^,-^, ]rfiiin i!''"'i'™^-rinW" '>■""'•' 



M f'.ir 








™ 1924 101 1 


1 1 


1 




CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 





Cornell University 
Library 



The original of tiiis book is in 
tine Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101105017 



T'HE 

PULPIT COMMENTARY, 

EDITED BY THE 

VERY REV. H. D. M. SPENCE, D.D., 

DEAN OF GLOUCESTER; 
AND BY THE 

REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A. 

WITH 

INTRODUCTIONS 

BY THE 



(TEN. ABCHDEACOxNT P. W. FAERAE, D.D., F.E.S.— EIGHT EEV. H. COTTERILL, D.D., F.K.S.K 
-VEEY KEV. PEINCIPAL J. TULLOCH, D.D.-EEV. CANON G. EAWUNSON, M.A. 
-EEV. A. PLUMMEE, M.A., D.D. 



FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY 

Nev/ York and Toronto. 



THE 



PULPIT COMMENTARY, 



EDITED BY THE 



REV. CANON H. D. M. SPENCE, M.A.. 

▼ICAR AND RURAL DEAN OF ST. PANCRAS, AND EXAMINING CHAPLAIN TO THE U3RD 
BISHOP OF GLOUCESTER AND BRISTOL' 



AND BY THE 

RET. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A. 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



(S^|io0ition anb fomiletUe: 

THE RIGHT HON. AND RIGHT REV. 
LORD A. C. HERVEY, D.D., 

LORD BISHOP OF BATH AND WELLil. 

fomiliee bg t)arions ^ntl)ors - 

REV. PROF. p. C. BARKER, M.A. REV. PROF. E. JOHNSON, M.. 
REV PROF. R. A. REDFORD, M.A. REV. R. TUCK, B.A. 
REV. W. CLARKSON, RA. 



VOL. 11 



FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY 
New York and Toronto. 



THE 



ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XV. 



'Ver. 1. — Came down . . . and taught for 
which came down , , . taught, A.\. ; saying 
for oTid eaid, A. V. ; eu»tom {Uos) for manner, 
A.y. Except ye be oirouincised, etc. The 
qnestion thus laised nearly effected the 
disruption of the Church, and was the most 
■eriouB controversy that had yet arisen. If 
the views broached by these Judsean Chris- 
tians had prevailed, the whole character of 
Christianity would have been changed, and 
its existence probably cut short. How great 
the danger was appears from even Peter 
and Barnabas having wavered in their 
opinion. (For St. Paul's treatment of the 
subject, see Eom. ii. 25, etc. ; iv. ; Gal. v. 
2 — 6; vl 12 — 15, etc.) The expression, Tii/es 
KaTi\6oinfS airb T^s "loviaias, is BO like that 
in Gtal. ii. 11, Tlpb roS ^KSelv rtvh,s anh 'Icucd- 
00V, as to suggest very strongly the con- 
sideration whether Peter was not at Antioch 
at this time, and whether the scene related 
in Gal. ii. 11, etc., did not precede, and in 
fact cause, the Council of Jerusalem. In 
this case the " dissension and disputation " 
spoken of in ver. 2 would include and 
directly point to the memorable rebuke 
given by Paul to Peter ; and we should, un- 
derstand that Peter, accepting Paul's rebuke, 
preceded him and Barnabas, and prepared 
the way at Jerusalem for the solution 
arrived at. And, indeed, Peter's words at 
Jerusalem are almost an echo of Paul's 
words addressed to him at Antioch. If 
Barnabas had shown a leaning towards the 
Judaizing party, he would the more readily 
have been accepted by them as one of the 
embassy. The chief objeution to this 
hypothesis is that in Gal. ii. 11 Peter's 
visit to Antioch seems to be spoken of as 
(omething subsequent to the journey of St. 
Paul and Barnabas to Jerusalem. But it 
«» not in the least necessary so to understand 

40TS II. 



it. St. Paul's mention of his visit to Jeru- 
salem might naturally recall the incident 
which had led to it, and which was another 
example of his own independence. Farrar 
places Peter's visit to Antioch between the 
Council of Jerusalem and the quarrel with 
Barnabas, in the time indicated in ver. 35 
of this chapter (vol. i. ch. xxiii.), and so do 
Conybeare and Howson (vol. i. p. 238), 
Meyer, and Alford ('Proleg.,'p. 24; note 
on oh. XV. 36, and Gal. ii. 11). Renan (' St 
Paul,' p. 290, etc.) and Lewin (vol. i ch 
xiii.) place it after St. Paul's return to 
Antioch, at the conclusion of his second 
missionary journey (oh. xviii. 22, 23). No 
absolute certainty can be arrived at, but sea 
note to ver. 35. Custom (see ch. xvi. 21); 
TCL iS-n is the technical term for the Mosaic 
institutions, used by Joeephus and Philo 
(see too ch. vi. 14 ; xxi. 21, note). 

Ver. 2. — And when for when therefore, 
A. v.; quettioning for disputation, A.V.; 
the brethren (in italics) appointed for they 
determined, A.V. Certain other of them. 
One of these would be Titus (Gal. ii. 1). 
The circumstance that, on this occasion, St. 
Paul did go up to those who were apostles 
before him, to consult with them on a 
matter of doctrine, shows at once why he 
refers so pointedly to this visit in Gal. ii. 1, 
etc., and is almost conclusive evidence that 
this visit is the one there referred to. The 
companionship of Barnabas ; the agreement 
of the expression, " I went up by revelation," 
with the fact that he was sent by the 
Church, doubtless in obedience to soma 
voice of the Spirit, like that mentioned in 
ch. xiii. 2; the occasion, a dispute about 
the circnmcision of Gentile converts; the 
line taken by Paul and Barnabas in de- 
claring the conversion of the Gentiles (ch. 
XV. 4, 12 ; Gal. ii. 27), and the result (ch. 
XV. 19 ; Gal. ii. 5, 7, 9), are all strong, no*. 
to say conclusive, marks of the identity of 



THE ACTb TO THE APOSTLES. 



[OB. XT. 1—41. 



the two visifs. The apostles and eldeis. 
This phrase marks the conutitution of the 
governing part of the Oiiuroti of Jerusalem. 
The addition in vers. 22 and 28 of " the 
irhole Chnrch," and (according to the T.B.) 
ol " the brethren," shows the part tbe body 
of the believers Had in approving and 
sanctioning the decisions of the elders. The 
transaction marks the position of the Churuh 
of Jerusalem a* the metropolitan Church of 
Oliristendom. 

Ver. 3. — They Otere/ort . . . passed tor and 

. . they pasaai, A.V, , both Phomicia for 
PhenUe, A.V. Being brought on their way 
^TvpOTreix(p9evTes)* The word trpOTrefiireiy has 
two distinct though allied meanings : one 
18 " to conduct a person on his way," as in 
oh. XX. 38 ; xzi. 5 ; the other is " to help a 
person on his way, by supplying him with 
all necessaries for his journey," as in Bom. 
XV. 24; 1 Cor. xvi. 6; 2 Cor. i. 16; Titus 
iii 13 ; 3 John 6. This last is the meaning 
here. Being the messengers of the Church, 
they travelled at the Church's expense. 
Both Fhoenicia and Samaria. Their course 
would be through Berytus, Tyre, Sidon, and 
Samaria. Declaring the conversion of the 
GentUes. There was an especial reason for 
doing so, as it had a strong bearing upon 
tke great controversy about to be decided at 
Jerusalem. 

Ver. 4. — The apostles for of the apostles, 
A.V. ; the elders for elders, A.V. ; rehearsed 
for declared, AV. They were received of 
the Church, etc. Being themselves the 
formal envoys of the Church of Antioch, 
they were formally received as such by the 
Church of Jerusalem, headed by the apostles 
and elders. 

Ver. 5. — Who for whieh, A.V. ; it is for 
that it was, A.V. ; charge for command, A.V. 
There rose up, etc. As soon as Paiil and 
Barnabas had finished their recital of the 
conversion of the heathen to whom they 
had preached the gospel, certain Christian 
Pharisees who were at the meeting dis- 
turbed the joy of the brethren and the 
unanimity of the assembly by getting up 
and saying that all the Qentile converts 
must be circumcised and keep the Law. 
This, of course, would have included Titus, 
who was present with St. Paul ((Jal. ii. 1, 
8). The Epistle to the Galatians deals 
directly and forcibly with this question. 

Ver. 6. — The elders for elders, A.V. ; were 
gathered for came, AV. ; to for for to, A.V. 
The question was too important, and, per- 
haps, the persons who advanced the ob- 
jections too considerable, to allow of a 
deoirion to be taken on the spot A special 
meeting of the Church was called to con- 
sider the matter. 

Ver. 7. — Questioning for disputing, A.V., 
as in ver. 2 brethren for men and brethren. 



A.V., M in ch. Tii 2, etc. ; ytm for •», A.V 
and T.K. ; by my mouth the QeniiUs for the 
Gentiles by my mouth, A.V. Questioning. 
It was a repetition of the same scene that 
took place at Antioch. Peter, etc. It seems 
to have been wise on Peter's part to allow the 
meeting to exhaust itself by fruitless dispu- 
tations before he rose to speak. His rising, 
with all the authority of his person and 
position, commanded immediate attention, 
A good while ago ; literally, frem andeni 
days, or still more exactly, from the Aays off 
the beginning of the gospel ivnepal ipxaiai), 
days belonging to the beginning (i-pxh) ot 
the Church's existence, and dating far back 
in Peter's own apostolic life. Nothing can 
be more natural than this allasion to the 
conversion of Cornelius, and the gift of the 
Huly Ghost to the Gentile inmates of his 
house, as related in oh. x. 44. 

Ver. 8. — Heart for hearts, AV. (icapSio- 
yyda-Tiis). Bare them witness; i.e. set th« 
mark of his approval upon them, vouched 
for their sincerity (see the use of the verb 
HapTvpia in Luke iv. 22 ; John iii. 26 ; oh. 
vi3: x. 22, etc.). 

Ver. 9. — He made no distinction for ^i 
no difference, A.V. (comp. oh. x. 20, note) ; 
cleansing for purifying, A.V. This is exactly 
the doctrine of Gal. ii. 16 and Bom. iii. 30, 
vrith which compare also ver. 11. 

Ver. 10. — That ye should put for to put, 
A.V. The Greek words cannot be con- 
strued as the A.V. takes theiQ. It is not 
a Greek construction to say Treipi(eiv nva. 
irotelv KaK6v, '* to tempt any one to do eviL" 
The infinitive iiriBeivai must be taken ge- 
rundially, " hy placing," or " putting," and 
the sense is — Why do you try God's patience 
by your provocation in putting an im- 
bearable yoke upon the necks of those who 
believe? Or, "as if he had not power to 
save by faith" (Ohrysostom). 

Ver. II. — We shall be saved through the 
grace, etc., for through the grace . , .we shall 
be saved, A.V. ; Jesus for Jesus Christ, A.V. 
and T.B. ; tn like manner for even, A.V. 
" How full of power are these words ! The 
same that Paul says at large in the Epistle 
to the Bomans, the same says Peter here" 
(Chrysost., 'Hom.,' xxxii). 

Ver. 12.— .Ind for then, A.V.; they 
fiearleened for gave audicTice, A.V. ; re- 
hearsing what signs for declaring what 
mira^iles, A.V. Kept silence ; marking the 
contrast between the noisy questionings and 
disputiugs which had preceded Peter's 
speech, and the quiet orderly attention with 
which they now listened to Paul and Bar- 
nabas, telling them of the conversion of the 
Gentiles. It recalls Virgil's description ot 
tliu eifeot of the presence of a man of grave 
piety upon an excited crowd — 



OK. XT. 1 — tl.] 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 



"Tnm, pietate gravem ao meritig si forte 
Tiium quern 
Aspexere, silent, irreotisque auribus ad- 
■tant." 

C'^Qeid,' i. 152.) 

Ver. 13. — Brethren for men and trethreri, 
A. v., as ver. 7. James answered. James's 
place as presiding bishop is here distinctly 
marked by his summing up the debate. 
" This (James) was bishop, as they say, and, 
therefore, he spoaks last" (Ohrysost., ' Horn.,' 
xxxiii.). And again, " No word speaks John 
here, no word the other apostles, but held 
their peace, for James was invested with the 
chief rule." " He says well with authority, 
'My sentence W" (ibid.). A remarkable 
testimony against papal supremacy. 

Ver. 14. — Symeon for Simeon, A.V. ; re- 
hearted for declared, A.V. ; Jir»t God for 
Oodat the first, A.V. Symeon. This is the 
only place (unless Symeon is the right 
reading in 2 Pet. i. 1) in which Simon 
Peter's natae is given in this Hebrew form, 
which is most proper in the mouth of James 
speaking to Palestine Jews. Singularly 
enough, Chrysostom was misled by it, and 
thought the prophecy of Simeon in Luke i. 
31 was meant. How first; corresponding 
to the " good while ago " of ver. 7. Did visit, 
etc. The construction linffKi-^aro Xafiiiv is 
very unusual, and indeed stands alone. The 
verb always has an accusative case after it 
(ch. vi. 3; vii. 23; xv. 36), unless Luke i. 
68 is an exception, which, however, it hardly 
is. There are two ways of construing the 
phrase. One is to consider it as elliptical, 
and to su[jply, as the A.V. and E.V. do, Tci 
iBvi). So Alford, who compares the construc- 
tion in Luke L 25, where ^ir' in4 must be 
supplied. But this is a harsh construction. 
The other and better way is to take iire- 
(T/ceiJiaTO, not in the sense of " visiting," but 
of " looking out," or " endeavouring to find 
something." The sense of the infinitive after 
the verb is nearly equivalent to " look out for 
and took," literally, loolced out how he might 
take. With a slight modification of mean- 
ing, LreniBus (in ' Speaker's Commentary ') 
renders it " Bxcogitavit accipere," " planned " 
or "contrived to take." A people for Ms 
Name ; i.e. to be called by his Name, hais was 
the peculiar designation of " the people " of 
God, answering to the Hebrew ny (comp. 1 
Pet. ii. 10, O* ttotJ ov Kahs, vvv 5e \ahs ©eoO). 

Ver. \G.— These things for this, A.V. ; / 
uu'H for wt'H, A.V. ; fallen for fallen dmen, 
A.V. 

Ver. 17.— May for might, A.V. 

Ver. 18.— Who maketh these things known, 
etc., for who doeth all these things (in ver. 17 
of A.V.) ; known for known unto God are all 
his works, A.V. and T.B. Known from the 
beglniung of the world. The above passage 



from Amoi ix. 11, 12, ii quoted, not very 
exactly, though with no change of sense, from 
the LXX., where it ends with the words, 
" snith the Lord, who doeth all these things," 
as in the A.V. But the LXX. in ver. 17 differs 
widely from the present Hebrew text. For 
whereas the Hebrew has, " That they may 
possess the remnant of Edom, and of all the 
heathen that are called by my Name," the 
LXX. (Cod. Alex.)have,'07rais 4;/ ii<(TjT{](ra>au 
otKardXonroi Tcij/ai/dpd^TTojVThv Kvpiof. ical iravTa 
tA idvri, K.r,\., where it is evident that they 
read lifT}), seek after, for wn; , possess and 
Dn>«, men, for DhlN, Edom. There is e««ry 
appearance of the LXX., followed here by 
St. .Tames, having preserved the true read- 
ing. As regards the reading of the R.V. in 
ver. 18, it is a manifest corruption. It is 
not the reading of either the H( biew or the 
Greek version of Amos, or of any other 
version ; and it makes no sense. Whereas 
the T.R., which is the reading of Irenasus 
(iii., xii.), as Meyer truly says, " presents a 
thought completely clear, pious, noble, and 
inoffensive as regards the connection," 
though he thinks that a reason for rejecting 
it. Nothing could be more germane to St. 
James's argument than thus to show from the 
words of Amos that God's present purpose 
rf taking the Gentiles to be his people was, 
like all his other works, formed from tlie 
beginning of the world (comp. Eph. i. 9, 
10 ; iii. 5, 6 ; 2 Tim. i. 9, etc.). As regards 
the interpretation of the prophecy of Amos 
intended, the idea seems to be that that 
apparent ruin of the house and family of 
David which culminated in the crucifixion 
of the Lord Jesus would be followed by 
those " sure mercies of David," which con- 
sisted in his resurrection from the dead, 
his exaltation to the right hand of God, 
and the gathering in of the Gentiles to his 
kingdom. The phrase, "the tabernacle of 
David," is rather difficult, because the word 
in the Hebrew is TiT nap, tabernacle or 

booth of David. It is the word used for the 
booths at the Feast of Tabeinacles, and 
denotes a temporary shed of branches or 
the like of a very humble character. It is 
difficult to say why this word was used, unless 
it was to show that the house of David had 
fallen to a low estate before it was pulled 
down. 

Ver. 19. — Judgment for sentence, A.V. (e'yii 
Kflvai); turn for are turned, A.V. Qmarpi- 
<poiiaiv). Judgment. Sentence is the best 
word, as expressing the decisive judgment of 
St. James, which, being delivered with the 
autliority of his office at the close of the 
debate, carried with it the suffrages of 
the wliole cnuneil. The things decreed by 
tiiem were called Ta ^iyfw.Ta ra KeKptfm^a vird 
tuy aTTOiTTiAwv Kol rm* ■wfit^vripun. Xura. 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



LOH. XT. 1 — 41 



It applies to those that should hereafter tura 
as well as to those who were already turned. 

Ver. 20. — The pollutions for pollutions, 
A.V. ; what i$ etrangled for things strangled, 
A.V. The pollutions. In the decree itself 
(yer. 29) this is explained by eldaKoSiraiv, 
things offered to idols, though some apply 
the "pollutions" to all the things here 
mentioned, not the idols only. Later St. 
Paul somewhat enlarged the liberty of 
Gentile converts in respect to meals offered 
to idols (see 1 Cor. viii. 4—13 ; x. 25—28). 
What is strangled, etc. The things for- 
bidden are all practices not looked upon as 
sins by Gentiles, but now enjoined upon 
them as portions of the Law of Moses which 
were to be binding upon them, at least for 
a time, with a view to their living in com- 
munion and fellowship with their Jewish 
brethren. The necessity for some of the 
prohibitions would cease when the condi- 
tion of the Church as regards Jews and 
Gentiles was altered ; others were of eternal 
obligation. 

Ver. 21 . — From generations of old for of old 
time, A.V. ; sabbatli for sabbath day, A.V. 
The meaning of this verse seems to be that, 
in requiring the al)Ove compliances, the 
council was not enjoining anything new or 
strange, because the U entiles who attended 
the synagogues were familiar with these 
Mosaic doctrines. It has been often stated 
that these four prohibitions were in sub- 
stiiuv'e the same as the so-called seven pre- 
cepts of Noah, which were binding upon 
proselytes of the gate. Tliis is, liowever, 
•oarcely borne out by the facts. Tlie four 
prohibitions seem to have been a tempoi ary 
arrangement adapted to the then condition 
of the Church, with a view to enabling 
Christian Jews and Gentiles to live in 
brotherly fellowship. The Jew was not to 
require more of his Gentile brother: the Gen- 
tile was not to concede less to h's Jewish 
brother. St Augustine (' Cont. Manich.,' 
32, 13), quoted by Meyer, ridicules the idea 
of Christians in his time being bound by 
the law of things strangled (see Hooker 
and Bishop Sanderson, quoted by Words- 
worth, in the same sense). 

Ver. 22. — It seemed good to for pleased it, 
A. V. ; the elders lor elders, A.\. ; to choose 
men out of their company and send them, etc., 
for to send chosen men of their oum company, 
A.V.; Barsabbastoi Barsabas, A..y . andT.R., 
as ch. i. 23. To choose men, etc. This is a 
necessary change, because the middle aorlst 
QiKXeiaiifvous) cannot have a passive mean- 
ing (chosen) ; see ver. 40. Chief men (^701;- 
fUfovs); literally, leaders. So in Luke xxii. 
16 'O iiyoi/isvos is rendered, "He that is 
ehief." In Heb. xiii. 7, Ol fiyoi/jiemi i/iay 
is, " Them which have tiie rule over you ; " 
joxu spiritual rulers. Silas seems to be a 



contraction of Silvanut,. like Lncas for 
Lucanus. In the Acts he is always called 
Silas, in the Epistles of St. Panl and St. 
Peter, SUvanns. Going as direct emissaries 
from James and the Churq)i of Jerusalem, 
Silas and Judas would have great weight 
with the Jews in Syria and Cilicia. 

Ver. 23. — Wrote thus by them for terofo 
letters by them after this manner, A.V. ; the 
elder brethren for elders and brethren, A.V. ; 
unto . . . greeting for send greeting unto, etc., 
A. v., as ch. zxiii. 26. The elder brethren, 
etc. The grammar of the senteuce is irregu. 
lar, as there is nothing for ypi^iavTis to agree 
with. But " the elder brathren " is a phrase 
vinknown to the Scriptures, and it is much 
more in accordance with the feeling of the 
times that "the brethren," t.e. the whole 
Church, should be included in the saluta- 
tion. Greeting. It is remarkable that the 
only other place in the New Testament 
where this Greek salutation occurs is 
Jas. i. 1. 

Ver. 24.— The words in the A.V. and the 
T.B., saying. Ye must be cireumcised and keep 
the Law, are omitted in the B.T. and the 
B.V. ; commandment for such commandment, 
A.V. The certain which went out from 
us are the same as the " certain men " which 
"came down from Judssa," of ver. 1. The 
word rendered subverting (liva<TK€vil(ovTes) 
occurs nowhere else in Scripture or in the 
LXX, It is spoken properly of a person who 
moves and carries off all the goods and 
furniture from the house which he is quit- 
ting. Hence to "disturb," "throw into 
confusion," "turn upside down," and the 
like. To whom we gave no commandment. 
Observe the distinct disavowal by James of 
having authorized those who went forth from 
him and the Jerusalem Church to require 
tlie circumcision of the Gentiles. The A.V. 
expresses the meaning most clearly. 

Ver. 25. — Saving come to for being assem- 
bled mth, A.V. ; to choose out men and send 
them for to serid chosen men, A.V. (see note 
on ver. 22). Having come, etc. The Greek 
is capable of either meaning. AI ford prefers 
that of the A.V. Others think mat stress 
is laid upon the decree being unanimous. 
Our beloved Barnabas and Paul. James and 
the council thus gave their full and open 
support to Barnabas and Paul. Observe 
that Barnabas is named first, as in ver. 12. 

Ver. 27. — Themselves also shaU for shaU 
also, A.V. ; by word of mouth for by mouth, 
A.V. Judas and Silas (see ch. x. 7, note). 

Ver. 28. — It seemed good, etc. The for- 
mula is remarkable. It implies the con- 
sciousness on the part of the council that 
they had "the mind of the Spirit;" but how 
this mind of the Spirit was communicated 
we are not expressly told. There may have 
been some "revelation," similar to that 



CH. XT. 1 — 41.] 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



recorded in oh. xiii. 2; x. T9; Gal. ii. 1, etc 
It ia, however, generally understood a§ 
resting upon Christ's promise to be with his 
Church always. Hefele (' Hist, of Christian 
Councils,' pp. 1,2, English translation) quotes 
Cyprian as writing to Pope Cornelius in the 
name of the Council of a.d. 252: "Placuit 
nobis, Sancto Spiritu suggerente ; " and the 
Syncid of Aries as saying, " Placuit, prsBsenti 
Spiritu Sancto." And this is the general lan- 
guage of the synods. Constantine claimed 
for the decrees of the three hundred bishops 
at Nicaea the same authority as if they had 
been "soliua i'ilii Dei sententia." But, as 
Bishop Wordsworth on ch. xv. 28 wisely 
siiys, " It cannot be held that councils of 
the Church now are entitled to adopt 
the words of the text in the framing of 
canons." 

Ver. 29. — Things lacrificed for meats 
offered, A.V. ; it shall be well with you for 
ye shall do well, A.V. The phrase c2 
vpaairem means to " prosper," to "fare well " 
(com p. Eph. vi. 21, " How 1 do "). 

Ver. 30. — They, when they were dismissed, 
came down for when they were dismissed, they 
came, A.V. ; having gathered for when they 
had gathered, A.V. The multitude does not 
exactly express the idea of rh ttA^Soj, which 
is the fulness or the whole of the body spoken 
of. Thus Luke i 10, Xlav rh irA^flos Tov 
XooD is "The whole congregation;" Luke 
ii. 13, TlKriBos ffrparias oupavtov is " The 
whole heavenly host ; " Luke xix. 37, 'A-kcw 
rh Tr\ri6os T&v fiaGriricv, " The whole com- 
pany of the disciples ; " also ch. vi. 2 and 
iv. 32, Ti ir\T]dos Tuv wuTTeutrdpTaiv is " The 
whole company of believers ; " ch. xxii. 36, 
Ti rrx^Sos ToB \oo5 is " The whole body of 
the people ; " in ver. 12 of this chapter, nS.y 
rh irX^Bos is " The whole Church of Jeru- 
salem." So here, Th ■wli.TJdos means " The 
whole Church." 

Ver. 31. — And when they had read it for 
which when they had read, A.V. 

Ver. 32. — Being themselves also prophet$ 
for being prophets also themselves, A.V. 
Being themselves also prophets, exhorted, 
etc. Observe the connection of exhortation 
with prophecy, and compare the explanation 
of the name of Barnabas in ch. It. 36, note. 
Confirmed them ; iireffrripi^av, as ver. 41 and 
eh. xiv. 22 ; xviii. 23. Nothing is so unset- 
tling as controversy; but the preaching of 
these " chief men " brought back men's 
minds to the solid faith and hope of the 
gospel How rich the Church of Antioch 
was at this time, with Paul and Barnabas, 
Judas and Silas, and probably Titus, and 
some, if not all, of those mentioned in ch. 
xiii. i, for their teachers I 

Ver. 33. — Spent some time there for tarried 
(here a space, A.V. (see ch. xviii. 23 ; xx. 3 ; 
Jaa. iv. 13); dismissed for let go, A.V. ; 



those that had sent ihfim forih for the apo8tle$, 
A.V. an.l T.K. 

Ver. 34. — This verse is omitted in the 
E.T. and by the best mimnscripts and com- 
mentators. It seems to Imve besn put in to 
explain ver. 40. But Silas may have returned 
to Jerusalem, as stated in ver. SS, and come 
back again to Antioch, from having formed a 
strong attachment to St. Paul and his views. 

Ver. 35. — But Paul for Paul also, A.V. ; 
tarried for continued, A.V. It is at this 
time that Meyer and other commentators 
(see ver. 1, note) place Peter's visit to Antioch 
mentioned in Gal. ii. 11. But it is quite 
inconcei\able that Peter, with all the influ- 
ence of the Jerusalem Council fresh upon 
him, and after the part he himself took in 
it, and when his own emissaries, Silas and 
Judas, had just Mt Antioch, should act the 
part there abcribed to I dm. Nor is it within 
the region of probability that, so soon after 
the council, any should have come " from 
James" to unsay what James had said and 
written at the coun.il. We may with much 
confidence place Peter's visit to Antioch 
before the council, as suggested in note to 
ver. 1. 

Ver. 30. — After some dai/s for sorne days 
after, A.V. ; return now for go again, A.V. ; 
the brethren for our brethren, A.V. and T H.; 
wherein we proclaimed for where we have 
preached, A.V. ; fare for do, A.V. After 
some days is hardly equivalent to ^erti nraj 
rin4pas. The exiiressicm in Greek is quite 
indefinite as to time, and may cover months 
as well as days. That it does cover a con- 
siderable length of time we gather fiom the 
expression in ver. 33, that Judas and Silas 
" tarried some time at Jerusalem," followed 
by that in ver. 35, that after tlieir depiirtuie 
"Paul and Barnabas tarried (iUrpi&uv) in 
Antioch." We can hardly suppose the two 
periods together to have included modi less 
than a year. Let us return, etc. Tlie •■lin- 
gular loving care of Paul for his yoiim 
converts appears here (comp. 1 Thess. ii . 7, 8 : 
iii. 5—8 ; 2 Cor. i. 14, etc.). 

Ver. 37. — Was minded for determined 
A.V. and T.K.; John also for John, A.V. 
and T.K. , who was called for whose sur- 
name was, A.V. Was minded. It ia doubt- 
ful which is the true reading, i^ovKtvaaTo 
or e0oi\eTo. The dilfereuce of meaning is 
small. The first means " took council with 
himself," i.e. planned, thought, to takf 
Barnabas; the second, "wished," •'.«. hi* 
deliberate will was to take Barnabas, ^in 
gularly enough, Alford,who rejects ifiovKiTa 
which is the reading of E.T., translatei' 
iPovheieru by " was minded," which is thu 
translation of ifioi\€To in the E.V. We see 
in this choice of Mark by Barnabas the 
natural partiality of a near relation. We 
may also see the same flexibility of dispo- 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. XT. 1 — 41- 



sitlcm which raade him yield to the influence 
ol the emissariuB of Junies (Gul. ii. 13). 
Who was called. It mi^lit seem odd that 
tills description of John should be repeated 
liL-re after having been given in oh. xii. 25. 
But perhaps it was usual so to designate 
him (see Luke viii. 2; xzii. S; Matt. x. 3; 
ch i 23 ; X. 6). 

Ver. 88. — Talce wilh fhem him for take Mm 
wiih them, A.V. ; vnthdrew for departed, 
A.V. Withdrew. The Greek word a-no- 
mavTa (friim which comes the substantive 
apottasij) is a strong one, and dinotes 
decided lilame, as does the indication of 
the oppiisite course, by way of contrast, 
which he did not take. "He did not go 
with them to the work " to which God cal^d 
them, as he ought to have done. The whole 
phrase, too, which follows is strongly 
worded. " Paul thou;;ht good," as rej,'ards 
one who hail turned back from the work, 
" not to take that man." The fiii avfiirapa- 
Aa^Seij- of ver. 38 is, as Meyer observes, 
sharply opposed to the <Tv/iirapaAa$ew of 
ver. 37. Ijuke evidently sides strongly 
with Paul, and almost reproduces the ipsis- 
lima verba of the " sharp contention." One 
would inter tliat this passage was penned 
by Luke before the reconciliation which 
appears in 2 Tim. Iv. 11, and that we have 
here an indication of the early date of the 
publication of "The Acts." Perhaps also 
there is an indication in the narrative, 
coupled wilh Mark's subsequent attach- 
ment to Peter, that Mark rather leant at 
this time to Judaizing views, and that his 
previoas departure "from the work" was 
partly owing to a waut of complete sym- 
pathy with St. Paul's doctrine. St. Paul 
would have no half-hearted helper in his 
grand and arduous work. 

Ver. 39. — There arose a tharp contention 
for the contention was to sharp between them, 
A.V. and T.R. ; parted for departed, A.V. ; 
so that for so sharp . . . that, A.V. ; and 
Barnabas for and so Barnabas, A.V. ; took 
Mark with him for took Mark, A.V. ; sailed 
away for sailed, A.V. There arose a sharp 
contention, etc. The sense " between them " 
must be supplied, if the Englisli word " con- 
tention " is used. Tiie word irapo^x>irii.6s only 
occurs twice in the New Testament : once in 
Heb. X. 24:, in a good sense, "To provoke" 
(for a provocation) — " stimulate or excite " 
— " unto love and good works," which is ita 
common cla.ssiciil sense; the other time in 
this passage, where the sense is attributed 
to it in which it is used in the LXX., as in 
Deut. xxix. 28, '^v 6v/aw koI opyri Kal irapo- 
iviriJL^ li£yd\(j> (T(p6Spa, "in great indignation ; " 
and in Jer. xxxii. 37 (xxxix. 37, LXX.), 
coupled with the same words, 4y irapoivai^ip 
u.fyi.\if, " in great wrath ; " answering to 
cpep Is Hebrew. But it is more probable 



that St. Luke uses the word here in its 
common medical sense. In medical writ( rs 
— Galen, llippocrtites, etc.— the rrapoiuff/j-is 
is equivalent to what we call an access, 
from the Latin accessio, used by Celsus, when 
a disease of some standing takes a turn for 
the worse, comes to a heiglit, and breaks out 
into its severest form. This is the sense 
in which our English word "paroxysm" is 
used. The meaning of the passage will 
then be that, after a good deal of uncomfort- 
able feeling and discussion, the difference 
between Paul and Barnabas, instead of 
cooling down, broke out into such an acute 
form tliat Barnabas went off to Cyprus with 
Mark, leaving St. Paul to do what he 
pleased by himself. And Barnabas, etc. The 
K.V. is much more accurate. The conse- 
quence of the quarrel is said by St. Luke 
to have been that Barnabas took Mark ofl 
with him to Cyprus. The statement that 
Paul chose Silas is a separate and inde- 
pendent statement, as appears by Uav\os 
(in the nominative) and e|^A8e in the indi- 
cative mood. St. Luke's narrative quite 
sides with St. Paul, and throws the blame 
of the quarrel, or at least of the separation, 
upon Barnabas. Kenan ('St. Paul,' p. 119) 
thinks St. Paul was too severe upon John 
Mark, and that it was ungrateful of him to 
break with one to whom he owed bo much 
as he did to Barnabas for any cause of 
secondary importance. He also thinks that 
the real root of the quarrel lay in the oon- 
stantly changing relations between the two 
apostles, aggravated by a domineering spirit 
in St. Paul. But the force of this censure 
turns upon the question whether it was a 
cause of secondary importance. If St. Paul 
had a single eye to the success of his 
mission, and judged that Mark would be a 
hindrance to it, it was a question oi primary 
importance to " the work," and St. Paul was 
right. Renan also remarks upon the ex- 
tinction of the fame of Barnabas consequent 
upon this separation from his more illustrious 
companion. " While Paul kept advancing 
to the heights of his glory, Barnabas, sepa- 
rated from the comiianion who had shed a 
portion of his own lustre upon him, pursued 
his bolitary course in obscurity." Sailed 
away. Cyprus was Barnabaa's native 
country (ch. iv. 36), and the scene of the 
earliest mission (eh. xi. 19), and of Paul 
and Barnabas's first joint evangelistic 
labours (ch. xiii. 4). Barnabas would have 
many liiends there, and could form plans 
at his leisure tor his future action. The 
friendly mention of him in 1 Cor. ix. 6 
siiows both that lie continued his disinte- 
rested labours as an apostle and that the 
estrangement between him and St. Paul had 
passed away. The paroxysm had yielded to 
the gentle treatment of •harity. 



OH. XT. 1 41.] 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



Ver. ¥>.—But for and, A.V. ; teen* forth 
for departed, A.V. ; commended for recom- 
mended, A.V. ; to for unto, A.V. j the Lord 
for God, A.V. and T.E. Choso Silas. If 
ver. 34 of the T.R. is a true reading, it 
•eoounts for the presence of Silas at Antiooh. 
Otiierwise there is no difficulty in supposing 
that Silas, attracted by the holy zeal of St. 
Paul and by desire to work among the 
Gentiles, had come back to Antioch after 
giving account to the apostles at Jerusalem 
of the success of his mission with Judas to. 
the Churches at Antioch, Syria, and Oilioia. 

Ver. 41. — Syria and Cilioia (see yer. 23). 
This rather looks asif tlie " some days after " 
of ver. 36 did not cover a very long time, 
because the special mention of "the 
Churches of Syria and Cilicia" indicates 
that St. Paul's visit bad some oonueotion 



with the epistle addressed to them bjr the 
apostles and elders of the Church of Jeru- 
salem (ver. 23), as we see from eh. xvi. 4 
was the case. Confirming; as oh. zir. 22; 
XV. 32; xviii. 22 (T.K.). In the passive 
voice iirurTtipt^o/iai means to "lean upon," 
as in 2 Sam. i, 6, LXX., and in classical 
Greek. Benan thus indicates their probable 
route : " They travelled by land northwards 
across the plain of Antiooh, went through 
the ' Syrian Gates,' coasted the gulf of the 
Issns, crossed the northern branch of the 
Issus through the • Aman^an Gates,' then, 
traversing Cilicia, went perhaps through 
Tarsus, crossed Mount Taurus through ike 
'CUician Gates,' one of the most terrible 
passes in the world, and thus reached 
Lycaonia, going as far as Derbe, Lyatra, 
and loonium " (' St Paul,' p. 123). 



HOMILETIOa 

Vert. 1 — 35. — The controversy. The apprehension of truth, full, pure, and nnralxed 
with error, should be the desire of all good men. And it is a great help towards attaining 
truth when vre are able to love it and to seek it absolutely for its own sake, without 
reference to its consequences, without regard to the wishes of others or undue 
submission to their opinions. It is also necessary for a man in pursuit ot truth to 
divest himself of prejudices, and the influence of false opinions which he has adopted 
from habit, and without due consideration. The mind should approach the consideration 
of truth u&warped and uncoloured by any subjective influences except the love of 
God and innocency of character. Divested of prejudices and of passions, and possessed 
of adequate knowledge, the mind would receive moral and religious truth with nearly 
as much certainty as it does mathematical problems. The object of controversy should 
be to clear away all prejudice, all ignorance, all passion, every groundless opinion and 
prepossession, which stand in the way of the acceptance of truth. And controversialists 
should be ready to admit the probability that those who difier most widely from them 
may, for that very reason, see some side of trath which is hidden from their own eyes, 
and therefore should be ready to give a candid consideration to their arguments. The 
controversy which is described in its oiigin, progress, and settlement, in the passage 
before us, is an instructive one. We see on the side of the Judaizing party the types of 
the hindrances constantly existing to the reception of new truths. There was at first a 
blind and indiscriminate attachment to old opinions. They had been brought up in 
the belief that the Mosaic institutions were unchangeable. The very suggestion of a 
modification of them was treason against Moses and against God. They had been 
brought up in the belief that they were exclusively the people of God. All the pride 
and selfishness of their hearts rebelled against the idea of others being admitted to on 
equality of privilegea with themselves. They had cherished a contempt and hatred 
for all other nations of the earth : how could they believe that those nations were as 
much objects of the love of God as they themselves were? Again, they had fattened 
in the opinion of their own righteousness, of their own moral superiority over other 
people : how could they be willing to accept a gospel which taught them that they 
could only be justified by grace, and that they must seek that grace on a level with all 
other sinners, through the merits of Jesus Christ? Again, their reverence for their 
rabbis and great men, and for their sayings and teaching, which they were accustomed 
to lean upon with a certain superstitious awe, and to quote with a proud fondness, was 
another hindrance to the reception of the gospel in its integrity by them. And all 
thete inflaences, good and bad, concurred to close the eyes of their reason against all 
oppoang evidence. They would, indeed, admit a Christianity which left the Law of 
MosM intact, and oUiged all Christians to become Jews, so to speak. That exalteti 



8 THE AOTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. rr. 1— 4L 

their nation, flattered their pride, increased their self-importance, left the prejudices of 
their childhood nndisturhed. But the gospel as preached by Paul they could not and 
would not accept. The controversy on the other side was waged with fairness and 
firmness combined. St. Paul's large experience, both of the prejudices of his opponents, 
which he had once felt himself in their full power, and of the grace of the Lord Jesus 
Christ, which had been manifested to him in so remarkable a manner, gave him an 
unrivalled command of the argument. He had as much reverence for Moses, as full a 
conviction of the Divine origin of the Law, of the inspiration of the prophets, and of 
the infallible authority of Holy Scripture, as his opponents had. But he had a deep 
Insight into the doctrines of grace, borne witness to by the Law and the prophets, which 
they had not. He saw the harmony betwefen the Old and New Testaments ; how the 
Law was a schoolmaster to bring men to Christ ; how Christ was the end of the Law for 
righteousness to every one that believes ; and how in the gospel of God's grace in Jesus 
Christ the Law was not destroyed, but fulfilled. He had, therefore, a full certainty as to 
the main points of the controversy which others had not. And yet he was tender and 
considerate toward his opponents (Gral. iv. 19), and brought, not abuse, but argument 
to bear against their errors ; as in the two wonderful Epistles, to the Qalatians and to 
the Bomans. And in a similar spirit we find him here willing to refer the matters in 
dispute to the Church at Jerusalem, presided over as it was by James, who had the 
credit of leaning to the side of his antagonists. But combined with this gentleness we 
have to mark his unflinching firmness and boldness. It required no small courage and 
strength of conviction to withstand a person of such weight and authority as Peter, 
and to reprove him before the Church. It required no little heroism to go into the very 
stronghold of Judaism, and there, before James, and Peter, and the Pharisees, and the 
most Jndaizing members of the Churches of Judaea, to proclaim the gospel of the 
&e« grace of God (Gal. ii. 2 ; ch. zv. 12), and the free admission of the Gentiles into 
the Churoh of Christ. And let us mark the result. All the true-hearted men were 
won by Paul's way. Peter recovered from his weakness and openly sided with Paid ; 
James threw his great weight unequivocally into the same scale ; Barnabas shook off his 
momentary hesitation ; the whole assembly gave a unanimous vote in favour of Paul's 
view; and the Church was saved from disruption. In an age when the peace of the 
Church is so much disturbed by controversy, and when such violence, both of language 
and of action, is indulged in by those who wish to enforce their own views, it ia 
important to study carefully the history of this first great and trying controversy, which 
threatened at one time to split the Church to its very foundations, but wMch was brought 
to such a happy issue, under the blessing of God, by the wisdom, charity, and firmness 
of the apostle to the Gentiles. God grant, of his tender mercy, a like spirit to the 
leaders of party in our own days, and a no less happy settlement of the questions which 
separate brother from brother, and impede the progress of Christian truth. 

Yen. 86 — 41. — The paroxysm. The proposal of two friends whose fast friendship 
was of many years' standing ; of two brethren loving and beloved ; of two apostles A 
Jesos Christ, who had long laboured together to win souls to Christ and to advance 
the kingdom of God, and who had achieved together the most signal triumphs over 
the powers of darkness, who had suffered together, who had undergone the most appall- 
ing dangers together, who had stuck by one another under every circumstance of trial 
and difficulty ; — the proposal, I say, of two such men to start together on a new errand of 
love, might have seemed to be the very last occasion likely to produce contention and 
strife. Alas ! for the infirmity of our poor fallen nature, that any evil should arise from 
purposes so good and holy. The faithful, truthful record of the sacred history in our 
text suggests much caution and many useful lessons for Chriftian practice. 1. There 
was perfect agreement between the two apostles as to the end in view — the revisiting 
the Churches they had planted for the purpose of confirming them in the faith of Jesus 
Christ. As far as we know, they were both of one mind, both equally desirous ot 
advancing the kingdom of God, both equally ready to spend and be spent for the Name 
of the Lord Jesus and for the spread of his gospel in the world. Thus far we may 
well believe that their communications on the subject of the new mission were carried 
on in perfect harmony and love, because there was in each a single eye and an unmixed 
mtoiive, vie the glory of Christ. 2. The difference arose when Barnabas pioposed 



OH.XT. 1— 41.J THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. • 

that they should take John Mark as their companion. Here we seem to detect the 
entrance in of human motives. His partiality for his cousin ; possihly the feeling that 
Ills own softer character needed the support of a steady ally to enable him to hold his 
ovm against the strength of Paul's will ; possibly too some leaning towards the Jewish 
party in the Church, or at least an unwillingness to offend them, — made him blind to the 
inconvenience of taking a half-hearted companion with them. He was consulting with 
tlesh and blood, and not with the Spirit of God, when he made the suggestion. We can 
imagine that Paul objected at first with mildness, and pointed out the evils that mioht 
arise. He would dwell upon the vital interests of the mission, the dangers and diffi- 
culties of the work, the insufficient guarantee that John Mark's constancy would be 
equal to the task. It is, of course, possible, though it does not appear, that Paul may 
have judged Mark somewhat severely, or may have urged his objections without all th« 
tenderness that was due to the feelings of Barnabas. But there is not the slightest 
evidence that this was so. Probably at first he hoped to persuade Barnabas to give 
up his project. Probably Barnabas hoped so to state his wish to reinstate John Mark 
that Paul might give way. But when these hopes broke down on either side, then 
gradually, no doubt, the discussion assumed a growing tone of asperity, till at length 
the paroxysm came on. Barnabas cut the discussion short by turning upon his heel, 
and separating himself from his old companion and friend, and going forth in self-will 
with his cousin to Cyprus. The old partnership with Paul was dissolved, and nothing 
remained for Paul to do but to choose another missionary companion, and pursue his 
project in sadness. We cannot doubt that the peace and joy of both apostles was clouded 
by this unfortunate episode. But St. Paul had probably the testimony of his conscience 
that he had acted from the purest motives, and, from the friendly mention of Barnabas 
alluded to in the note to ver. 39, we may hope that, when the paroxysm had subsided, 
the old relations between the two brethren were restored to their former footing of cor- 
diality and love. But the great practical lesson we learn is the importance of keeping 
our motives of action pure and simple. We must try and not allow our judgment to be 
clouded by partialities and personal influences of any kind. We must endeavour never 
to subordinate the great interests of the Church and of the gospel to any private 
feelings or wishes, however innocent in themselves. And even right feelings and 
reasonable wishes must be so kept under control as never to overflow the banks of 
reason and of charity, and never to Injure the great cause of the gospel of Christ, to 
which they ought always to he made subservient. Generally, the narrative of this 
paroxysm enforces the wise words of St. James, " Let every man be swift to hear, slow 
to speak, slow to wrath : for the wrath of man worketh not the righteousness of God" 
aas. i. 20, 21). 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOES. 

Vera. 1 — 11. — A grave crisis in (he kingdom of Ood: lessons. The crisis of the 
kingdom will be found in the life of the Divine Leader of the faith. In those hours 
when all that was human in him shrank from the sufferings and sorrows which were 
before him, or from the agony which was upon him, or from the darkness which 
enshrouded him, then was " the crisis of the world " and of the kingdom of God on 
earth. But this also was a crisis, grave and serious. If the Church at Antioch had 
yielded to these "false brethren " (Gal. ii. 4), when they came to invade its liberty; or 
if — a much greater peril — the Church at Jerusalem had decided in favour of the 
Judaizers, and had passed a sentence that circumcision was necessary to salvation ; and 
if Christian truth had thus been narrowed to the small dimensions of a mere adjunct to 
Jadaism, where would Christianity have been to-day ? From the incident here related 
we draw the lessons — 

L What eabm zealotry mat try to do. These men "who came down from 
Judsea " (ver. 1) were members of the Pharisaic party " which believed " (ver. 5) ; they 
were formal adierents of the Christian faith ; they spake reverently of Christ, and 
believed themselves to be acting in the interests of his kingdom. Yet we know that 
they were taking a course which, if they had carried their point, would have simply 
extinguished the faith in a few years. Often, since then, has blind zealotry done its 
best to bring about a condition whidi would have proved fatal to the cause of God and 
of redeemnd humanity. 



10 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xv. 1--4L 



n. In what nNiNViTiNO labotjes fidelity mat involve jm. How different from 
evangelizing risks and toils, and from the fraternal intercourse which followed these, 
how much beneath both the one and the other, how much more uninviting this contro- 
versy with false brethren, narrow-minded, mistaking a rite whose significance was 
exhausted for an essential of salvation I How uncongenial to the spirit of the apostle 
this " dissension and disputation " (ver. 2) I But it was necessary ; it was as much a 
part of their bounden duty and their loyal obedience to their Lord as the preaching of 
the gospel or the inditing of an Epistle. The Christian workman cannot always choose 
his work. He must sometimes give up the congenial for the unpleasant, the inviting 
for the repellent. 

HL How WELL TO ENCOUKAGE THE FAITHFUL IN THE HOUB OP THEIB ANXTBTY. 

Those who constituted the deputation were " brought on their way by the Chvirch " 
(ver. 3). In the profound anxiety which must have filled the sagacious and earnest 
mind of Paul at this critical juncture, such giacious attention on the part of the Church 
must have been exceedingly refreshing. No " moral support " of tried and anxious 
leaders, in times of supreme solicitude, is thrown away ; it is well-spent time and trouble. 

IV. That it is sometimes oub dutt to take into consultation oue brethren m 
A BIOHER POSITION. The Church at Antioch was not obliged to consult that at Jeru- 
salem; the latter had no jurisdiction entitling it to decide the disputes of the former. 
But it was becoming and it was wise, and therefore it was right, to refer the matter 
in dispute to " the Church [of Jerusalem] and the apostles and the elders " (vers. 4, 6). 
Often when no written constitution obliges us to refer to authorities, it is a matter of 
practical wisdom, and therefore of rectitude, to go outside our own " body * and submit 
our case to those in high repute. We may gain far more than we lose thereby. 

V. The teaching of Qod'b fbovidence. (Vers. 7 — 9.) Peter would not have taken 
the dde he took now had not his eyes been opened by the event in which he had borne 
BO large and so honourable a share (ch. x.). We should grow more charitable and more 
large-minded as we grow in years. 

VI. The fkeedom op the gospel from all burdensome imposts. (Ver. 10.) Why 
tempt God by putting on the neck of the disciples an intolerable yoke ? Why invite 
defeat? Why multiply difficulty and ensure disappointment by requiring of the whole 
Gentile world a conformity which they will not render and which God does not demand? 
Why make burdensome the yoke which the Master himself made easy (Matt. xL 30)? 
The gospel of his grace was meant to be a source of blessedness and deliverance ; 
how incensate the folly of tying to it any institutes which would make it become an 
Insufierable vexation 1 

VIL The essence op the oedinanoii. Circumcision was but the outward sign of 
admission to the privilege and obligation of the Law. The Law was but the schoolmaster 
to bring men to Christ. Those, then, who were saved by the grace of the Lord Jesus 
Christ (ver. 11) had the very essence and substance of which the old Jewish rite was 
bat the sign and symbol (PhiL iii, 3 ; Eom. u. 28, 29). — 0. 

▼«r». 12 — 35. — A grave msis in the kingdom of God : more lessont. After Peter's 
si>eech (vets. 7 — 10) came the narration of facts by Barnabas and Paul, in which they 
laid stress on the Divine tokens of favour and support which they had received in the 
execution of their work (ver. 12) ; and then James summed up the matter, evidently 
giving voice to the decision of the Church. We learn — 

L That men op divergent thought should strive to meet onb another's views 
lar Christian council. Probably it would be hard to find two good men of any a"-e 
or country who have taken more divergent views of the gospel of Christ than (Ud 
James and Paul. Their Epistles show us how they viewed the one truth from separate 
and even distant standpoints. Had they come to this Church meeting intent on 
magnifying their own (fistinctive points, there would have ensued bitter conflict and 
fetw rupture. But they strove to meet one another, and the end was peace and the 
furtherance of redeeming truth. 

IL That an equitable compromise mat be the most honourable settlement, 
(Vers. 19 — 21.) In concession to the Gentile party, it was not required that they should 
submit to the distinctive rite ; in concession to the Jewish party, it was required that 
certain statutes should be observed by them. Occasions will very frequently ooov 



OH.XV. 1— 41.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 11 

when each side owes it to the other to make concession. The spirit that strives onV 
for victory is not the spirit of Christ. We should, as his disciples, count it an hoiKnr 
and a joy to concede, when we conscientiously can do so, to Christian brethren who diffei 
from us. 

III. That wb may leave dnimpcrtant matters to the settlement of time, 
The particular precepts which James and those who thought with him desired to have 
enforced have long since rli'<appi-ared. Their observance at the time was expedient, 
for Moses had in every city them that preached him, etc. (ver. 21). But when the 
special reasoiiH for conformity were removed, then they fell through. Where the peace 
of a Church or a large Christian community is at stake, we do well to accept small 
matters which are unessential; time is on our side. 

IV. That Oheistianitt has pubif'ied and pbopobtioned public morals. It sur- 
prises and shocks us to read of abstinence from meat which had been offered to idols, 
and from things strangled, being placed side by side with abstinence from the sin of 
fornication, as if, in morals, these things stood on the same level. We feel that the 
latter is a thing so utterly and inherently bad that the former is not at all comparable 
with it in heinousness of offence. The fact is that we think thus because our holy 
religion has purified our thoughts, and taught us to see ceremonial and moral offences in 
true perspective. But wherever Christianity has been corrupted, where the traditions 
of men have overlaid its simplicity with their ceremonialism, we find this defective 
view prevailing. It was necessary, at that time and in the then condition of the world, 
formally and expressly to disallow a custom which we now shudder at and shrink 
from as a shameful sin, 

v. That decisions, when once attained, should be coueteouslt and oaeefullt 
OABBIED OUT. (Vers. 22 — 33.) The Church at Jerusalem, though on the main point 
it had yielded to the Church at Antioch, did not give way sulkily or grudgingly. It 
did not dismiss the deputation with a cold and formal resolution. It sent able and 
influential men, with letters, to accompany Paul and Barnabas, and these greeted the 
Syrian Church and laid the matter fully before them. So that, in the end, the two 
communiiies understood one another and rejoiced in one another the more. What is 
done in Clirist's name and cause should be done with utmost courtesy and with perfect 
thoroughness. 

VI. That wb mat best happy in the all-seeing wisdom and all-embracinq 
LOVE OF God. (Vers. 14 — 18.) James intimated that what was then happening was 
only the iulHlnient of the Divine intention. God knew from the beginning what he 
should accomplish, and he purposed the recovery and redemption of the whole Gentile 
world. 1. W hen we are baffled by the perplexities of the way, let us remember that 
all things are in the hands of the omniscient One. 2. When we are distressed by the 
disappointmon's and difficulties of our work, let us be consoled by thinking that God 
means to restore mankind ; his wisdom and his love will prevail, though we see not 
our way and though our fears abound. — 0. 

Ver. 26. — Sdf -sacrifice for Christ. There are two classes of men of whom we are 
reminded by these words of the Jerusalem Church. 

I. Those who abb beady to sacrifice their lives fob anything and EVEBYTniNo 
BUT THE BEST AND HIGHEST. The soldier for victory ; the sportsman for excitement ; 
the explorer for the gratification of curiosity ; the Alpine climber for credit ; the artist 
for fame ; the sailor for love of the sea, etc. There is no lack of men who risk life 
for something. But we have to consider that while (1) there is a touch of nobility in 
some of these cases which wins our admiration ; yet (2) often the end is not worth 
the sacrifice, — life and all that life means to its holder and to those who are related to 
him and dependent on him are too precious to be parted with for a slight object, too 
valuable to be sacrificed for any but a serious and great end. And (3) when thus lost, it 
is often laid down from instinct or passion rather than from principle. There is some- 
thing essentially unsatisfactory in it ; for it is a material loss with no corresponding 
gain. It brings sadness to the heart, loneliness and misery to the home, and does not 
bring adequate consolation to the mind. 

II. Those who becognizb the highest and the best but saceificb little ob 
NOTHING TO IT. We should, perhaps, say to him ; for : 1. The highest and best meet in 



la THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh.xt.1— 4L 

a living One, even Jesua Christ. It is, indeed, to honour his Name (see text), but it is 
also and chiefly to exalt and extol him and make him very high (Isa. lii. 13) in the 
estimation and affection of the world, that his servants strive and suffer. 2. Ourselves 
and all that we have are his due ; theref ire our lives, when he asks us to lay them 
down at his feet. 3. There are those who recognize his claim, but do not comply with 
his desire. There are those who do ; men that have hazarded their lives for Jesus 
Christ, from Paul and Barnabas down to our own Christian martyrs ; men and women 
who, on various fields of holy, daring, and heroic suffering, have cheerfully sacrificed 
all to honour him and do his bidding ; but there are too many that acknowledge the 
validity of his claim but do not respond to his call. There are in our congregations 
and even in our Churches (1) men who withhold themselves from missionary or minis- 
terial service, because, though well fitted for it, they are not prepared to make the 
necessary sacrifices ; (2) men that will not step into the breach when some other kind 
of holy activity is demanded, because they shrink from the burdens or the annoy- 
ances it will entail ; (3) men that will not encourage some good work of Christ, 
because, to do so, they must part with that which the world counts precious. These 
are far from being numbered with the " good and faithful servants." — 0. 

Vers. 36 — 41. — Apostles at fault. When a grave and critical juncture had been 
safely passed without damage done to any, there arose a quarrel about an unimportant 
and insignificant matter, which had regrettable, not to say deplorable, results. The 
heart of the earnest and affectionate Paul yearned to know how their converts fared in 
"every city where they had preached the Word of the Lord" (ver. 36). Barnabas 
immediately acquiesced in Paul's proposal to visit them ; everything promised another 
useful mission journey, in which the calmer and more genial qualities of the one man 
would supplement the intenser and more vehement characteristics of the other. But 
there arose a question as to companionship, which wrecked their agreement to work in 
one another's company, and which separated the two friends for life. Barnabas wished 
to take Mark, and would not abandon his desire ; Paul would not consent to take him : 
" and the contention was so sharp . . . that they departed asunder " (ver. 39). We learn 
from this incident — 

I. That xs act of mobal weakness mat have fab longbb and mobe sebious 
CONSEQUENCES THAN WE CAN POSSIBLY EOBESEE. Could Mark have foreseen that his 
desertion of the cause in Pamphylia would have led to the lifelong separation of his 
uncle from Paul, he would probably have remained with them, and " fulfilled the work," 
even as they did. But he did not reckon on after consequences. It is well for us to 
consider that our acts of minor wrong-doing, of moral weakness, of spiritual short- 
coming, may do an amount of mischief from the commission of which we should shrink 
with dismay if we could only look it in the face. 

II. That between the two apostles a decided and begeettable fault was com- 
mitted. Their intention to work together in the cause of Christ need not and should 
not have been broken off by their disagreement. They ought either to have compromised 
the matter by mutual concession, or one of the two should have yielded to the other. 
Paul owed too much to Barnabas to be justified in pushing his own will to the point of 
separation. Barnabas owed too much to Paul to make it right for him to insist so 
pertinaciously on his particular desire. One should have yielded if the other would not. 
It was an unedifying, unseemly, unchristian thing for two apostles to throw up a plan 
on which they had sought Divine direction, and which must have received the sanction 
of the Church, because they could not agree on a matter of detail. They must both 
have lived to regret it. Men in prominent positions, and those who are engaged in great 
matters, are bound to be above such unseemliness of behaviour. Either (1) the 
ingenuity of love should devise a middle way, or (2) the sacrifiaial spirit of love should 
yield the point altogether. 

III. That in eaoh case the fault committed was the shadow op his own 
PAETicuLAB EXCBLLBNCT. Probably both of the apostles were blameworthy. But so 
far as Paul was to be condemned, his failure was the shadow of his intensity. Such 
was the entirety of his devotedness, such the intensity ot his zeal, such the strennoua- 
ness of his soul, that he could not brook anything which looked like half-heartedness 
AM ao far as Barnabas was to blame, bis fault was the shadow of his kind-hearte^lness, 



OH. XT. 1—41.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 1» 

his willingness to ^ve another chance to a young man, his reluctance to exclude from 
noble service a man who bad made one mistake. Each was animated by a commend- 
able spirit, though each may have gone too far in his own course. Often when we 
unsparingly condemn, it would be well to remind ourselves and others that the faults of 
good men are usually but the shadow of their virtues. 

IV. That God judoks the good by thbie ABiDiNa spibit, and not by thbib 
OOOABIONAL DiSFOsmoHS : SO also should we. These two men were not the less servants 
of Ck)d, ambassadors of Jesus Christ, because they were betrayed into temporary ill 
humour. God appraised them by their essential, abiding spirit of love and devotion ; 
he forgave their passing ebullition. In the same way we must talte care to estimate 
men, not by an occasional outburst which is not really characteristic and is no true 
criterion, but by the " spirit of their mind " — that which really shapes and colours their 
life and character. 

v. That this faui/t of the apostles had, as became the men, a Chbistian 
ENDING. Paul afterwards wrote kindly of Barnabas, and actually sent for Mark, 
declaring that he was " pro6table for [the] ministry " (2 Tim. iv. 11). The sun should 
not go down upon our wrath. If any man has a quarrel against any, he is to "forbeai 
and to forgive" (Col. ili. 13).— C. 

Vers. 1 — 5. — The Judmzers at Antioch. There must needs be heresies, that is, 
divisions and separations of opinion, in order that that which is approved may be made 
manifest. In conflicts of this kind, the chaff of falsehood is sifted from the genuine 
wheat of truth. 

I. The position of the Judaizebs. 1. It was a reactionary position. It aimed 
at the re-establishment of circumcision as the condition of salvation. This was 
going back from the " spirit" to the "flesh," from the principle of an internal to that 
of an external religion. It was substituting works for faith, doing for being, as the 
condition of salvation. 2. It was a revolutionary position. Such a claim convulses 
the very heart of the Christian Church. Wherever it has come up, a deep mark has 
been left in history. This was essentially the conflict of Isaiah and other prophets 
against the ceremonialists of the day. The question came up again at the Reformation. 
Law or gospel — Moses or Christ? Behind this question lies a world. Is religion 
stationary and stagnant or ideal. Divine, and possessed of the power of an expansive 
and endless life ? 

II. The immediate effect of the raising of the question. 1. Private dissension. 
Alas I often is it so. The loving missionary comrades, Paul and Barnabas, are disunited. 
But we must remember, " Though Plato is my friend, truth is my friend stiU more." 
Paul felt that evangelical freedom was threatened (Gal. ii. 4). And the gospel was 
dearer to him than life. Truth must not be compromised in the supposed interests 
of friendship. Indeed, the supposition is illusory. For if it be " a strong and habitual 
inclination in two persons to promote the good and happiness of each other," this cannot 
be at the expense of truth. 2. Public discussion. The difference between Paul and 
Barnabas could not be ignored. The topic must have been on the tongue of every one. 
See how good comes out of controversy as well as evil. Private pain is often the 
condition of public blessing. A cloud comes between two minds, but the truth shines 
presently the more brightly forth. 

III. The action of the CnnRCH. They resolved to despatch Paul and Barnabas 
to consult the apostles and elders at Jerusalem. Note the appropriateness of this 
decision. 1. As to the men sent — Paul representing the Gentiles and the missionary work, 
Barnabas the Church at Antioch. Besides, from Gal. ii. 1, et sqq., we see that St. Paul 
had a special inward direction to proceed thither. 2. The destination. Jerusalem, the 
mother city and the mother Church, and the seat of apostolic authority. Yet Antioch 
was probably not second to Jerusalem in numbers and influence. Without debating 
questions of Church government, the lesson may be drawn that no particular community 
should act for itself in important questions without consulting the general sense of tha 
Christian Church. 

IV. The journey and arrival at Jerusalem. 1. They had a conduct from the 
Church of Antioch as they set forth — an expression of confidence in the men, and o' 
deep interest in the result. Said the electoral Prince of Brandenburg to hi* envoy. 



14 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ch. iv. 1— 41 

proceeding to a conference with the papists, " Bring me the little word sola, i.e. alone, 
faith only, back — or come not back at all I " 2. They told good news on the way. 
They told of the conversion of the heathen, and the news was received with great joy. 
Here was a great argument for Paul, gathered on the way. So does God solve our 
disputes in words by the irresistible logic of his facts. 3. At Jerusalem they tell the 
great things God has done for them. The facts of the past are prophetic of the future. 
Divine mercy as an historical fact is the basis of sure hope and confidence. The_ temper 
of devont recollection and thanksgiving fits the mind for the view of present duties. — J. 

Vers. 6 — ^21. — The council at Jerusalem. The claim of the Judaizers is sharply 
and absolutely put. Circumcision is a necessity ; the Law of Moses must be observed. 
The whole question is open, and the air is full of debate. 

I. DiscouBSE OF Peteb. 1. The question whether the Mosaic Law is binding upon the 
heathen or no is referred by him to experience. This is the great guide of alL In no case 
may it be neglected. In every case recurrence to it as a whole will be found helpful. 
Now, at CsBsarea it was clear that the Gentiles, no less than the Jewish Christians, had 
received the Holy Spirit. This fact the apostle considers to be significant proof that 
God had already decided the question in debate. God, he had before learned, was no 
" respecter of persons." Here he expresses the same truth by saying that God has made 
no difierence between them ;' has placed the two upon one footing. He has testified 
to the Gentiles by imparting to them the Holy Spirit, his grace and good pleasure. 
2. The reference to immediate experience lea'ls to the larger reference to history — the 
history of the sacred past. The entire revelation of God in both testaments rests on 
history and consists in history. Christ " lived his doctrine and preached his life." 
And the living experience of prophets and apostles offers a rich fund of instruction. 
Paul's doctrine is his own life translated into conscionsness and knowledge. And the 
doctrine of Peter is his own life wrought out in views of duty and principles of Christian 
thought. Christian doctrine is the expression of the results of Christian history. The 
discourse of Peter evidently produces a great impression. Silence follows, broken only 
by the voices of Barnabas and Favd, who relate the significant occurrences which have 
befallen among the heathen. 

II. Discourse of Jambs. 1. He, like a true Jew, trained in ear and memory by the 
prophetic oracles, reverts to them, and finds confirmation there of the views wrought out 
in the minds of the others by the certain discipline of experience. The writings of the 
prophets were used by the apostles as a guide to the interpretation of the signs of the 
present, and for directions as to present duty. Now, the oracle from Amos adduced by 
James refers in the first instance to the house of David. His royal house is fallen into 
ruins. But God would raise it up out of the ruins, would restore and extend it among 
the Gentiles among whom his Name shall be known — that is, among those who shall 
decide to acknowledge and serve him. All this God would bring about in accordance 
with his eternal designs (ver. 18). 2. Here, then, is lisht on the question of debate. 
Observe that the theocracy, the kingdom of God, stands in the centre of the promise, 
and not the Law as such. Further, the " calling on the Name of God " is laid down as 
the condition or incorporation with the kingdom of God. This condition has been 
already fulfilled by the converted heathen. Lastly, it is " the Lord who doeth these 
things." It i s not our short-sighted counsel and prudence which have to make new history 
and new laws, but God has promised that he will do it. Already has he adopted a 
people out of the heathen (ver. 14). If, then — this is the argument of James — we 
should lay a burden on the Gentile Christians, this would be going agaiust the teach- 
ing of facts, striving; against the current of history, thwarting the wUl of God therein 
revealed. 3. The decision of James. He would not have the Gentile Christians 
harassed, who are turning in repentance and good works to God. He would recognize 
their evangelical freedom ; would reject the demands of the Pharisaic party ; in fact, 
he fully, though on different grounds, coincides with Paul. At the same time, he 
insists on certain moral and ceremonial abstinences. The whole illustrates the ndld, 
gentle, and loving character of this apostle. There was in him, with the greatest 
strictness towards himself, the most compassionate love to others. Unceasingly in the 
temple, on his knees he prayed for forgiveness for his people rBusebius, ' Eccl. Hist.,' ii. 
2B). He who loves his own household best will be the kindest to them without. 



OH. XT. 1— 41.J THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. IS 



The trae patriot is the true philanthropist ; the loyal adherent of hi* Church the best 
friend of universal Christianity and progress. — J. 

Vers. 22 — 29. — Decision of the council at Jerusalem. This, the first coundl of the 
Church, is generally considered an example for all times. 

L An example of Christian prxjdenoe, 1. In the selection of emissaries. It had 
reference partly to the Churches, partly to Paul and Barnabas. The Churches were 
assured that the emissaries were not delivering their own private opinion, but the 
deliberate judgment of the Church. And the apostles had the legitimacy and purity 
of their office sealed by the highest Church authority. 

II. An example of brotherly love and wisdom. Without the taking of some 
such step, the Judaizers in Autioch and elsewhere would remain unchecked, and left 
to pursue their disturbing and factious intrigues. And by this step a new bond of 
sympathy and affection was established between Jew and Gentile, between Jerusalem 
and the world. 

III. An example of inspired action. " It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and 
tons." The words may be abused or used with genuine devout feeling. The Holy 
Spirit is the Source of light and wisdom in the mind — the Judge and Decider in spiritual 
things. The conclusion of a matter, discussed by the faithful in the light of the Holy 
Spirit, may justly be looked uiwn as the decision of tlie Holy S|iirit. The whole stamp 
of the message is spiritual, imiiressive, full of Christian piety and love. Its closing word, 
promising blessing on the conditions laid down, is far better than a threat of pains on 
disobedience would have been. The Christian " Farewell 1 " contains not only the wish 
for a brother's happiness, but that he may abide in Christ, and walk as he walked 
in the world. — J. 

Vers. 30 — 34. — Effects of the mission from the Church. The few words of the 
decision gave rise to a large joy and consolation at Antioch. Let us generalize this. 

I. The gospel brings peace to troubled hearts. Freedom from the yoke of the 
Law only truly to be enjoyed by those who have previously smarted and groaned beneath 
that yoke. 

II. It unites the souls of believers in peace. Judas and Silas, by the exercise 
of their prophetic gifts, exhorted and strengthened the brethren. The faithful teacher's 
heart is in his element in bringing souls to the Saviour. 

ZII. It leads in peace towards the heavenly Jerusalem, to the mother Church 
ABOVE. They were sent with (leace from the brethren to tliose wiio sont them forth. 
All interchange of love on earth, all messages of reconciliation, are prophetic of and 
prepare for the home of peace above. — J. 

Vers. 36 — 41. — Beginning of the second missionary journey. The dissension of Paul 
and Barnabas, painful in itself, may yield useful matter of reflection. 

Human infirmity in mature Christians. 1. The fact of it. Paul judged 
severely of Mark on moral grounds. His desertion of him and Barnabas (ch. xiii. 13) on 
a former occasion was to his mind a strong proof of inconstancy. But Mark had fallen 
away from them, not from Christ. And iiarnabas would lean to the side of leniency 
and clemency towards the young disciple. The contention became sharp. Both thought 
themselves to be contending for Christ; both were unconsciously contending for self. 
Both were in the right, each from his own point of view aiming at the good of the 
young man and the furtherance of the kingdom. 2. The consolation of it. (1) With 
reference to the person concerned. Chrysostom says that the strife was uf great service 
to Mark ; for the sternness of Paul brought a change in his mind, while the kindness 
of Barnabas suffered him not to feel abandoned. (2) With reference to us. We may 
be encouraged by the thought that these holy men were of like passions with ourselves, 
bone of our bone and flesh of our flesh. Divine love triumphs over and is made perfect 
in human wealmess. Apart from that, man's very virtues become faults; the mildness 
of Barnabas degenerates into softness, the severity of Paul into harshness. Divine love 
converts faults into blessings. Mark is humiliated, and thereby raised in Christian 
manhood. The separation uf the apostles divides the stream of E»vhig grace into two 
streams, and sy Ujv mnv widely spreads it in the world. — J. 



!• THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. XT. 1—41. 



VerB. 1 — 21. — The first councils spiritual liberty eitablished. The controver^ 
between a corrupt Judaism and the gospel of Christ certain to be brought to a crisis. 
The conversion of Saul, taken in connection with his special mission to the Gentiles, 
forced the mutter on the attention of the Church. The scene of the controversy was 
Antioch, where Paul would have many supporters. But Jerusalem was the proper place 
for a settlement — not because any authority was assigned to the spot, but because there 
could be gathered a more really representative assembly of the whole Church, Notice — 

I. Thk facts themselves are never questioned, but gladly acknowledged. The 
acceptance of the Gentiles, the blessing on the ministry of Paul and Barnabas, the gift 
of the Holy Spirit bestowed on others than the Jewish believers. 

IL The point of contention is the claim asserted by a small section of the Jewish 
Church, of Pharisaic spirit, to impose on the new Gentile converts the obligations 
of the Mosaic Law, particularly circumcision. This showed that they regarded Christ 
as only a Reformer of the Law, not as substituting the gospel for the Law. 

III. The whole Churoh is the body of referees. The apostles and elders are the 
speakers and leaders, but the multitude is present, and to them (ver. 22) the decision 
is referred. 

IV. The testimony of the Spibit in the facts rehearsed, the signs and wonders 
wrought, is plainly the voice of God to the apostles. Both Peter and James stand 
firmly on that foundation — God hath called them. Therefore we must obey his voice. 
The witness of the facts agrees with the witness of the word. 

V. The restrictions which were deemed necessary were simply the dictates of 
brotherly love. Stumbling-blocks should not be thrown in the way of weak brethren. 
Let the Gentiles use their liberty, only let them respect the feelings of Jews and the 
moral demands of the Law. 

VI. The contentious party must have been a mere handful of men. They are 
condemned by the letter sent to Antioch. The effect of the epistle was to silence them 
and produce a happy peace. Which representation entirely overihrows the statement 
of such critics as Baur, that there was a Pauline element in the Church opposed by the 
Petiine. 

VII. The cause of strife is buried in the depth of zealous labour for Christ 
and souls. Judas and Silas, the messengers from Jerusalem, soon forgot the trouble 
in much higher topics and co-operation with the Church at Antioch in tlieir evangelistic 
efforts. Thus this first occasion of ecclesiastical settlement shows the Church pervaded 
with the spirit of brotherly love and faith. They had no conception of Church authority 
apart from the voice of God's Spirit. They came together in perfect equality. They 
reverenced age and spiritual distinction, and the mind of the brethren gathered 
together in conference, but their chief dependence was on the promise of the Holy Ghost 
and his guidance, so that they could say, " It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to 
us." — E. 

Ver. 9. — The spirituality of the gospel. " Purifying [cleansing] their hearts by 
faith." Purity comes from within. The influence of pure thought and pure feeling 
on practice. The purification of Judaism typical. The Holy Ghost did the work. 
When the temple was closed, the kingdom of grace opened. The Spirit must operate 
upon the spirit. All ritualism, as such, contradicts the essential principles of gospel 
liberty. 

I. The heart needs OLEANsnia. 1. Of its falsehood. The heathen world a world 
of lies. The tendency of fallen nature to believe strong delusions. 2. Of its corrupt 
desires. The Pall was a lowering of the spirit of humanity to the level of the inferior 
races. Animalism is the characteristic of heathenism and of an unregenerate state. 
3. Of its self-justification and pride. The evil holds to it. A broken and contrite' 
heart is required. 

II. The heart is cleansed. Consider the nature of the purity bestowed. 1. The 
conscience, by a sense of Ibrgiveness; "perilous stuff" cleansed away. 2. An obiect 
of love revi aled to whom the heart is surrendered. " Thou knowest that I love thee " 
The germ of the new life in the soil of the affections. 3. Consecration. Circumcision 
was a covenant sign. "Out of the heart are the issues of life." A pure will is tltat 
which is pledged by a changed course of action and a new position. 



OH.xy. 1— 41.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 17 



in. The heart ib cleansed by faith. The contrast between the old covenant 
and the new. The truth accepted becomes the power of God unto salvation. Spiritual 
cleansing differs from: 1. Mere ritual purification. 2. Mere nominal separation from 
the world by an external life. 3. Mere slavish obedience to the letter of the Law. 
A purity which rests upon faith is a purity embracing thoughts and desires, lifting the 
heart with joy, securing it against the temptation to self-righteousness and superficial 
morality. Believe; give your mind to the message; welcome the personal Saviour; 
follow the leading Spirit. Bejoice in the liberty of God's children. Christ's yoke ia 
easy, hie burden hgnt, — "&. 

Ver. 26. — Spiritual heroism. " Men that have hazarded their lives," etc. 

L The power op Christ's Name. 1. Those who were ready to die for him must 
have <iccepted him as the fulfilment of all their hopes. The previous position of Paul 
and Barnabas instructive as showing what the Name of Christ was to them. 2. No 
mere change of creed so expressed. A personal affection at the root of their heroism. 
The self-sacrifice not only proved sincerity, ~ but exemplified the transforming and 
ennobling power of the gospel. 

n. The DfFLUENOB OF HBBOio EXAMPLES. 1. Li Strengthening faith. 2. In 
stimulating feeling. The Christianity of the present time apt to languish for lack 
of such infiuence. Times of great danger to the Church times of great testimony. 
The effect of missionary zeal in promoting the growth of character. 3. The true 
leaders of the Church should be foremost in devotion. Apostolic zeal very different 
from ecclesiastical fanaticism. The world bows before spiritual might.— B. 

Vers. 36 — 41. — Contention amongst brethren. Importance of the record as showing : 
1. The sincerity and simplicity of the Christian writers. An impostor would never 
have inserted such a fact. 2. The overruling grace of God. The treasure in earthen 
vessels. Infirmities in the agents magnifies him who, notwithstanding, accomplishes 
his purposes. Notice — 

L The true principle op Christian work. Constant watchfulness and inspection. 
" See how they fare ; " for encouragement and confirmation ; for maintenance of order 
for advancement in teaching. " Visit the brethren." Not only in each Church, but 
in the outlying districts ; maintain brotherly sympathy. The true conception of the 
Church is that of a society resting on a spiritual basis of mutual confidence and love. 

n. Subordination of personal considerations to the highest interests of Christ's 
kingdom. Barnabas thought more of his nephew than the work. He was most 
in the wrong. The Church, by their commendation of Paul in prayer, plainly expressed 
their sympathy with his side of the controversy. At the same time, as Mark proved 
himself faithful, events showed that Paul might have yielded for the sake of peace 
without injury to the <oduse of truth. His strong will tempted him. 

in. The errors of good men are not suffered to hinder the work of God. More 
good done by the division of labour. Introduction of Silas. Mark probably best under 
the sole guidance of Barnabas. The divisions in the Christian Church viewed in the 
light of this primitive contention. Not wholly injurious. Partly due to the natural 
differences of intellect and temper. Overruled to develop the variety of Christian 
character. Will be at last, like discords resolved into harmony, the source of j^ory 
w God. Yet, as at first, so always, remembrance <rf the infirmity and fallibility 
of great and good men should keep us near the throne of grace. — B. 

Vers. 1 — 35. — A great dissension on the threshold of the Gentile Chwrch, and the 
apostcHie management of it. One subject knits together very firmly the contents of 
this paragraph. And the' subject is one of the greatest importance. Its interest is all 
of the practical kind ; and well had it been for the unconverted world had the Church 
through all these centuries abided by the suggested lessons that we have here. The 
one subject is the beginning of ecclesiastical dissension within the Church catholic 
itself; not on matter purely doctrinal, not on matter purely disciplinary, but on matter 
that may be for the time supposed to lie on the border-land between these two. For 
some will insist on making it mostly a question of veritable doctrine ; others would stickls 
tor It as a question at least of " decency and order " in disoipline. Let us notice— > 
ACTS — n. • 



18 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. xr. 1—41. 



L Tmb bimfle question itself at issue. Gentiles have many great signs and 
wonders wrought amongst them, of which they are by no means simple beholders. 
They themselves are " a great part of them." They are believed in multitudes of cases to 
have become true converts to the new faith. The apostolic verdict and pronouncement 
have gone forth that " God had opened the door of faith " to them. And facte seem to 
speak for themselves, saying that they have received the gifts as well as the gift of the 
Holy GhoBt. Must these (Entiles submit to the Jewish initiatory rite of circumcision ? 

n. The obioin of the oreat dissension that arose upon this simple question. 
Certain men, evidently of the Church in Judssa, came down to Antioch, and with volun- 
teered assiduity (ver. 24) took upon them to teach the brethren at Antioch that 
circumcision was a rite necessary for them to submit to, if they would be saved. Ol 
these men, before they are condemned as mere officious idlers or " busybodies," it 
shall be granted that they had a rijrht to their own religious views, their own reading 
of the Law and prophets, and their own past history ; tliat they also had a right to 
travel and to go and see the new Gentile converts, whose Church at Antioch must in 
itself have been such a sign ; and that, arrived there, they were not bound to keep a 
perpetual silence. But from the very moment that these things are conceded to the 
members of any Christian society dates the solemn responsibility which rests upon 
them. One of the great facts of the " liberty " (ver. 10 ; GaL v. 1) of Christ's Church 
is that individual character shall he called out and strictly tried by the vast increase of 
individual responsibility. But the liberty cannot be had and the responsibility left. 
And up to this point these things may be noted — (1) that from the very first " offences 
would come," even within the Church ; but (2) that it was no less " woe " to them by 
whom the offence should come ; for that on them lay the responsibility (of which they 
should be aware and be ware), and not upon any lach^ on the part of the Church as 
a whole in not legislating, for instance, to suppress the freedom of individual thought 
and word. For to do this under the rule of Jesus wotild be to originate worse 
" offence." The very worst affront to Jesus is to substitute letter for spirit, law for 
love. The origin of a dissension, then, that excited much disputation, consumed much 
precious time, is certain to have awakened some bitterness of word and of temper, as 
well as to have caused no slight anxiety and pain to those concerned, was the gratuitous 
work of men who had not correct knowledge, did not try to get it (ver. 24), and who 
went out of their way to " make a great stir." 

III. The apostouo management or this dissension. The somewhat indefinite 
phraseology of the second verse, compared with the words of the Apostle Paul in 
Gal. ii. 2, leaves us in very little uncertainty that we are to understand that Paul and 
Barnabas received special intimation from the Spirit that the question should be 
moved to Jerusalem ; that the Church at Antioch heartily fell in with the rightness of 
this course, and rejoiced to attend the steps of the apostles and other delegates to the 
last, as well as to commend them in prayer to God. 1. If, then, the intimation of the 
Spirit showed the way for the ajwstles, it may be gathered (1) what really important 
issues were at stake, not in the matter only, but in the manner of treating this dis- 
sension ; and (2) it may be assumed that many a time and anxiously and fervently did the 
♦wo implore Divine guidance. The Spirit is the Ruler in the Church. How imperfectly 
IS this vital fact remembered in modern days! And the Spirit's guidance is sought and 
obtained when clouds and stormy weather were presaged. As to the practical uses to 
be gained by this reference of the question to Jerusalem and to the body of the apostles 
and eldeis, it goes by saying. 2. When Paul and Barnabas, and certain others of the 
Antioch Church with them, reach Jerusalem, they are, in the first instance, courteously 
received by the whole Church with " the apostles and elders." The meeting was a 
service, and a happy, holy seivice. All hear what God has done (ver. 4), and the joy 
is great. And, finally, the question is opened, apparently as temperately as plainly 
(ver. 5). 3. The proper council shortly come together. It consists of " the apostles 
and dders." But the matter appears to have been argued in the presence of the whole 
assembly still (vers. 7, 12, 13, 22). Four leadini^ speeches and arguments are recorded 
and the order and the wisdom ahke of the selection of speakers must be apparent Who 
better t« begin than Peter? His argument is plain, practical, and cannot be gainsaid. 
But the w»y in which he turns the tables on his brethren of the Jewish sticklers foi 
eircuBtcision (ver. 11) is most significant. There follow Bam»ba8 and Paul with their 



oiLrr.l— 41.J THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 19 

missioiLary tidings. These carried volumes of conviction, and were well fitted to do so. 
Men listen still wonderfully in preached sermons to facts and reliable history. It is 
these which weigh, too, with the unsophisticated and the mass. And with what keen- 
ness of attention and almost sympathetic pride they listen to these recitals from tho 
lips of men who had " hazarded their lives for the Name " of the Lord Jesus Christ 
(ver. 26) 1 And after these thrilling speeches James (probably " the brother of the 
Lord" and the writer of the Epistle general) renews argument, corroborating it by Old 
Testament Scripture quotation. Nor does he sit down without making definite pro- 
posals to meet the present case. 4. In harmony with those proposals, the apostles and 
elders and the whole Church agree. And they agree to write and to send what they 
write by the honoured hands of Paul and Barnabas, and two others specially delegated 
from their own home communii)n to Antiooh. Vers. 23 — 29 contain the words of a 
letter which, for kindly respect, for conciliatory tone toward all, for fidelity of truth 
(ver. 24), for "honour to whom honour" is due (ver. 26), for religious calling to witness 
of the one Ruler of the Church, " the Holy Ghost " (ver. 28), and for the word of 
exhortation (ver. 29), could not be surpassed. 5. The four peacemakers speed on their 
way to Antiooh. They call " the multitude" (ch. iv. 32 ; vi. 5) together, deliver their 
letter, and congratulate the Gentiles liberated from many a fear in its "consolation." 
This gentle touch at the end speaks much of what had been transpiring in the minds 
of those Gentile converts, and helps as practical comment upon ver. 10 of this chapter. 
The two visitors, Judas and Silas, also address the Antioch Church, the latter of whom 
finds such interest in place and people that he stays at Antioch, there a while assisting 
Paul and Barnabas in their ministry and in their pastorate of the flock. 

IV. Some genebal lessons fob Chuboh life suggested by this HiSTouif. We 
should observe: 1. The sanction here given to the patient and faithful use of strictly 
moreU forces in the government of the Church of Christ. The case had aspects that 
might well, on tho one hand, try the forbearance of the lari;e-hearted, and, on the other 
hand, tempt to high-handed despatch. But a world of trouble is not grudged to keep well 
within the spirit of the Master, and to have compassion on the weak, and to consider 
others in their errors and their small-mindedness, " lest they also be tempted," with whom 
confessedly may lie now the strength and the right and the goodness. 2. The honour 
done to courtesy and respect and to the observance of " duty towards equals," or those 
who for the. time must be called so. Christianity often seems to offer us a very clear, 
very beautiful outline of the perfections possible to human society merely as such. 
3. The kindest attention here paid to human feelings. It seems to shine out again and 
again. Where a cold, despotic, hard-and-fast ecclesiasticism would have found its 
occasion for triumphing, the true order of Christ's Church finds a chosen occasion for 
Teveieucing feeling. i)'or upon and in addition to all the honour shown in the transac- 
tions recorded in this chapter to respect and courtesy, there is apparent the sympathy 
of true and heartfelt love. Amid great dangers the least possible damage was done to 
the reputation of young Christianity, and the comment might still be, " See how these 
Christians love one another." — B. 

Vers. 37 — 39. — Symptoms more ttartUng. There is a sense in which human nature 
and Christian princi|ile are opposed to each other. When in conflict they are indeed 
two rare antan;onists. It is astonishing at how many angles the former can be touched 
by the latter, and how deeply and incisively this cuts into that. The great dissension in 
the matter of circumcision and the new Gentile converts filled larger space under the 
eye; but how often has it faded away firom the mental gaze of even the most devout 
reader when the present dissension has come immediately after upon his view, and with 
unwelcome semi-fascination riveted attention 1 Faithful, we may well say, as the 
" Spirit of all truth " is his Book. The sins and failings of apostles are not concealed. 
Nor are they even glossed over, though it was the very moment when men of devout 
sympathies would have given anything to veil them from view and withdraw them 
firom any permnnent record. The record lies here, and it must be for use. A certain 
iudofiniteness characterizes it where it would have particularly suited our curiosity to 
havw exact detail and pronounced verdict. That very incompleteness is sure to shelter 
valonble hints. We shall do well, then, to notice as simply as possible the track of the 
oarrative, and keep near it. We are taught— 



20 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. fOH. xt. 1— 41. 

L GlTB BLBMBNT OF THE EBBPEOT DUB TO SoEiPTUBB. This IS to Compare ScriptuT* 
with Scripture. The slight hint of ch. xiii. 13 lies for a while like a chance seed 
dropped in chance soil. But now it has appeared above ground, and it takes shape 
and colour, and buds with meaning. Ch. xx. 39 furnishes us with another kind of 
instance of the value of reading Scripture in this way, where we glean a beantifiil 
saying of " the Lord Jesus," not recorded elsewhere, though the apostle calls on those 
to whom he was speaking to "remember" it as a thing they had heard or read. 

IL Scbiptubb's bxamplk as to occasional keticenoe. Here was a quarrel 
undoubtedly. There was, without doubt, Divine reason for writing certain facts of ii 
on the page of Inspiration. But how frugal the language is ! How utterly absent the 
least symptom of satisfaction in the narrating of it I And there is not an attempt to 
dilate or expatiate upon it. 

III. Scripture's example as to passing judgment and mbasurixo out pbaisb 
AND BLAME. If Sciipture is thus cautious, with all the resources, amounting often as 
in this case to certainty of knowledge, which it possesses, how much more careful 
should we be to avoid a course for which our nature seems often to manifest a strong 
predilection 1 It is our very disappointment here that blame is not apportioned between 
Paul and Barnabas, nor any final verdict pronounced. But, on second thoughts, is that 
disappointment of worthy sort ? 

IV. How TWO UNDOUBTEDLY CHRISTIAN MEN MAT TAKE VERT DIFFERENT VIEW8 OF 

DUTT IN SOME ONE PRACTICAL MATTER. 1. It is even pleasant and suggestive to note 
that the difference was none of doctrine. The " unity of the faith," at all events, is not 
wounded in the house of its friends. 2. It is even possible, though perhaps scarcely 
probable, that this difference of opinion was abundantly legitimate, and that it pro- 
ceeded from as much excellence of one kind in Barnabas as of another in PauL Bar- 
nabas may have leaned to John in compassion and forgivingness and desire to give him 
another trial, instead of shutting him out from it for one offence. And strong, trenchant 
Paul may have been so stricken with the " memory " of the words of " the Lord Jesus " 
about the man who " put his hand to the plough, and looked back," and like words, 
that he could not feel it was a case for human kindness as against Divine fidelity, and 
could not entertain two opinions upon it. Paul also may have rightly estimated the 
incalculable disgrace and reproach it would bring upon the work of Christ if at some 
more unfortunately critical point than before Mark should fail. It must be admitted 
that both of these good men may have been justified in thinking that the matter was not 
a little matter and not a matter for yielding, but for allowing conscience " to have her 
perfect work." 

V. How TBEMBLINOLT OABEFUL GOOD MEN SHOULD BE IN DIFFERING TO GOVERN 

TEMPER AND RESTBAIN ALL BITTERNESS. However jiossibly motives may have been 
unimpeachable on this occasion, and justifiable room have existed for two opinions, yet 
it is impossible to escape the conviction that difference degenerated into dispute. The 
passage-at-arms was not altogether that of brethren, but it was " so sharp " that the 
sacred phraseology uses an equivalent not less forcible than the word " exasperation." 

VI. How MUCH BETTER IT IS TO SEPARATE, AND BOTH WORK, RATHER THAN FIGHT 

AND BOTH STOP WORK. The Separation of tiiis place may be regarded as the typical 

instance of the Kew Testament, as the separation of Abram and Lot (Gen. xiii. 5 18) 

is that of the old, with consequences not altogether dissimilar. For from this point the 
star of Paul is more and yet more in the ascendant, as it was with Abram but of 
Barnabas henceforth the sacred record fails to tell. 

VII. How GEATBFULLT WE SHOULD ACKNOWLEDGE THE GOODNESS AND THE PITT THAT 
BTILL USE SINFUL, IMPERFECT MEN, AND OUT OP ALL THE TANGLE OF HUMAN STRIFE 

BEING TO FAB8 DiviNE PUEPOSBs iND THE SALVATION OF MEN. For when all else is 
said, and our whole brief narrative in these few verses is surveyed, we most gratefully 
gather this residuum of good and ol comfort. 1. The purpose that visited Paul's heart 
and his sharing of it with Barnabah — a pnrpa»e that rose from a heart's deep and hi'gli 
love, and that was nothing daunted by the prospect of danger and suffering. 2. Thf 
outspoken and honest objection lalcen by Paul to the wnipany of Mark. That thij 
objection, with its blunt hunesty, lluds room given to it on ;he i>age may be taken as 
some indication that the right lay with Paul. Nothing is breatha' to detract from tba 
propriety cf his firm veto of Mark as a companion. 3. The prayers of the brethrej 



OH. XV. 1—41.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 21 

who send Paul forth, and their "recommending him to the grace of God." These 
three things are welcome reliefs in the midst of a scene not attractive in its main 
aspects. Would that as much redeeming impression could be found in other cases 
of "sharp contention" among Christian brethren and fellow-labourers in the same 
vineyard! — B. 

Ver. L — Circumcision and salvation. Bevised Version, "Except ye be circumcised 
after the custom of Moses, ye cannot be saved." It was inevitable that the claims of 
Judaism and of Christianity should presently come into conflict, ^he conflict, when 
it came, would be sure to rage round some one particular point of difference ; not 
necessarily the most important point, but the one which would give most prominence 
to the essential differences. Circumcision was only a formal rite, and its importance 
might easily be exaggerated; but it sealed the exclusiveness of the Jewish system, and 
it illustrated its ceremonial character, so it formed a good ground on which to fight. 
The Jews had this vantage-ground. Circumcision was unquestionably a Divine insti- 
tution ; and the Christian could bring no proof whatever that it had been formally 
removed. The Christian teachers could only urge that the " life in Christ '' no longer 
needed formal bonds, and that God's grace in Christ Jesus was given to those who 
were not of the circumcision. St. Paul took very firm ground on the question. While 
prepared to go to the very limits of charitable concession in dealing with those who 
felt the helpfulness of rites and ceremonies, he was prepared to resist to the death any 
tampering with the gospel condition of salvation, or any attempt to declare that saving 
grace could be found in any formal ordinance or ceremony. " When the very founda- 
tions of Christianity were in danger of being undermined, it waa not possible for St. Paul 
to " give place by subjection." 

I. Man's highest need oonobived as salvation. Not reformation ; not religion ; 
not material prosperities; not intellectual attainments; not culture; but distinctly 
salvation, which is a moral good, bears direct relation to personal sins and to a sinful 
state, and is conceivable only by some Divine intervention, and on revealed Divine 
terms. Man's final cry is, " What must I do to be saved? " " How can man be just 
with God ? " Salvation, conceived as man's reconciliation with God, was the idea of 
Judaism, and it was represented by man's being brought into covenant relations, and 
kept in them by sacrifice and ceremonial. Judaism had a moral life within its ritual, 
and this finds expression in the Psalms and in the prophets. Salvation, as apprehended 
by Christianity, is man's reconciliation to God, upon his penitence for sin, and faith in 
the Lord Jesus Christ, as the all-sufficient Sacrifice for sin and Saviour entrusted with 
authority to forgive. The two systems are related, as a shadow is related to the figure 
that throws it; but the two cannot be combined; the shadow must pass altogether 
when the substance has come. The salvation man wants is a soul-salvation, and thai 
no rite, no ceremonial, can touch. 

n. The oldeb idea of the means of salvation. Salvation was a Divine favour 
granted to one particular race. The Abrahamic relations, standing, and rights were 
secured to all who adopted the appointed sign and seal of circumcision. In later years 
outsiders were admitted to share the "salvation," or "standing with God," of the 
Abrahamic race, by submitting to the rite of circumcision. As spirituality faded from 
the Jewish life, increasing importance became attached to the mere rite, and zealots 
contended for it as if in it alone lay the hope of salvation. There is an important 
place for ritual, but it is ever perilous to spiritual truth if it is put out of its place. It 
is a useful handmaid; it is a tyrannous mistress. 

in. The newer idea of the means op salvation as eevbalbd to the apostles. 
Not works of righteousness, but "faith," which presupposes penitence. How is a 
sinner saved? Apart from all systems or ceremonies, he must accept the salvation 
ireely offered to him by God in the person of his Son Jesus Christ. The act of accept- 
ABoe is called " faith." We cannot wonder that this new and most gracious condition 
tf salvation should have pushed the older idea altogether out of the apostles' minds. It 
seemed new; they would not even try to think how it fitted the old. Conscious of the 
new life and joy it brought, they would find themselves gradually being weaned from 
Jewish ceremonial, and the more advanced thinkers, such as St. Paul, would be even in 
iKHaae danger of exaggerating the contrasts between the old and the new. 



a THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. XT. 1— 41 



IV. The effort to restore again the older idea. Truths and practices which 
have long absorbed the interest of men do not die without a struggle. Some cham- 
pions linger on, and show fight at every opportunity. A wealth of interests gather 
round every religious system, and generations must pass before these can be wholly 
changed. So we cannot wonder that tlie sterner Judaism showed fight against the 
apostles, or that paganism again and again made desperate efforts to resist advancing 
Christianity. The Jewish teachers seem on this occasion to have acted in an under- 
handed and unworthy way. " The course they adopted, in the first instance, was not 
that of open antagonism to St. Paul, but rather of clandestine intrigue. They came as 
'spies' into an enemy's camp, creeping in unawares, and gradually insinuating or 
openly inculcating their opinion that the observance of the Jewish Law vas necessary 
to salvation." Two things need to bo considered. 1. Why their teaching had to be 
so vigorously resisted. (1) Because it tended to confuse the minds of the disciples ; 
(2) because it was fundamentally opposed to the Christian teaching. 2. On what 
grounds the resistance could be made. These were (1) the exclusiveness of the Chris- 
tian condition of salvation — by faith ; (2) the supreme claims of the teaching of Christ, 
who laid no such burden on his disciples ; (3) the fact that the Holy Ghost sealed 
believers irom among the uncircumcised. This is enough, then and now, "Whoso- 
ever believeth on the Son of God hath everlasting hfe." — E. T. 

Vers. 2, 4. — The Jerusalem Church. Christianity started out from Jerusalem. The 
disciples fulfilled their Lord's command, and "began at Jerusalem." The gospel was 
first preached at Jerusalem. The Holy Ghost endowed the Christian teachers, and 
sealed the Christian believers, first at Jerusalem. The Church first took form at Jeru- 
salem. Its officers were first appointed at Jerusalem. And the records intimate that, 
when the other disciples were scattered abroad, the older and prominent apostles 
remained behind in the holy city, and exercised a kind of supervision over the work 
of the various Christian teachers. The constitution of the Jerusalem Church caimot be 
certainly known ; but it is clear that St. Peter had no exclusive authority, and that if 
disputes and controversies were submitted to an apostolic council, their decision took 
the form of recommendation and not of command. As the subject will be treated from 
several points of view, according to the bias of the preacher, we give only the general 
outline of the topics that may be usefully considered. 

L Jerusalem, the Christian starting-point. The first teachers were Jews ; 
and Christianity is not only the proper outcome and perfection of Judaism, but it bears 
the Jewish stamp. It links on to the fundamental ideas of GK)d, sin, redemption, which 
were revealed to the Jews. If it were wholly new, it could not be true. 

II. Jerusalem, the apostolic centre. A kind of mother Church. Observe how 
its council of apostles and elders was sought when difficulties of doctrine or practice 
arose ; and how the Gentile Churches sent their charitable gifts to the poor saints at the 
mother Church. 

III. Jerusalem, the model Church. How far any Church could present a model 
may be disputed. Any model would be efficient by reas'^n of its illustrating working 
principles, not by virtue of its mere form. 

IV. Jerusalem, the source op authority. How far apostles cMmed authority on 
the ground of their knowledge of Christ, inspiration, miraculous gifts, and power to 
give or bring the Holy Ghost, needs to be carefully considered. — R. T. 

Vers. 9 — 11. — Salvation hy grace for all. This passage is part of the speech delivered 
by St. Peter at the conference. His words ought to be weighty words, seeing that God 
had been pleased to reveal directly to him the relations in which the Gentiles should 
stand to his gospel. St. Peter would have been an intensely Jewish man but for his 
experiences at Joppa and Csesarea. He had evidently learned well the lesson of the 
broadness of the Christian platform ; and yet even he subsequently faltered, and 
brought himself under the rebuke of St. Paul. After reminding his hearers of the part 
which he himself had taken in admitting the Gentiles into the Christian Church 
St. Peter urges this point : " The communication of the Holy Ghost was the true test 
of God's acceptance ; and God had shown that he was no respecter of persons by shed- 
ding abroad the same miraculous gifts on Jew and Gentile, and purifying by faith th« 



OH. xy. 1—41.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



hearts of both alike." He further reminds them what a heavy yoke the Jewish Law 
had proved for many generations; how thankful they were to be relieved from the legal 
bondage by the salvation offered through faith ; and how unreasonable it would be to 
attempt to impose on others a burden which neither they nor their fathers had erer 
been able to bear. Dean Plumptre gives thus the conclusion of St. Peter's speech : 
" The Pharisee might regard the Law as binding ; but even he, if he believed in Christ, 
was compelled to confess that his hope of salvation was found in the work of Christ as 
the Saviour ; and if so, then, as regards that hope, Jew and Gentile were on the same 
xsvel, and the judgment that men could not be saved without the Law was but the 
inconsistency of an intolerant dogmatism, insisting on imposing that which was 
acknowledged to be profitless." There is in St. PetePs speech a firm declaration of the 
great evangelical principles. 

1, Salvation on God's side is his act of grace. The idea of purchase or desert 
is wholly excluded from it. Salvation by perfect obedience to formal rules, and faithful 
keeping of covenant terms, had been thoroughly tried in Judaism, and it had certainly 
and hopelessly failed, because sinning man lacked the power. Man could no more 
save himself by the attempted obediences of Judaism than by the human schemes 
devised in heathenism. It was evident that salvation for man must be an intervention 
of Divine love, a manifestation of Divine grace. And this is the very essence of the 
gospel messac;e concerning God : " What the Law could not do, in that it was weak 
through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, 
condemned sin in the flesh." Salvation is a Divine gift, offered fireshly and freely, 
apart from all previous revelations and conditions, on terms which God himself is 
pleased to arrange. And, without bringin.^ forward any older ideas or customs, our 
simple duty is to listen to God as he tells us the conditions upon which he is pleased to 
offer forgiveness and life. We may be quite satisfied if we can find the terms laid down 
in the new covenant of grace, and they are these : " God hath given unto ua eternal 
life, and this life is in his Son. He that hath the Son hath life." 

IL Salvation, on man's bide, is his act of faith. No gift can be of value unless 
there is a proper preparedness to receive it. We do not simply scatter our common 
earthly gifts, we choose to whom we shall ^ve them, and we expect them to be in 
such a ste,te of mind and feeling towards us as shall ensure that they will accept and 
make good use of our gifts. Such conditions apply to the gift of salvation. Of free 
grace, though it is, it requires something in man which can alone secure that the gift 
will be valued. The spiritual preparedness of man for the spiritual gift is called faith. 
It is illustrated in the disposition of mind which Christ required in those whom he 
miraculously healed. And it includes (1) surrender of self-trust ; (2) confidence in 
Grod's provision and promise ; and (3) a full desire for and expectancy of Divine help. 
Faith, as a disposition or mood of mind, is to be distinguished from faith as an act. 
The state of faith sets us ready to receive the gift ; the act of faith appropriates the 
gift. So presenting man's faith, it will be clearly seen that no kind of " merit," as a 
saving work, can attach to it. 

in. Both akb lakgb enough conditions to cover and bmbkace all humanitt. 
Jew and Gentile too. This is St. Peter's point in vers. 9, 11. The grace of the universal 
Father can, without doubt, reach and bless and save all. Ani/aith is so common, so 
universal a human faculty that it can be made a conditioa for all. Every one can 
thankfully open hand and heart to receive a gift. Everybody can trust.— E. T. 

Ver, 26. — The highest Christian commendation. Nothing could be said more fitted 
to ensure the confidence of the Churches in the messengers sent fi-om the conference 
than this description : " Men that have hazarded their lives for the Name of )up Lord 
Jesus." It may be observed that men have established this test of sincerity, nobility, 
or belief in any trith : " Could the man stake his life on it?" " Was he willing to 
die for it?" The heroic traveller is the man who stakes his life on his purpose, as did 
Livingstone. The heroic soldiers are they who volunteer for the forlorn hope, and die 
to serve their country. The heroic martyrs are the men who can die for their faith and 
opinion. No man's faith has come under the full testing unless, in some form, it is 
proved whether he will die for it. The sublimest of all illustrations is found in our 
Lord's purpose of perfect obedience to his Father's wilL That purpose came under 



24 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES, [oh. it. 1—41 

aaany and various testings, but we could not feel that it was perfect, and indeed the 
infinite example, if he htwi not tept it through the trial of that agonizing death. Ho 
not only " hazarded," he actually yielded his life in maintaining that obedience. By 
the same test Barnabas and Paul had been proved, and in their first missionary jonmey 
their lives had again and again been in peril ; once indeed Paul had been left for dead 
after the riotous stoning of the populace (ch. xiii 50; xiv. 19). From the Christian 
standpoint the noblest and best men are — 

I. Those who can sacrifice self. Self-seeking is the marked characteristic of the 
unrenewed man, toned, however, by amiability, kindness of disposition, generosity, 
motherhood, etc., as elements of the natural character. Self-denial is the highest con- 
ception of purely human virtue, and is the noblest adornment of human character. 
In a thousand forms " self-denial " is demanded in our common life and relations ; and 
none of the responsible positions in life can be occupied without this virtue being 
demanded. Self-sacrifice is seldom required ; but the man who can meet this demand 
gains the first place in the world's esteem. Illustrate by the doctor who dies for hii 
patient ; the mother who dies for her child ; the rescuer who dies in rescuing ; the 
missionary who yields his life in his mission. The extreme demand may not always be 
made ; it often has to be faced. And we may test our own hold of truth, du^, or 
hope, by putting to ourselves this question, " Could I die for it? " Show what kind ol 
morsd power the heroic leaders in self-sacrifice gain over their fellows. 1. They declare 
that duty is before pleasure. 2. They attest the grandeur of a cherished idea. 3. They 
glorify the conception of right. 4. They uphold faith in God. 5. They afSrm the 
insignificance of this life in view of the life that is to come. 6. They keep up the 
standard of life for us all ; and are, as angel-ministrants, ever beckoning us on to higher 
and nobler things. 

II. Those who oa» baceificb self fob the sake of Cheist's Name. Taken in 
two senses : 1. For the sake of upholding the honour of Christ's Name, seeing that he is 
ever honoured in the conduct of his servants. Men praise him through what they see 
of him in us. He " laid down his life for us, and we ought to lay down our lives for 
the brethren." 2. For the sake of making witness for Christ No witness can have 
the power of a martyrdom. Illustrate Stephen's witness in his death. (1) Self-sacrifice 
sets Christ up in the view of men, for all gather round the martyr, imd wonder over his 
calmness and victory. (2) Self-sacrifice proves the truth of doctrine (see Paley's argu- 
ment from the persecutions and sufferings of the early teachers). (3) Self-sacrifice for 
Christ impresses upon us the extraordinary fascination which the Lord Jesus can exert 
on men's souls. How we must love those for whom we are willing to die 1 None can 
take our love so that for the sake of it we will yield our life, as does the Lord Jesus 
Christ. 

Conclude by showing that passing ages do not change the Divine demands, only 
change the forms in which they find expression. The heroic life of self-denial in many 
things, and even of self-sacrifice sometimes, as our witness to Christ, is still demanded, 
in these indulgent times, of aU who name the Name of the Lord Jesus.^B. T. 

Vers. 28, 29. — Reasonable and unreasonable burdeni. " To lay upon you no greater 
burden than these necessary things." The precise nature of the things which the 
council thought essential to Christian standing and life are discussed in the Expository 
portion of this Commentary, and materials for the introduction of our subject will 
be found in it. " The letter does not say why these things were neceseary, and the 
term was probably chosen as covering alike the views of those who held, like the 
Pharisee Christians, that they were binding on the Church for ever, and those who, like 
St. Paul, held that they were necessary only for a time, and as a measure of wise 
expediency." The letter is a most wise and careful one ; it avoids the details of tiie 
dispute, or any report of the discussion in the council. It accuses no one, but by impli- 
cation supports the position which St. Paul had taken. It effectually checked for a 
time the agitation created by the Judaizing party. Tvro dangers attended the young 
CSiristian Church. 1. A false conception of liberty in Christ, which really meant 
"licence," and rainooa loosening of self-restraint and reasonable mle. 2. A mia- 
cUevous bondage to mere forms, out of which the life and meaning had kmg faded, and 
j)as8ed. The council wiselj met the twofold danger by declaring that t^ eld forms 



■ XT. 1—41,] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES, 25 



were no longer binding, bnt that the Christian liberty ought to he set under safe, 
prudent, and mutually accepted rules and restraints. The laying on Gentile Christians 
of the old Judaic burdens was unreasonable. But the laying on them of burdens 
coming from the relations of Christian principles to the sins and evils of society, aU 
must recognize to be reasonable. They were free, but they must not use their liberty 
unwisely, or so as to injure the conscience and sensitive feeling of even the weakest 
brother among them. We may gather from this advice given to the Antiochene Church 
some clear distinctions between the reasonable and imreasonable in burdens laid on us 
as Christians. 

I. The burden of custom is unbbasonablb. The plea, " Everybody does it, there- 
fore you must," is one which the Christian is quite justified in rejecting. Fashion in 
religious conduct, or in religious worship, or in religious doctrine, if it is imposed as a 
burden, the Christi«Mi may call unreasonable. He is in no sense obliged to follow such 
lead unless he can clearly discern that the fashion or custom expresses the claim of 
the right. Oftentimes customs grow up which become a terrible slavery, and it becomes 
necessary for some Christians to break the bonds as resolutely as St. Paul did the bonds 
of these Judaizing teachers. Illustrate from the three spheres : (1) religious doctrine ; 
(2) religious worship ; (3) religious society. 

II. The burden of abkogated Law is unbbabonable. Becognizing the progression 
of Divine revelation, we see that a step upwards involves freedom from the step below. 
Judaism was one step in Divine revelation, and it prepared for the spiritual revelation 
in Christ, which was a step higher. It was unreasonable to press the demands ol 
formal Judaism, and much more unreasonable to press the claims of rabbinical 
Judaism, on those who had been lifted up to the spiritual and Christian platform. 
This point is well argued by Phillips Brooks, in a most suggestive sermon on the 
' Symbol and the Eeality.' He says, " There is no better test of men's progress than 
this advancing power to do without the things which used to be essential to their lives. 
As we climb a high mountain, we must keep our footing strong upon one ledge until 
we have fastened ourselves strongly on the next ; then we may let the lower foothold 
go. The lives of men who have been always growing are strewed along their whole 
course with the things which they have learned to do without." What an over- 
burdened life ours would be if we were compelled to carry all the old things we once 
valued and used with us in our advance to the new I Yet there is a sense in which, 
even in our Christian times, men press on us the burden of that which is past, abrogated, 
and done with. It may be effectively illxistrated in relation to Christian doctrine. It 
is said that Judaic forms of sacrifice explain the Christian redemption ; and we may 
urge that this is an unreasonable burden, and all that we need to accept is, that Judaic 
sacrifice was the figure and symbol, by the help of which men were prepared to 
apprehend and receive the moral and spiritual redemption wrought in and by the Lord 
Jesus. We, as well as the early disciples, may properly refuse the burden of Mosaic 
symbols and forms, which have had their day, done their work, and ceased to be. 

III. The burden of agreed rules is reasonable. All associations of persons 
together involve mutual acceptance of conditions of fellowship; and those conditions 
must put limitations on personal liberty. Illustrate by the necessary rules of a nation, 
a club, a family, a congregation. These are reasonable, and are no infringements of 
liberty, but a proper expression of it. No one feels such to be a burden. Further than 
this, society, as constituted in each country and age, has an unwritten code of manners 
and morals, and this need not be unreasonable, nor is it felt to be a burden so long as it 
manifestly concerns the preservation of social virtue and goodness. As with the early 
Church, the conditions of society may make specific demands on Christians, such as 
are indicated in ver. 29 ; but these may reasonably be accepted as the restraints of the 
few for the good of the whole. 

rv. The bubden of charitt is ebasonablk. Here we come upon ground which 
St. Paul's teaching to the Corinthians has made very familiar. Christian love even 
rejoicei to p«t itself into bonds if thus it can gain influence on others. In conclusion, 
urge that life properly refuses bonds, and demands free expression; but the life i« 
Christ willingly puts itself under rules for his sake and for others' sake. — R. T. 

Ters. 37 — 39. — Conttntions emd separationt, It is sometimes % weakness of dealing 



2« THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [qa. rv. 1— *1 



with Scripture characters that " inf piration " is not distinguished from " perfection." 
The place of human infirmity in divinely endowed men is not sufficiently recognized 
And yet, for the correction of this very tendency, the frailty of good men is alwayg 
indicated in the Scripture histories. Of only one man — the Man Christ Jesus — can it 
he said, " In him was no sin." So when it is manifest that good men have fallen into 
error and sin, unnatural ways of explaining the fact are often resorted to, and men are 
afraid to recognize that these great men of Scripture were really " men of like passions 
with us ; " and so, from our own experiences, we can hest apprehend their failings. A 
point needing much careful thought is the relation of the Divine regeneration to the 
natural disposition and character, It is a renewal of the man if it renews his will ; 
hut it has to he followed up hy a continuous Divine work which renews the mind, 
character, temper, hahits, and relations ; and we must not he surprised if, at any par- 
ticular point of that work, there remain frailties and infirmities. Evidently no idea of 
ahsolute perfection of character and disposition can he entertained concerning either 
Barnabas — "a man full of faith, and of the Holy Ghost" — or of Paul, who had heen 
called to the apostleship. A close survey of the relations hetween these two mission- 
aries reveals a gradual drifting apart, a kind of widening distance between them, which 
probably neither of them consciously recognized or in any way encouraged. When 
they started out, Barnabas, as the elder man and the elder Christian, took the 
leading place ; but circumstances brought Paul to the front. There was force of 
character, power on others, natural leadership, which men soon recognized, in spite 
of bis somewhat insignificant appearance ; ami as he gradually subsided into the 
second plnce, Barnnbas could very naturally cherish the idea that Paul had better go 
alone, or with companions of his own choosing. Actual grounds of separation usually 
follow on a period of secietly divided feeling, and the difficulty that arose over John 
Mark need not have been so serious if there had been no previous unconscious 
drifting asunder. Difficulties and dissensions occur only too often in family and Church 
life, but they seldom are mere sudden storms wliich cannot be accounted tor; they 
follow on a condition of atmosphere which has necessiiated them sooner or later. 
Olshausen says, on this contention between Barnabas and Paul, " Paul appears, although 
inileed this cannot be imagined, to have permanently violated the principle of love, for 
on account of a single fault he entirely threw off Mark; and of Barnabas it might be 
feared ihat love for his relative, more than a conviction of his fitness, was the motive 
for taking him as a companion on his missionary journey. But on closer consideration 
these surmises are seen to be perfecily groundless." These considerations [irepare the 
way for a closer examination of the "contention" and the consequent separation of 
these two good friends and fellow-labourers. 

I. The subject of the contention. Give some account of Mark ; his probable 
youthfulness ; his mother's dependence on him ; his particular office as minister or 
attelidant on the two missionaries. The difficulties and dangers of travelling in those 
times required that several should go together ; and as men of good family and assod»- 
tions, both Barnabas and Paul would be accustomed to, and dependent on, the daily 
offices of servants or attendants. Ministry to such a person as St. Paul we would count 
honourable indeed. 

II. The aeguments of the contention. These may easily be imagined. Each 
man took his own point of view and pressed it too hard. Each had good show of 
reason, but each manifested self-wiU in presenting it. The arguments were of little 
avail towards producing satisfactory results, because the divergence was rather one of 
sentiment and feeling than of deliberate judgment Arguments seldnm help the settle- 
ment of disputes that really arise from diversity of feeling. Christian principle and 
Christian charity and brotherliness can do more in such cases than the most convincing 
arguments. 

III. The results of the contention. These may he shown so far as tLey affected 
(1) St. Paul, (2) Barnabas, (3) Mark, (4) Silas. It may be shown that St. Paul's 
severiiy with Mark did not influence his personal affection for him; and that if as a 
matter of judgment, he declined his service, he did not take up a permanent prejudice 
against him. In conclusion, lessons may he learnt from this incident concerning (1) 
the insidious growth of feelings that tend to separate " very friends ;" (2) the hopeless- 
ness of settling the disputes which arise hetween men by mere argument ; (3) the hop* 



CH. XVI. 1 40.J 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 



27 



that lies in the exercise of mutual forbearance, kindly yielding of our own, anxiety to 
find common ground, and the true Christian brotherliness, to preserve us from sepa- 
rating contentions, and to heal them when they arise. — B. T. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XVL 



Ver. 1. — And lie came aho for then came 
he, A.V. and T.R. ; to Lystra for Lystra, 
A.V. ; Timothy for Timotheus, A.V. ; of a 
Jewest for of a certain woman which was a 
Jewess, A.V. and T.B. ; which for and, A.V. 
For Derbe and lystra, see ch. xiv. and notes. 
This time St. Paul visited Derbe first, 
whereas before he came from Lystra to 
Derbe (oh. xiv. 6, 8, 21). Was there ; viz. at 
Lystra (see 2 Tim. iii. 11). A certain dis- 
ciple ; i.e. a Christian (ch. xi. 26). From St. 
Paul's speaking of Timotliy as "my own 
son in the faith " (1 Tim. i. 2 ; 2 Tim. i. 2), 
and from his special mention of Timothy's 
mother Eunice (2 Tim. i. 5), it is probable 
that both mother and son were converted by 
St. Paul at his first visit to Lystra, some 
years before (oh. xiv. 7). Timothy. It is a 
Greek name, meaning "one wliolionoursGod" 
(formfiil,like Timoleon,Timolaus, Timocrates, 
etc.). It was a not uncommon name, and 
occurs repeatedly in the Books of the Macca- 
bees ( 1 Maco. V. 6 ; 2 Maco. viii. 30, etc.). 
Another form is Timesitheos. Timnthy is 
uniformly spoken of by St. Paul in terms of 
eulogy and warm affection (see, besides the 
passftorfts above quoted, Rom. xvi. 21 ; 1 Cor. 
iv. 17; xvi. 10; Phil. ii. 19—22; and the 
gemral time of the Epistles to Timothy). 
A Jewess; viz. Ji/unice (2 Tim. i. 5), also 
a Greek name (equivalent to Victoria'), 
though borne by a Jewess. A Greek | i.e. a 
Gentile (see Murk vii. 26 ; ch. xiv. 1 ; xvii. 
4; xii. 10; Rom. i. 16; ii. 9; 1 Cor. x. 32, 
etc.; Col. iii. 11). Had liis fither been a 
proselyte, it would probably have been said 
that he was (Bengel). 

Ver. 2.— The same for which, A.V. This 
is an improvement, as making it plain that 
it was Timothy, not his father, who was 
well reported of. For the phrase, 8s ^/iofnv- 
peiTo, see ch. vi. 3 ; x. 22 ; Luke iv. 22. At 
Lystra and Iconium ; coupled together, as in 
2 Tim. iii. 11. It appears, too, from ch. xiv. 
19, that there was close communication be- 
tween Iconium and Lystra. The brethren 
at Iconium would, therefore, naturally know 
all about young Timothy (comp. 1 Tim. 
iii. 7). 

Ver, 3. —He took for took, A.V. ; that for 
which, A.V. ; parts for quarters, A.V. ; aZl 
4new for knew aU, A.V. Circumcised him. 
The Jewish origin of Timothy on his mother's 
tide was a sufficient reason for circumcising 
him, according to the maxim, Partus lequitur 



ventrem. And it could be done without 
prejudice to the rights of Gentile converts 
as established in the decrees of which St. 
Paul was bearer. Because of the Jews ; not 
the Christian Jews, who ought to know 
better than trust in circumcision, but the 
unbelieving Jews, who would be scandalized 
if St. Paul had an uncircumcised man for 
his fellow-labourer (see 1 Cor. x. 20). 

Ver. 4. — Went on their way for went, A.V. ; 
which had been for that were, A.V. ; OuU for 
which, A.V. 

Ver. .5. — So for and so, A.V. ; the Ghurehei 
were strengthened for were the Churches estab- 
lished, A.V. In number ; i.e. in the number 
of their members (comp. ch. ii. 47 ; v. 14 ; 
vi. 7; xi. 21). For the phrase, 'EurfpEoDi/To 
Tji Trlimi, " They were made firm in the 
faith," comp. Col. ii. 5, T6 arfpfoiia t^i 
els Xpttrrhv iriffTeats Ofiaj/, *' Tiie steadfastness 
of your faith." The word is used in its 
physical sense in ch. iii. 7, 'E/rrfpe^eria-m' 
aiiTov at ^dtreis, K.T.X., " His feet and ankle- 
bones received strengtli," became fast and 
firm instead of being loose and vacillating. 

Ver. 6. — And they went for now when they 
had gone, A.V. and T.R. ; through the region 
of Phrygia and Gahitia for throughout 
Phrygia and the region of Galatia, A.V. and 
T.B. ; having been for and were, A.V. ; 
speak for preach, A.V. The region of 
Fhrygia and Oalatia. But Phrygia is 
always a noun sulistantive, and cannot be 
here taken as an adjective belonging to 
XiiSpo : and we have in oh. xvlii. 23 exactly 
the same collation as that of the A.V. here, 
only in an inverted order: T^iv roKariKiii/ 
Xiiipav Kol ^pvylav. Even if the t^v is pro- 
perly omitted, as in the E.T., before TaXa- 
tikV, the passage must equally be construed 
as in the A.V. The Galatians were Celts, 
the descendants of those Gauls who invaded 
Asia in the third century b.o. This passage 
seems to show conclusively that Derbe and 
Lystra and Iconium were not comprehended 
by St. Paul under Galatia, and were not the 
Churches to wliom the Epistle to the Gala- 
tians was addressed ; and forcibly suggest 
that the Galatian Churches were founded by 
St. Paul in the course of the visit here so 
briefly mentioned by St. Luke. Asia is 
here usei in its restricted sense of that dis- 
trict on the western coast of Asia Minor, of 
which Ephesus was the capital. It is in this 
sense that it is used also in ch. ii 9 ; vi. 9 ; 
xix. 10, etc.; Rev. i. 11. St. Paul Appa- 
rently wished to j;o to Ephesn? But the 



THB ACTS OP THS APOSTLES. 



[oh. xvi. 1—40. 



time was not jet come. It was the purpose 
of the Holy Ghost that the Galatian 
Ohiii-ohes should be founded first, and then 
the Churches of Macedonia and Aohaia. 
The apostles were tent, did not go anywhere 
of their own accord (comp. Matt. x. 5, 6). 

Ver. 7. — And when for after, A.V. and 
T.E. ; come over aqainst (icaTa) for come to, 
A. v.; and the Spirit of Jesus for but the 
Spirit, A.V. and T.B. But the phrase, " the 
Spirit of Jesus," occurs nowhere in the 
New Testament, and is on that account very 
improbable here, though there is considerable 
manuscript authority for it. It is accepted by 
Meyer and Alford and Wordsworth, follow- 
ing Griesbach, Laohmann, Tischendorf, etc. 

Ver. 8. — Passing . . , they came for they 
passing . . . came, A.V. They would have 
gone north to Bithynia, where, we know from 
1 Pet. i. 1, there were many Jews. But 
the Spirit ordered them westwards, to the 
geacoast of Troas, that they might be ready 
to sail for Macedonia. In like manner 
Abraham went out not knowing whither he 
went (Heb. xi. 8). Truly the footsteps of 
God's providence are not known 1 

Ver. 9. — Tliere was a man . . . itanding, 
beseeching Mm, and saying for there stood a 
man . , . and prayed him, saying, A.V. 
Thus was ushered in the most momentous 
event in the history of Europe, the going 
forth of the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem 
to enlighten the nations of the West, and 
bring them into the fold of Jesus Christ. 
Paul saw and heard this in a vision in tlie 
night. It is not called a dream (Bengel), 
but was like the vision seen by Ananias 
(ch. ix. 10), and those seen by Paul (eh. ix. 
12 ; I. 5 ; xviii. 9). A vision (Spafna) is dis- 
tinguished from a dream (Jvimviov, ch. ii. 17). 
It is applied to things of a marvellous cha- 
racter seen objectively, as to the Transfi.;u- 
ration (Matt. xvii. 9) and to the burning 
bu8h(ch. vii. 31). 

Ver. 10. — When for after, A.V. ; straight- 
way for immediately, A.V. ; sought for 
endeavoured, A.V. ; go forth for go, A.V. ; 
concluding for assuredly gathering, A.V. ; 
God for the Lord, A.V. and T.E. Concluding ; 
ffviiPiPiCovTes, only here in the sense of 
" concluding" or " gatiiering." In ch. ix. 22 
it is "proving." In Eph. iv. 16 and Col. 
ii. 2 it means to "join together." In clas- 
sical Greek to "bring together" in the 
sense of " reconciling," sometimes of " agree- 
ing" to a proposition. In the LXX., to 
« infltmct," " teach " (1 Cor. ii. 16). In this 
reree we first remark the very important 
intradnction of the pronoun we into the nar- 
rative, marking the presence of the historian 
himsei^ and showing that he first joined St. 
Pat* »t Troas. He went with him to 
ntiGpin (ver. 12), and there he appears to 
iMYe stopped till St. Paul returned there ia 



his third missionary journey on his way from 
Achaia to Jerusalem (ch. xx. 5, 6), where we 
find him still with the apostle (ch. xx. 17, 
18). We again find him with St. Paul at 
Osesarea, while he was a prisoner there (oh. 
xxvii. 1), and he accompanied him on the 
voyage to Rome, which is the last place 
where we hear of him (ch. xxvii. 2, 3, etc. ; 
xxviii. 2, 11, 14—16; Ool.iv. 14j Philem. 
24). It is quite characteristic of Holy 
Scripture that things are told, or appear on 
the face of the narrative, without any ex- 
planation. Who Luke was, what brought 
him to Troas, how he became a companion 
of St. Paul, whether as his medical adviser 
or otherwise, we know not. His Christian 
moflesty forbade his speaking about himself. 
Ver. 11. — Setting sail therefore for there- 
fore loosing, A.V. ; made for came with, A. V. 
(eMu5/)<J|iieo), elsewhere only in ch. xxi. 1); 
Samothrace for Samothraeia, A.V. ; day 
following for next day, A.V. In the New 
Testament this latter phrase only occurs in 
the Acts. 

Ver. 12. — A city of Macedonia, thejint of 
the district, a Boman colony for the chief eity 
of that part of Macedonia, and u, colony, 
A.V. ; this for that, A.V. ; tarrying for 
abiding, A.V. A city of Macedonia, eta 
This is a difBcult sentence. The natnral 
way of construing the words undoubtedly 
is, as in the A.V., " which is the chief ciiy 
of the [or, ' that '] district of Macedonia, 
and a colony." The only difficulty in the 
way of so taking it is that when .^milius 
Paulus, as related by Livy (xlv. 29), divided 
the conquered kingdom of Macedonia into 
four districts (regionet oi partes% Amphi- 
polis was made the capital of the district in 
which Philippi was situated. But the 
epithet irp^rri does not necessarily mean 
the capital ; it is found on coins applied to 
cities which were not capitals. Besides, in 
the interval of above two hundred years 
between iEmiliua Paulus and St. Paul (from 
B.O. 167 to A.D. 50), it is very probable that 
the city of Philippi, with its gold-mines and 
its privileges as a colony, may have really 
beooine the capital. And so Lewin, follow- 
ing Wetstein, understands it (vol. ii. p. 
209). We know that in the reign of Theo- 
dosius tlie Younger, when Macedonia was 
divided into two provinces, Philippi be- 
came the ecclesiastical head of Macedonia 
Prinia. It had been made a colony by 
Augustus CsBsar, with the name " Ool. Jul. 
Aug. Philip.," i.e. Colonia Augusta Jnlia 
Philippeusis ('Diet, of Greek and Boman 
Geog.'). It must, therefore, anyhow have 
been a place of first-rate importance at this 
time. Those, however, who do not accept 
this explanation, couple icoXwvla with nSKa, 
" which is tlie first colony-city," etc. Otbera 
take xp^Tii in • local sense, " the fint aito 



OH. XYL 1— 40.J 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



29 



yon eome to in Macedonia" (Conybeaie and 
Ho'vrgon, Alford, Bengel, etc.). The E.V. 
eeeiu* to take iJtis ijrl . . . McuceSovfas 
Tr6Kn together, and irpJiTi] rris /leplSos as 
a further description of it — a most awkward 
construction. Alford renders it, "which 
is the first Macedonian city of the district." 
But the natural way of construing a 
passage is almost always the best, and 
nothing prevents us from believing that 
St. Luke, who knew Philippi intimately, 
was strictly accurate in calling it " the chief 
city of the district of Macedonia," i.e. the 
district in which it was situated. That 
/iipis is the technical name of the division 
of a province appears from the title jUfpiS- 
"PXI^i applied by Josephus to a certain 
ApoUonius, governor, under Antiochus 
Epiphanes, of the district in which Samaria 
was included (' Ant. Jud.,' xii. v. 5). The 
ancient name of Philippi was Datos first, 
then Krenides — the springs, or wells ; and 
the word used by Livy of the districts of 
Macedonia, pars prima, eecutida, etc., is an 
exact translation of /iepn. It received the 
name of Philippi, from Philip, the father 
of Alexander the Great, who extracted a 
great revenue from its gold-mines. Its 
great historical celebrity arises from the 
battle in the plain of Philippi, in which 
the republican party, under Brutus and 
CassiuB, received its death-blow from 
Octavius and Antony. (For a full de- 
scription of Philippi, and of tlie privileges of 
a colony, see Conybeare and Howson, vol. 1. 
311, etc., and Lewin, vol. i. ch. xi.) This. 
Alford, following certain manuscripts, reads 
auTp, "in the city itself," as distinguished 
from the place outside the city, where the 
irpoveuxfi was. But, perhaps, St. Luke uses 
the word "this" from Philippi being the 
place of bis own residence, and where he 
may have drawn up the narrative on the 
spot. 

Ver. 13. — Sabhath day for sabhath, A.V. ; 
we went forth witlumt the gate for we went 
out of me city, A.V. and T.R. QiriXiis for 
iroKiai); we supposed there was a place of 
prayer for prayer was wont to be made, A.V. ; 
were come together for resorted thither, A.V. 
By a river side. By the river side is the 
natural way of expressing it in English. 
The river is not the Strymon, which is 
a day's journey distant from Philippi, but 
probably a small stream called the Gangas 
or Gangites, which is cro3.sed by the Via 
Egnatia, alwut » mile out of Philippi. 
The neighbourhood of water, either near a 
stream or on the seashore, was visually pre- 
ferred by the Jews as a place for prayer, as 
affording facility for ablutions (see Josephus, 
' Ant. Jud.,' xiv. 10, 23 ; and other passages 
quoted by Alford). The phrase, oV ivoij.i(fro 
rpovevxh f^inu, should be rendered, not as in 



the R.V., but more nearly as the A.V., 
where u, prayer-meeting (of the Jews) was 
accustomed to be held ; i.e. this particular 
spot was tlie usual place where suoli Jews or 
pi'Oaelytes as happened to be at Philipp' 
met for prayer. It also appears from 
Epiphanius ('HsBr.,'80,§ l,quoted by Alford) 
that the Jews usually had their irpoirivxai, 
whether buildings, or open spaces, 6|m 
iroAecus, outside the city. The wayside 
orossps are of the nature of irpoirfvxai- 

Ver. 14. — One that for which, A.V. ; to 
give heed for that she attended, A.V. ; by for 
of, A.V. A certain woman, etc. Wlietlier 
her personal name was Lydia, or whether 
she was commonly so called on account of 
her native country and her trade, must 
remain uncertain. Thyatira was in Lydia. 
Lydian women, from the time of Homer 
downwards, were famous for their purple 
dyes ; and it appears from an inscription 
found in Thyatira, that there was there a 
guild of dyers, called oi Pa<l>i7s (Lewin, ii. 
214). One that worshipped God {treffofifmi 
rhv @ihv); »'.«. a proselyte. So in ch. xi ii. 
43 we find of <rePiiJ.eyoi TrpociiKvToi, the devout 
or religious proselytes. And so al <re$6fieiiai 
•yvvalKis, the devout women. And so, in ch. 
xviii. 7, Justus is described as <re$6iLei/os 
rhv @e6v one who worshipped God (see too 
ch. xvii. 4, 17). In ch. x. 1 Cornelius is 
spoken of as evffe^iis koI (po^oifnyos t6v @iiy. 
It has been suggested that possibly Euodias 
and Syntyche (Phil. iv. 2) were of the same 
class, and converted at the same time as 
Lydia. There is certainly a coincidence 
between the mention of the women in ver. 
13 and the prominence given to the Philip- 
pian women in PhU. iv. 2, 3. It is well ob- 
served by Ohrysostom, on the latter part of 
this verse, " The opening of the heart was 
God's work, the attending was hers : so that 
it was both God's doing and man's" (comp. 
Phil. ii. 12, 13). To open (Siavolyuv) is 
applied as here to the heart (2 Maco. i. 4); 
to the eyes (Luke xxiv. 31); to the ears 
(Mark xvii. 34, 35) ; to the understandinf^ 
(Luke xxiv. 45) ; to the Scriptures (Lulce 
xxiv. 32) ; " Cor clausum per' se. Dei est id 
aperire " (£ienf<el). 

Ver. 15. — When she washaptized ; showint,' 
that St. Paul, as St. Peter (ch. ii. 38, -1 1 ; 
X. 47), a» Philip (ch. viii. 38), as Anauiiis 
(ch. xxii. 16), as our Lord himself (BLak 
xvi. 16), had put holy baptism in the very 
forefrout of his teaching (comp. Heb. vi. 2). 
And her household (comp. ver. 33; 1 Cor. 
i. 16; 2 Tim. iv. 19). This frequent men- 
tion of whole households as received into 
the Church seems necessarily to imply 
infant baptism. Tbe exlmrtationa to 
children as members of tlie Church m 
Eph. vi. 1, 2, and Col. iii. 20, lead to the same 
inference. Come into my house, eto. A 



30 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLSa 



[cH.xTi.1 — Ml 



beautiful speoimen of true hospitality ; oomp. 
1 Pet. It. 9; Heb. xiii. 2 ; 1 Tim. v. 10; 
3 John 5 — 8 ; also 2 Kings iv. 8 —10, where, 
however, the Greek word for "constrained" 
is iKpirriaiv, not as here irapifflaa-aro, which 
only occurs elsewhere in the New Testa- 
ment in Luke xxiv. 29. In the l^XX. it 
is used in 1 Sam. xxviii. 23 ; Gen. xix. 3 
(Cod. Alex.) 9 (in a different sense) ; 2 Kings 
ii. 17; V. 16. Her large hospitality does 
not boar out Chrysostom's remark as to her 
humble station of life, 

Ver. 16. — Were going to the place of 
prayer for went to prayer, A.V. and T.R. ; 
that a certain maid for a certain damsel, 
A.V. ; having for possessed with, A.V. The 
place of prayer. The rj Ttpoa-evxh of the 
B.T. undoubtedly means "the place of 
prayer," the proseuche. They went there, 
loubtless, every sabbath. What follows 
happened on one occasion after Lydiu's 
baptism. A spirit of divination (vvtviia 
nieavoi, A.V. ; niiSiBVa, K.T.). "TliBwv 
denotat quemlibet ex quo videtrSai datur," 
"any one of whom inquiry may be made " 
(Bengel). It was a name of Apollo in his 
character of a giver of oracles. Delphi 
itself, where his chief oracle was, was some- 
times called Pytho (Schleusner, s.v.), and 
Pythius WHS a common epithet of Apollo. 
The name Python (Plut., 'De Defect. Orao.,' 
cap. 9) came thence to be applibd to a 
ventriloquist (Hebrew 3'w), or to tlio spirit 
that was conceived to dwell in ventriliquists 
and to speak by them, just as in Hebrew the 
ventriloquist was Boraetimea called 3lt« Sya 
(or rhyn if a woman), the owner of a spirit 
of divination, or simply 3iN, a diviner (see 
1 Sam. xxviii. 7 (twice) for the first use, and 
Lev. XI. 27 ; Deut. xviii. 11 ; 1 Sam. xxviii. 
3; for the second). In some passages, ag 
1 Kings xxviii. 6 and Isa. xxix. 4, it is doubt- 
ful whether nix means the ventriloquist or the 
spirit The feminine plural riuix (Lev. xix. 
31 ; XX. 6 ; 1 Sam. xxviii. 3, 9 ; Isa. viii. 19) 
seems always to denote the women, who, like 
the damstl in the text, practised the art of 
ventriloquistic necromancy, whether really 
possessed by a spirit or feigning to be so. 
The word iridav is only found here in the 
New Testament. The LXX. usually render 
nUIN by iyya<TTpiii.vdos. Gain (f'pyotria), 
literally, work, craft, or trade; then, by 
metonymy, the gain proceeding from such 
trade (ch. xix. 21, 25). By soothsaying 
(jjLavTfvoiievri). So one name of these ventii- 
loquistB waa kYyaarpifiavris, 

Ver. 17. — Following after . , . cried out for 
followed , . , and cried, A.V. ; servants 
for the servants, A.V. ; proclaim unto you 
for show unto us, A.V. and T.R. This 
testimony of the spirit of divination to the 
doctrine of St. Paul is analogous tu that of 



the unclean spirits who cried ont to Jesus, 
" Thou art the Son of God " (Mark i. 23—26; 
iii. 11; Luke iv. 34, 35); and St. Paul's 
dealing with the spirit of divination was 
similar to that of our Lord's with the evil 
spirits in the cases referred to. What was 
the motive of the damsel, or the spirit by 
which she was possessed, for so crying out, 
or St. Paul's for so silencing her, we are not 
told. Perhaps she interrupted him, and 
diverted the minds of those to whom he was 
preaching. And he did not like the mixture 
of lies with truth. The motive of secreoy 
which was one cause of our Lord's rebuke 
to the spirits would not apply in the case of 
St. Paul. 

Ver. 18.— SAe did for did she, A.V.; for 
many for many, A.V. ; sore troubled for 
grieved, A.V. ; charge for command, A.V. ; 
it for he, A.V. ; that very for the same, A.V. 
Command {irapayyiKKm, iis in ch. L 4 ; v. 28 ; 
and ver. 23 of this chapter, ete.). The only 
other instances of exorcism by St. Paul are 
those recorded in ch. xix. 12 and IS. The 
question of possession by spirits is too large 
a one to be discussed here. It must suffice 
to notice that St. Paul in bis action (as oar 
Lord before him had done), and St. Luke in 
his narrative, distinctly treat possession, and 
expulsion by the power of Christ, as real. 

Ver. 19. — But for and, A.V. ; gain for 
gains, A.V. (_4pya(ria, as ver. 16) ; laid hold 
on for caught, A.V. ; dragged for dreui, A.V. ; 
hefore for unto, A.V. The rulers (oi ipxavr^s); 
the archons. Meyer thinks these were the 
city judges, or magistrates (who always had 
their court in the ayopa, or forum), by whom 
Paul and Silas were seut to the prastori 
(^(TT partly oi) for judgment. So in Luke lii. 
58, the litigants go to the apx<iy first, and 
he sends them on to the icpiT^s, or judge, 
who orders them for punisiiment This 
seems a more probable explanation than 
that commonly adopted (Howson, Alford, Ee- 
nan, Lewin, eto.), that the Hpxames and the 
ffrparriyoi mean the same officers. No reason 
can be conceived for Luke's calling them 
dpxovTfs if he meant arpaTTiyol, or for naming 
the officei s twice over when once was suffi- 
cient. Nor is it liUely that officers of such 
high rank as tlie duumviri, or prsstors, as 
they had come to be called, should be always 
in the forum, to try every petty case 
(see articles "Colonia," "Duumviii," and 
" Prsetor," in ' Diet, of Greek and Roman 
Antiquities'). It seems, therefore, that 
Meyer's explanation is right. At Athens 
the general term ipxopTfs was applied to 
inferior magistrates, as well as to the nine 
archons (' Diet, of Greek and Roman Anti- 
quities : ' " Arclion "). 

Ver. 20.— When tl^y had brought for 
brought, A.\.; ujiio for to, A.V. ; they said 
for saying, A.V. The magistrates ; •rpa. 



BH. xn. 1 — to.] 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



31 



TTryof, i«. the praatora. Philippi, belag a 
colony, was governed by Roman magistratea 
caUed duumviri, corresponding to the two 
consuls at Eome. But we Icam from O'.cero 
that in his time tJie duumviri in the oolcnies 
were beginning to be called prators, a little 
previously used only at Eome (' De Leg. 
Agrar.,' 34), and to be preceded by liotors 
(^dffSovxot of ver. 85). Two inscriptions 
have been found in which the duumviri of 
Philippi are mentioned (Lewin, p. 216). 

Ver. 21.— Set forth for teach, A.V. ; it i» 
for ore, A.V. ; or for ndlher, A. V. Romans ; 
in a special sense, as members of a colony. 

Ver. 22. — Bent their garments off them for 
rent off their clothes, A.V. ; beat tliem toith 
rodstoibeaithem,A.\. Beat them; l>am((iy, 
marking that they were beaten by the liotors, 
or ^aPSovxoi (see ver. 35). The phrase rent 
... off (Ttepipfii^avTfs) is only found here in 
the New Testament, but it is frequently 
used of stripping oif garments, in classical 
Greek and in 2 Muco. iv. 38; and by 
Josephus (' Ant. Jud.,' vi. xlv. 6) of David 
rendiug his garments— a circumstance not 
mentioned in the Bible narrative CI Sam 
XXX. 4> 

Ver. 24.— Cm* for thrust, A.V. In the 
stocks; Greek rb ^i\ov, sometimes called 
luXoire'Si;. The ^vKov was of different forms, 
and used as a punishment. Sometimes it 
was a kind of heavy wooden collar put on 
the neck of a prisoner, whence the phrase, 
Ui\if (pifiovv rijv aux^va (Aristoph., ' Nubes,' 
592), " To make fast his neck in the pillory." 
Sometimes it was what Aristophaoes calls 
TreuTfaipiyyoy ^i\ov, " stocks with five holes," 
two for the feet, two for the hands, and one 
for the neck. Here, as in Job xiii. 27 
(wheretheLXX. wordis ev/cuA.iJ^aTi, Hebrew 
ID, a stake, or log), it is simply " the stocks." 
Thus Paul and Silas, first stripped and 
beaten, then put in the inner prison, and 
further mMe fast in the stocks, were treated 
with the utmost possible rigour and severity. 
Bee St. Paul's vivid reminiscence of the 
outrage (1 Thess. ii. 2, S^Spio-fleWes). 

Ver. 25. — But about for and at, A.V. ; 
were praying and singing hymns for prayed 
and sang praises, A.V. ; were listening to (im- 
perfect) for heard, A. V. Prayed, etc. Their 
proseuche was now the dungeon and the 
■tock«. But, though they were but two, the 
Lord was in the midst of them, according to 
his promise, and manifested his gracious pre- 
sence in the striking deliverance which fol- 
lows. Were listening to them ; svaKpodonai, 
found only here in the New Testament. 
But the substantive, iiroKpiacns, hearkening 
("to hearken," A. v.), occurs in the LXX. of 
1 Sam. XV. 22. What a scene I The dark 
inner dungeon ; the prisoners fast in the 
stocks, their backs still bleeding and 
■martini; from thestripes; the companionship 



of criminals and outcasts of society; the 
midnight hour; and not groans, or curses, 
or complaints, but joyous trustful snngs of 
praise ringing through the vault I while 
tlieir companions in the jail listened 
with astonishment to the heavenly sound in 
that place of shame and sorrow. 

Ver. 26. — Prison-house for prison, A.V., 
as oh. V. 21, 23. All the doors were opened. 
This would be the natural effect of the earth- 
quake. Bands (Seir/io). St. Luke always fol- 
lows the Attic usage of Se<rti6v, in the neuter 
(oomp. ch. XX. 23; Luke viii. 2i)). St. 
Paul follows the Hellenistic usage of Siff/iis, 
in the masculine (Phil. i. 13; see Jer. ii. 
20; y. 5; Hab. iii. 18). In many instances 
(genitive and dative) it is, of course, impos- 
sible to determine whether the word is 
masculine or neuter. 

Ver. 27. — The jailor being roused for the 
Iceeper of the prison awaking, A.V. ; sfeepfor 
his sleep, A.V. ; drew for he drew out, A.V. ; 
was about to kill for would have killed, A.V. ; 
escaped for been fled, A.V. This readiness 
to kill himself rather than incur the dis- 
grace of failure in his cliarge is characteristic 
of the Roman soldier (comp. ch. xxvii. 43). 

Ver. 29. — And he called for lights for then 
he called for a light, A.V. Qpara is the ac- 
cusative plural, though not a very oominon 
form; ibas is often used in the sense of •' a 
lamp," or, as we say, " a light"); trembUi^gfur 
fear for came trembling and, A.V. 

Ver. 31. — Jesus for Jesus Christ, A.V. and 
T.R. ; thou and thy house for and thy lumse, 
A.V. 

Ver. S2.— They spake the Word, etc., unto ■ 
him for they spake wnto him the Word, etc., 
A.V. ; with for and to, A.V. Observe that 
Paul and Silas preached the Word of God's 
saving health to the penitent and contrite 
jailor before they thought of having their 
own smarting wounds washed and dressed. 
Observe, too, that they spake the Word of 
life to illuminate his soul before they 
administered the sacrament of baptism. 

Ver. 33. — Immediately for straightway, 
A.V. Washed their stripes. Mark the jailor's 
faith working by love. He and all his. Tire 
phrase seems purposely adapted to include 
family, slaves, and all under his roof. If the 
conversion of the jailor and his house was 
sudden, the circumstances which led to it 
were of unusual power— the earthquake, the 
loosing of the prisoners' bands, the midnight 
hour, the words of grace and love and life 
from the apostle's mouth. 

Ver. 34. — He brought them up . . , and 
set for when he had brought them . . . ke 
set, A. V. ; rejoiced greatly for rejoiced, A. V. 
(ayaWiio/iai, a stronger word thiin x^'peij'. 
Matt. V. 12 ; 1 Pet. i. 6) ; with all liis house, 
having Relieved in Ood for believing in Gnd 
with all his home, A.V. The word ttcwjh'! 



» 



MLE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. m. 1—40 



rendered "with all his House," occnrs only 
here in the New Testament. But it is used 
by the LXX. in Exod. i..l and elsewhere, and 
by Josephus, etc. The more classical form 
is irovoi/ceo-if or iracoiK-ijirfa;. The A.V. gives 
the meaning better than the R.V. The faith 
and tiie joy were both common to the jailor 
and his house. 

Ver. 35.— But for and, A.V. The magis- 
trates ; •'.«. the pr»3tors or duumviri, as in 
ver. 22 (where see note). The Serjeants ; 
i.e. the lictors (ver. 22, note). 

Ver. 36. — Jailor for keeper of the prison, 
A.V'., as ver. 27; reported the words . . . 
saying for told this saying, A.V. and T.R. ; 
come forth for depart, A. v. 

Ver. 37. — Publicly for openly A.V. (Stj- 
juoo-i?, ch. xviii. 28 ; sx.20); men that are toT 
being, A.V. ; do they now ca^t for now do they 
thrust, A.y.;hririg toi fetch, A..Y. Men that 
are Eomans. We have exactly the same 
phrase in ch. xxii. 25, on a similar occasion, 
where also is the only other example of the 
word oKaTiiKptTos, uncondemned. "AKpiros 
with a like meaning (" untried," " without 
trial "), is common in classical Greek. The 
Latin phrase is indicia causa. By the Lex 
Valeria (A.n.o. 254), " Ne quis magistratus 
civem Bomanum adversns provocationem 
necaret neve verberaret," every Eoman 
citizen had a right to appeal (provocare) to 
the populace against any sentence of death 
or stripes pronounced by the consuls or any 
other magistrate; and by the Lex Poroia 
(a.u.o. 5u6), no Boman citizen could be 
scourged. Silas, it appears from the phrase, 
^' us . . . men that are Bomans," was also a 



dvis Romanus. But nothing more is known 
about it It does not appear why their 
exemption as Boman citizens was nut made 
good before ; but probably the ma^strates 
refused to listen to any plea in their haste 
and violence. 

Ver. 3S.— Reported for told, A.V. 

Ver. 39. — When they had brought them out 
they asked for brought them out and desired, 
A.V. ; to go away from for to depart out of 
A.V. 

Ver. 40.— Departed ; ie. from Philippi, 
according to the magistrates' request in ver. 
39. This is much clearer in the T.B. and 
A.V. than in the Eevised Text and Version, 
because the same word, 4^e\9eTi>, is used in 
both places. The E T. in ver. 39 — aircAflelv 
i,ith destroys the reference, and rather sug- 
gests that Ihey merely " went out " of Lydia's 
house, which they had " entered into." It 
appears from the first verse of oh. xvii. 
Q'they had passed," etc.) that St. Luke 
stopped at Philippi,and probably made it his 
head-quarters till St. Paul's last journey 
from Macedonia to Jerusalem, some six or 
seven years later ' (ch. xx. 6). What 
became of Timothy we are not expressly 
told, only we find him at Beroea in oh. xvii. 
14 and 1 Thess. iii. 5 ; and at Corinth (1 
Thess. i. 1; 2 Thess. i. 1; 1 Tliess. iiL 6). 
Probably he accompanied St. Paul, but is 
not named, being still only a subordinate 
person in the mission. 

• Lewin (vol. i. p. 221) thinks that Luke 
composed his Gospel during this period, 
referring to 2 Cor. viii. 18. 



HOMILETIOa. 

Vers. 1 — 5. — The choice of a fit person. The ordination of Timothy to be a minister 
of God, and St Paul's fellow-labourer in the gospel of Christ (1 Tim. iv. 14; 2 Tim. 
i. 6 ; 1 Thess. iii. 2), was a great event in the Church's history. The character of her 
individual bishops and priests has always been a matter of paramount importance, and 
in nothing do we see the wisdom of the great apostle more conspicuous than in the 
choice of his fellow-labourers. He who refused Mark, because he was not sure of him, 
discerned in Timothy, young as he was, that simplicity of purpose, and that sober and 
docile zeal in the service of Christ, which made him a fit instrument for the mo«t 
arduous missionary work. Many qualifications concurred in Timothy. There was his 
thorough grounding in the knowledge of the Holy Scriptures through the pious care of 
his mother and grandmother, which gave strength to his own faith, and made him 
capable of reasoning with the Jews. There was his Jewish birth on his mother's side, 
which, when he was circumcised, would make him acceptable to the circumcision ; and 
there was his Gentile birth on his father's side, which would enable him to sympathize 
'vith the Greeks, and would dispose them to listen to him. There was his early 
acquaintance with the afflictions of the gospel, which he had seen so bravely borne by 
the apostle at Iconium and at Lystra, and which he had dared to share by taking upon 
himseU the Christian profession in the very heat of the persecution ; and there was 
his warm attachment to St. Paul as of a son to his father. All this Paul saw in him, 
and foresaw that, of all his missionary band, none would exceed Timothy in devotednesa 
to the Lord's work, and in singleness of aim for the Cljurch's good (Phil. ii. 19^£3)l 



CH. XVI. 1-40.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. S3 

The event fully justified his expectations. Not Luke, the beloved physician ; not Silas, 
the faithful brother and indefatigable evangelist ; not Titus, his "own son after the 
faith," were greater helps and comforts to him than this young disciple from the rude 
community of Lystra. In him he had one like-minded with himself — always ready 
for work, always seeking the things that are Jesus Christ's ; never ashamed of the gospel, 
ready to endure aiHiotions as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. The great day will reveal 
the value of Timothy's service in the kiiig'lom of God. The lessons for us to leam are : 
for the bishops of the Church, to give their utmost care to make choice of fit persons to 
serve in the sacred ministry of the (Jhuich; for the fiersons chosen, to throw their whole 
heart and soul into the work, that it may be well and worthily done; for the Church at 
large, to pray very earnestly that God would raise up faithtul, wise, and earnest men to 
pn ach his gospel, to feed his flock, and so to build up his kiugrlom tliat the Churches 
may be " established in the faith, and increase in numbers daily." 

Vers. 6 — 15. — The call. The great difference between sacred and profane history is 
not so much that the events are differeot, or the human motives of the actors are 
different, or even that God's providence works differently, but that the secret springs 
of the will of God, directing, controllinc;, and overruling, tuv in sacred history laid bare 
to view by that Holy Spirit of God who knows the things of God. In ordinary life the 
nervant of God believers that his steps are ordered of God, and tliat tlie providence of 
God, which oidcruth all things in heaven and earth, orders them for his good. But 
he is not preceded in his own goings out and in his comings in by a pillar of cloud by 
day and cf fire by night, as the journeyings of the children of Israel were. In like 
manner, when we read the history of the marvellous diffusion of the everlasting gospel 
among the various nations of the earth, and mark how in one part of the globe the 
successful missionary has selected some particular country for his evangelizing labours, 
and has foxmded there Churches full of light and love, while other countries have either 
beeu untrodden by the foot of the evangelist, or have yielded no return to the labours 
of the preacher of glad tidings, we recognize the directing will of Almighty God, 
albeit, no visible sign or word indicated where the net was to be cast into the deep 
waste of waters, and no voice of the Holy Ghost erected a barrier of prohibition. If 
we ask for some reasons why this difference should exist — say in the case of St. Paul — 
it will not be diEBcult to find several satisfactory ones. 1. It was of great importance 
to establish in the Church with certainty the conviction that the Lord Jesus Christ 
was still carrying on from his throne in heaven the work for which he left the bosom 
of the Father, and was incarnate, and suffered, and rose again. In the terrible odds 
under which a handful of simple, unlearned men had to contend against all the powers, 
all the intellect, and all the vice, in the world, it was of infinite moment that the voice 
and the wisdom and the power of their exal f ed but unseen Lord should be manifested from 
time to time working with them and for them, and thus 6.ssuring them of the victory. 
Hence the rushing wind, and the tongues of fire, and the leaping cripple, and the down- 
stricken xiars, and the heavenly visions, and the opening of the pnson doors, and the 
angelic ministrations, and the blinded sorcerer, and all the other puttings forth of the 
power of Christ. Hence, too, the immediate orders of the Holy Ghost : " Separate me 
Barnabas and Saul;" "Preach not the Word in Asia;" "Go not into Bithynia;" 
"Preach the gospel in Macedonia;" "Be not afraid; hold not thy peace, lor I am 
with thee, and no man shall hurt thee in this city." But these tokens of Christ's 
close watch over his Church in the fulfilment of her mission were not for Paul and 
Barnabas oidv ; they were for the servants of Christ in all ages and in every place. 
They needed not to be repeated. They have established for ever the truth of the Lord's 
promise, " Lo I I am with jou alway, even unto the end of the world." 2. We have 
intimated above that the ordinary mode by which the purpose of God is manifested, 
that such or such a country should not be evangelized at such or such a time, is by the 
failure of the missionary's effort. It is a good discipline for the Lord's servants to work 
here and there without knowing where their labours will be blest, and where they will 
be fruitless ; and to learn by such experiences how entirely ineffectual their best exer- 
tions are unless the Lord give the increase. But in the case of one like St. Paul, whose 
immense labours were to be crowded into a short space of time, this ordinary process 
way have seemed to the Divine wibdom too slow, and withal too wasteful. No other 
ACTS — ^Q. ■ 



M THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xn. 1—40. 

Paul would be forthcoming, when his life dropped, to take up and carry on iis apostolic 
woik ; and therefore we may suppose that, to economize Paul's labours, God dealt with 
him in the extraordinary way of direct injunctions and prohibitions. He was sent at 
once to sow the seed in the ground that would receive it. He was peremptorily 
hindered from sowing it where it would not bear fruit. And thus the Churcli derived 
the largest possible amount of benefit from his devoted work. 3. We may note one 
more reason. The great harvest of souls reaped by St. Paul in the very places where 
he was sent is another proof of the omniscience of the Holy Ghost, and that the 
apostle's several missions were really ordered and directed by him. When Simon 
Peter, at the Lord's bidding, after a night of fruitless toil, let down the net and enclosed 
such a multitude of fishes that the net brake, and the overladen ships were in danger 
of sinking, it was manifest that he who had given the command was indeed the Lord. 
And so, when at the call of the Holy Ghost Paul went to Antioch, and Cyprus, and 
Pisidia, and Galatia, and Macedonia, and Achaia, and preached the Word there, and 
everywhere there sprang up flourishing Churches, the countless disciples at Antioch, and 
Lysti a. and Iconium, and Philippi, and Thessalonica, and Corinth were so many distinct 
witnesses that he had indeed a call, and that he who called him was with him where- 
ever he went. It is an immense encouragement to us to be assured by the success of 
80 many of our missions at the present time that those who labour in them have 
received their secret call from Jesus Christ our Lord. 

Vers. 16 — 40. — Truth <md falsehood. The domains of truth and falsehood are in their 
own nature entirely distinct. This cannot be more emphatically expressed than in the 
inspired words which speak of God as the God of truth, and of Satan as the father of 
lies. The two realms are not only distinct, but contrary the one to the other. No 
greater injury has been done to the cause of truth than by the employment of weapons 
of falsehood in its defence. And, on the other hand, the most effective weapons used 
in defence of falsehood have been those which were taken from the armoury of truth. 
The section before us exhibits a remarkable example of the champions of truth and 
falsehood, and of the characteristic weapons of each. To take first the case of the masters of 
iLe soothsaying girl. With them it was a simple matter of gain. What their Pythoness 
taught, what direction her soothsaying took, whether her divination supported Judaism, 
or heathenism, or Christianity, was all one to them, so that their own gains were great. 
They were good friends and well-wishers to Paul and Silas as long as their own profits 
were consistent with the spread of the gospel. But when the damsel was silenced, and 
the silver stream of the rewards of divination was dried up, their anger knew no 
bounds. With the keen fury of disappointed avarice they turn against those whom 
before they seemed to honour and respect. But how shall they wreak their vengeance 
against these " servants of the most high God " ? It would not do to speak the simple 
truth and say, " These men who ' show unto us the way of salvation,' have robbed us 
of our gains in the name of Jesus Christ. Help us to punish them." It would not do 
to say, " The only fault we have to find with them and their teaching is that we are 
no longer able to delude simple people, and cheat them out of their money." And so 
they look about for some nobler, and thereby more effective plea. "Are we not Romans ? 
Is not Rome the mistress of the world? Is not Philippi a Roman colony? Is it fitting 
that the imperial majesty of the city should be despised and insulted here in the midst 
of the fasces of the lictors, and in the very presence of the prsetor ? Or again. Is not 
law tlie very bond which binds the world together? Is not law that which all good 
men honour and obey ? Are not the noble Roman people a law-abiding people ? And 
shall a few ignoble and despicable Jews dare to teach customs and persuade men to 
observe laws contrary to the laws of Rome, and contrary to the duty of Roman citizens? 
Out upon such lawless insolence I In the name of the majesty of Rome, rise up, ye 
people, and put these intruders down. In the name of holy law, rise up, ye magistrates, 
and chastise these presumptuous offenders against the law ! Vindicate the fair fame 
of Philippi, and silence these blasphemers against the truth!" So spake these lying 
champions of their own sordid interests ; and with the weapons of righteousness 
wielded by their unrighteous hands, they gained a short-lived victory. And now for 
the champions of truth. Paul and Silas, as they are portrayed in the simple, lucid 
narrative of the Acts of the Apostles, stand before us as two men of triinsparent 



OH. xvL 1— 40.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLEa 86 



integrity, living for one object — the presentation of truth to the minds of men for their 
present and eternal good. We cannot detect in them one single selfish purpose — neither 
the love of gain, nor the love of power, nor the love of praise, nor the love of ease. 
What we can detect — ^it stares us in the face — is an intense love of God, an entire 
devotion to the Lord Jesus Christ, an unquenchable charity for the souls of their 
fellow-men, both Jews and Gentiles, and a calm, stead,y hope of the appearing and 
kingdom of their unseen Lord. We see also a sense of duty urging them to every step 
they take, and prompting every word they speak. Well, they preach the gospel of 
Jesus Christ. They convince, they convert, they receive their converts into the Church 
»' <3-od, all the while leading lives of blameless purity, quietness, and order. Then 
iiey are seized, they are ignominieusly I eaten with many stripes, they are dragged off 
/o prison, their feet are made fast in the stocks, and they are left alone in the dark. 
But it was no darkness to them. In the exercises of prayer and praise the light of 
Heaven illuminated their souls. The gospel which they believed and preached was no 
less precious in its promises, its hopes, its power, its present light and joy, in that 
inner dungeon, than it had been by the water-side or in the crowded synagogues of 
Antioch. The Master whom they served was no less glorious, no less worthy of all their 
love and all their service, than he had ever been. They knew that his truth would 
endure from generation to generation. They were not moved from their steadfastness. 
Then came £heir wonderful deliverance. And how did they use it? In preaching the 
same truth to their jailor, in repeating it to the house of Lydia, in carrying it forth 
from city to city, and being never silent, but continuing to bear witness to tha truth as 
long as their life endured. And are they silent now ? I trow not. The truth has not 
changed ; but in heaven it is seen more fully, in more unclouded lustre, in fuller pro- 
portions of breadth, and length, and height, and depth ; and they that know it there 
have fuller powers of thought and speech with wmoh to magnify it than the most 
gifted of them possessed on earth. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOEa 

Vers. 1 — 5. — The Church's duty and reward. I. The dutt of the Chubch. •!. To 
encourage and develop Ghristian talent. When Paul Went to Lystra he found the Church 
there speaking well of a young disciple, Timotheus. This convert was "well reported of 
by the brethren" (ver. 2), and " him Paul would have to go forth with him " (ver. 3). 
The Church praised him who was praiseworthy; and the minister trusted and encouraged 
him who was trustworthy, leading him on to higher things, and placing him in a position 
in. which his consecrated powers would have freer range and extended usefulness. The 
Church of Christ seldom does better than when it nourishes youthful piety, and paves 
the way for the exercise and development of growing talent. 2. lo make timely con- 
otaaion. " Him Paul took and circumcised because of the Jews " (ver. 3). Paul 
thought these men wrong in their views, but he consulted their sensibilities for the 
sake of concord and progress. The true triumph is, not to work well with those with 
whom we are in full sympathy, but to co-operate, without friction, with those between 
whom and ourselves there is variance of view or difference of disposition. There is no 
possibility of rendering any considerable service in the cause of Church organization, 
without a large measure of the conciliatory spirit, and without a considerable amount 
of actual concession. Not the man who carries his point by obstinate persistency, but 
he who yields at the right time and in the right spirit is commended of his Lord. 
3 To he faithful to all compacts. (Ver. 4.) Probably Paul and Silas might have safely 
laid nothing about the decision at Jerusalem ; the people of Asia Minor would have 
heard nothing about that. But they were scrupulous to carry out the compromise in 
all its particulars. Fidelity to an undertaking is a clear and urgent Christian duty ; 
the Church or the minister who should slight it would be doing something which is not 
only unworthy but discreditable, displeasing to Christ, injurious to itself or himself. 
4. To keep in view consolidation and extension : to preserve a fair and wise proportion 
between these different branches of Christian work. Unrier the hand of Paul anrl 
Silas t,he Churches of Asia " were established in the faith, and increased in number " 
(ver. 6). The missionaries were not mure desirous of extending the line of activa 



3« THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xvi 1— 40 

evanrjelization thaa of securing the ground which they had taken. This is Christian 
wisdom. The two complementary works should always go together ; one will minister 
to ihe other; one cannot shine without the otlier. 

11. The reward op the Church. This is twofold. 1. To glean individual retvlts. 
True and keen must have been Paul's gratification to find such a disciple as Timothy 
at Lystra. Well was he recompensed for the cruel stoning he received in that town by 
gainina; such a " beloved son " and valuable helper in his work of faith and love. And 
it is the individual results of the Cliristian teacher's labour which are his most appre- 
ciated reward now. The recovery of that lost one ; the decision of that vacillating one ; 
the consecration of that promising one; — these are his joy and crown. 2. To witness 
general progress. To tiud that " the Churches are established," and that they are 
" increasing in number ; " to know that the cause of Christ is advancing, that his 
kingdum is coming, that his name is being honoured, and his praises sung by those 
who had been ignorant of his dying love ; — what joy, what intense and pure satisfac- 
tion, is this ! Other sources of delight may pass, or they may leave a stain rather 
than a tint behind them ; but this is a gladness that abides, and which purifies and 
ennobles the heart of him who is made happier thereby. — 0. 

Vers. 6—10. — The call of God and the appeal of man : a missionary sermon. Chris- 
tian life, when it has any strength and vigour, is an expansive thing. It pushes out 
in all directions. It asiss what it can do to extend the kingdom of God, what is the 
sphere in which it can best exercise its missionary zeal. It must be guided by two 
things — 

I. The oAiiL OF God. Paul and Silas went whithersoever they were directed. 
They furebore to go to some places because the way was closed by the Divine hand 
(vers. 6, 7) ; they went to others because " they assuredly gathered that God had called 
them " (ver. 10). Gud does not vouchsafe to us no w such plain and indubi table signs 
ef his will as he granted in apostolic days ; we have no such visions and voices as they 
had to guide them. Nevertheless he does direct our steps. He either calls us or 
" suffers us not " to go where we had designed to work, by some method, of his Divine 
procedure. 1. He may enlighten our minds by enlarging our faculties ; so that, though 
we are not conscious of any sjiecial influence, we see clearly what is the right and wise 
course to pursue. 2. He may inspire us with such promptings that we feel assured that 
we are being moved by his own hand. 3. He may, by his providential ordering, shut 
us out from, or shut us up to, the path in which he would not, or would, have us walk. 
It is for us to inquire reverently what is his will, which way he does not desire us to 
take, when he calls us to preach the gusjel, and then promptly and cheerfully to obey. 

II. The appeal from man. (Ver. 9.) This vision " appeared to Paul in the night." 
We need not wait for the night in order to have a vision and to hear a voice, in which 
men will cry, " Come over and help us." If we had but the ear to hear " the still, sad 
music of humanity," we should have bnrne to us on every wind the pitiful plaint of the 
sin-stricken cliildren of men. We should hear: 1. The cry of conscious spiritual distress. 
There are those who know the hoUowness of their old superstitions, or are vainly 
looking out for the truth ; from those who are groping in the darkness, we may well 
hear the cry, " Who will lead us into the light of life ?" 2. The prayer of inarticulate 
distress. There are countless multitudes that hunger and thirst for they know not 
what They have emfty, aching, lonj;in^' hearts, with boundless capacities. These heart« 
are unfilled, unsatisfied, and they are inarticulately but earnestly pleading for the bread 
of lile, of which if any man eat he shall never hunger more. There are also the vast 
multitudes of the suffering — of the sick, of the lonely, of the disappointed, of the 
bereaved. These are praying us, with silent but strong supplication, to send the know- 
ledge of the Divine Comforter, of him who alone can bind up the broken heart and 
heal its wounds. 3. Tlie appeal of pitiful degradation. The advocates of slavery used 
to contend — for lack of better argument — that those who were in bonds were contented 
with their condition. As if this were not the very heaviest indictment against the 
cause they pleaded I Surely the fact that slavery made men and women satisfied with 
degradation and dishonour was the most damaging impeachment which could be framed I 
And it is the fact that so many thouoauds of those who were created for purity, wisdom, 
\roifihif , righteousness, eternal life, are satisfied with the darkness and death of sin, it 



OM. ITI. 1— 40.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. SI 



18 this which constitutes the most eloquent appeal to take them that enlightening 
truth which will awake tiiem from their shameful apathy, juspire thuiii with a manlier 
and nohler hope, and satisfy them with a treasure which cannot fade, with a joy that 
abides for ever, with a life which is eternal and Divine. Unchristianized humanity 
stands ever before the eyes of a living Church and pleads with a powerful if not a 
passionate entreaty, " Come over and help us 1 "—0. 

Vers. 11 — 15. — The opened heart; or, the power of Divine gmilenest. Promptly 
obedient to the heavenly vision, Paul and Silas went " with a straight course to Samo- 
thracia," and by Neapolis to Philippi. There, eagerly awaiting a sacred opportunity, 
they "abode certain days." They availed themselves of the week ly gathering " at the 
river-side," where women, who everywhere are the most devout, were wont to meet for 
prayer. The whole narrative suggests the by-truths : 1. That we should instantly 
carry out the will of Christ when we are distinctly assured of it. 2. That we should 
choose the largest and likeliest sphere — " the chief city " (ver. 12)— for our activity. 
3. That those who are least honoured of man are they who find most solace in the 
service of God. 4. That those who go reverently to worship are in the way to secure 
a greater blessing than they seek. God reveals himself in unexpected ways to us, as 
now to Lydia : going to render the homage of a pure heart, she returned with a new 
faith in her mind, a new hope and love in her soul, a new song in her mouth. 5. That 
holy gratitude to God will show itself in a generous, constraining kindness toward man 
— a kindness that will not be refused (ver. 15). But the lesson of our tpxt is the 
truth which we learn concerning the gentle power of Ood in opening the closed heart of 
man : " Whose heart the Lord opened, that she attended unto the things which were 
spoken of Paul " (ver. 14). We may regard — 

I. The fact that he dobs woek THns upon us. If we appeal to our own con- 
sciousness we find that it is the case. Often God's Spirit so touches and moves the 
human soul, that it is only just aware, at the time, that it is being wrought upon ; or he 
so operates that we can only tell, by comparing past things with present, that we have 
changed our spiritual position. It is found by us to be the fact that the Lord is not 
in the storm, nor in the earthquake, nor in the fire, but rather in the " still small 
▼•ice." 

* Silently, like morning light. 
Putting mists and chills to flight," 

he lays his hand upon us and touches the deepest springs of our nature. Any faith 
which does not include the action of God's gentle power in awakening, enliglilening, 
renewing, reviving, the souls of men is utterly inadequate and completely fails to covft 
the facts of human experience. 

II. The WAT IN WHICH HE WORKS. God opens oiir hearts in different way». 1. 
Sometimes it is by making us gradually sensible of our own unworthiness, and theie- 
fore of our need of a Divine Saviour. 2. Sometimes by drawing our thought and love 
upward, higher and higher, from the true and pure and gracious that are found in 
the human, to him who is the true and pure and gracious Friend Divine. 3. Sometimes 
by constraining us to feel dissatisfied with the seen and temporal, and to seek our joy 
and our treasure in the unseen and eternal. 

III. The means by which he wobes. These are manifold : the sacred Scriptures ; 
the services of the sanctuary ; the friendship of the holy ; the opening, enlarging 
experiences of life ; the trial which, though not startling and terrible, is yet arresting 
and revealing, 

IV. The excellency of his wobk. Some may suppose that they have more to be 
thankful for when they can point to one quickening and arousing circumstance in theii 
life, sent of God to awaken and change them. But there is as much of the Divine in the 
opening of the flower by the light of the morning as in the upheaval of the lava Ijy the 
fires beneath the crust of the earth ; and there is as much of Divine power in its gentler 
action on the soul as there is in its more palpable and more terrible manifestations. It is 
open to us to think that there is even greater kindness shown in the former than in the 
latter. It behoves us (1) to recognize the reality of his gentle power ; (2) to bless him 
moat gratefully for his exercise of it upon ouiselves ; (3) to seek that he would put it forih 



38 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh.xti.1— 4fll 

on those with whom we have to do — children, etc. ; (4) to watch for its operation in 
ihum, and to co-operate with Gud therein. — (J. 

Vers. 16 — ^25. — Five truths from Philippi. We learn— 

I. That sacebd tkuth is sometimes found on ibbevbbent lips. (Ver. 17.) 1. 
Sometimes in mockery, as with this poor Philippian slave. She probably caught up 
the words she heard Paul use, and in the spirit of ribaldry uttered them again. So 
men have sometimes preached or sung in the spirit of mere raillery and indecent mirth. 
2. Sometimes in insincerity ; when those who have no care to secure a livelihood by 
honourable means resort to religion as a source of income. It is melancholy to think of 
the thousands who have adopted the preacher's function as a worldly calling, on whose 
lips the sacred truths of the gospel would be as ill placed as on those of this damsel of 
Philippi. 3. Sometimes in inconsiderate enthusiasm ; when they who are animated 
by a desire to do good, but allow themselves to act without due thought, use the most 
sacred terms with a freedom which is very near to flippancy. In all cases the 
irreverent use of Divine names and heavenly truths ia to be strongly if not sternly 
deprecated. 

II. That selfishness will never want a garment with which to hide rrs 
UGLZNESS. (Vers. 18 — 21.) The masters of this poor woman, when they found that 
" the hope of their gains was gone," determined to rid themselves of men who were 
actually sacrificing their temporal interests to the cause of truth and of humanity 1 So 
they incited the mob, and brought Paul and Silas before the magistrates, and played the 
part of indignant citizens, whose religious equanimity was being shamelessly disturbed 
(vers. 20, 21). They would not have ventured to show themselves as they were, in the 
nakedness and ugliness of utttr selfishness ; so they borrowed the flag of patriotism to 
cover themselves withal. The worst of this kind of sophistry is that men in no great 
time deceive themselves, even if they do not deceive their neighbours. Sin soon im- 
poses on itself; it thinks itself benevolent and humane when it is mercenary and crueL 

III. That error iqnorantly imagines it can extinguish truth by forge. The 
magistracy of Philippi, well sustained by the violence of the mob (ver. ii2), caused 
truth, in the person of its advocates, to be beaten and imprisoned. It doubtless 
imagined that there would be an end of this new and " pestilent " doctrine. But as 
the names of these prisoners were to be honoured long ages after those of their 
judges had been forgotten, so the truths which they proclaimed were to be preached 
and sung many centuries after those bonds were broken and those dungeon walls had 
crumbled. How vain the magistrates' court, the scourge, the gaol, the scalfoid, when 
it is the living truth of the Divine Redeemer of mankind which men are trying to 
stifle or to slay (PhiL i. 12—14). 

IV. That faithful service of Christ is songful evbrtwherb. Songs in the 
sanctuary are as natural as they are common ; that is to say, when we are worshipping 
that God who is our God, even the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Their 
devotees could not praise the " gods of the nations," because there was nothing in their 
character to call forth reverence, trust, gratitude. But the followers of Jesus Christ 
find in him everything for which to pay homage and to present thanksgiving. But 
it is not only in the act of Divine worship, but at all times, that "his praise is in our 
mouth." Even in prison — in such a prison as that of Pliilippi, and after such lacerating 
blows as they had endured — Paul and Silas " sang praises unto God." They rejoiced 
that they were " counted worthy to suffer shame for his Name " (ch. v. 41 ; see 
Matt. V. 10—12). And if the faithful servants of Christ could "lift up to God the 
voice of praise " in the dungeon, those who are engaged in his service now should carry 
about with them everywhere the spirit of sacred song. We should, we can, cherish 
the spirit of gratitude and holy joy in the home, in the place of business, in the social 
circle, in every sphere of our activity. For as there is no engagement in which we 
should not be honouring Christ, in which we should not be realizing his presence and 
enjoying a sense of his Divine favour, so is there none in which we may not find a 
source of satisfaction, in which we may not find a reason for holy song. 

V. That abounding Christian life overflows to the benefit of all. " And 
the prisoners heard them " (ver. 25). Not that Paul and Silas sang for their benefit, 
but that abounding happiness in suffering for Christ overflowed and made itself felt by 



OH. xvtl— 40.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 89 

•11 around. How these men, whose mouths, if opened at all, doubtless poured forth 
oaths and curses, must have been struck with surprise, and perhaps smitten with 
shame, to hear these two prisoners singing psalms of praise ! If our Christian life be 
not the poor, ill-fed, shallow streamlet it may be, but the well-fed, strong, swift, ever- 
flowing river it should be, then shall we lire to bless others even when we are only 
acting to express our own souls. — 0. 

Vers. 26 — 34. — Ood in the earthquake. God does not always manifest himself " im 
the still small voice " (1 Kings xix.); there are times when he makes himself known 
in other forms. We learn from our text — 

I. That God is sometimes, nr not often, in the tebbiblb. (Ver. 26.) " By 
terrible things in righteousness," as well as by gracious things in mercy and in love, 
does he answer us. He is in the earthquake and in the fire and in the great and 
strong wind, sometimes. He was, here. The earthquake was the moving of his hand, 
the utterance of his voice, the expression of his mind. It was his condemnatiou of 
human injustice and cruelty ; it was his declaration on behalf of human innocence and 
worth. As in nature we have the solemn as well as the pleasant, the fearful as well 
as the delightful, the storm as well as the sunshine, so in God's providential dealings 
with us, and also in his revelation of himself in Jesus Christ, we have the awful and 
the stern as well as the benignant and the merciful, the rebuke as well as the invita- 
tion, punishment as well as reward, death as well as life. 

n. That God's aim, in the tbbeibi.e, is to awaken the slumbebino soul. " The 
keeper of the prison awaking out of his sleep" (ver. 27). It was the sleep of sin from 
which this earthquake called him, rather than from bodily sluniber. God aroused his 
spirit thus; and from a guilty, deadly uncoDsciousness of all that is most precious in 
the human heart, he awoke to " newness of life." " God doeth it that men should fear 
before him" (Eccles. iii. 14). God sends the earthquake; he shakes the very ground 
under men's feet ; he makes their life-prospects to rock and quiver ; he threatens with 
leas, OP he permits terrible bereavements, to compel men to think of those thiugs which 
otherwise they would continue to disregard, to make men see the solemn realities 
which are about them, to place judgment and eternity in full view belore their eyes. 

III. That spiritual agitation btill asks the old question and reobives the 
OLD reply. Let men say what they will about " refined selfishness," it will always 
remain true that a man's first duty to God is the duty he owes to himself; that the 
first thing, a man awakened by God has to do is to consider how he can come into a right 
and happy relation to the God with whom he has to do ; in other words, to ask him 
how he can " be saved," how his sin can be forgiven and himself be taken back iilto 
the favour and the service of the living God. And the answer of Paul will always be 
the reply of the Christian teacher. The earnest seeker after salvation must be directed 
to a Divine Saviour, in whom he can " believe." For us to believe in the Lord Jesus 
Christ is to accept him fw all that he offers to he to us— to accept him (1) as the 
Saviour in -whom we trust for Divine mercy; (2) as the Friend to whom we give our 
heart ; (3) as the Lord to whom we dedicate our hfe. 

rV. That the acceptance of Jesub Christ is to be followed by DisoiPLUfiUip 
AND profession. The convened jailor, so far from being satisfied with his first change, 
gave his mind to the further and fuller understanding of the truth (ver. 32) ; moreover, 
he showed the sincerity of his conversion by being baptized into the Christian faith 
(ver. 33), by carrying with him all the members of his household, and by offering 
hospitality to those whom he had treated as criminals and now welcomed as friends. 
We, tao, if our faith be genuine, shall (1) be eager to learn more of Christ and of his 
h(Ay will; (2) make profession of our change of heart and life ; (3) do all we can to 
befriend and further those who are the ambassadors of Christ. 

V That faith in Christ tobns passing pleasure into abiding joy. "He 
rejoiced" (ver, 34). He had often lauglied and been merry before; now joy takes 
np Ita home in his heart. " Blessed are all they that put their trust m him."— 0. 

Vers. 35 — 40. — Ohriitian remonstrance. We may learn — 

I. The pitiful end or pbkoipitanoy. (Vers. 35, 38, 39.) These magistrates oi 
Philippi had hastily adopted the opinion of the clamorous multitude ; they had made 



40 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. xti. 1— 40. 

no snfiicient investigation; they had not ascertained the citizenship of the prisoner! 
at the bar; and now they have to pay for their precipitance. They send a sneaking 
message to the prison, "Let those men go; ' thus virtually confessing themselves in 
the wrong. Then when Paul refused to he thus dismissed, and placed himself in the 
position of one whose legal rights had been violated, they were fain to come in person, 
and beg of their own prisoners to go on their way 1 To such dishonour did a hasty and 
unfaithful use of their power bring these men. They who are in any office, whether 
in sacred or secular affairs, should remember that rashness is certain to suffer in the 
end, that precipitancy in judgment conducts to the shame of him who judges, that we 
should take ample time and make full inquiry before we condemn and punish. Other- 
wise judging others, we condemn ourselves and bring down the blow on our own head. 

n. The Christian dutst op remonstrance. Paul refused to be ignominiously dis- 
missed, having first been illegally punished. He uttered an indignant, a fervent remon- 
strance (ver. 37). He declined, being innocent and wronged, to be treated as if he were 
guilty and as if he bad nothing of which righteously to complain. It is often our Christian 
duty to act in the same way. In this matter there are : 1. Two laws to which we may 
make our appeal : either the law of man, which the magistrates of Philippi had now 
broken, and which Paul claimed they should have regarded ; or the law of God, the law 
which makes its demand on every human conscience, requiring truth, equity, respect, 
etc. When this is palpably violated, we may make our appeal to it against the iniquity 
and ill usage of our fellows. 2. Three laws by which we must be limited : (1) The law 
of purity. We are not at liberty to indulge in remonstrance if there is nothing in our 
mind but self-assertion ; the spirit by which we must be animated is a sense of wrong 
having been done, and of a righteous resentment of that wrong. A remonstrance which 
is nothing more than an attempt to recover something for ourselves, into which the 
feeling of pure indignation against evil does not largely enter, is not worthy of the 
name ; that is only a contention. (2) The law of innocence. We must take care that 
we have clean hands, or we shall not be in a position to upbraid others. Too often 
there are faults on both sides, and those who use the language of remonstrance are open 
to damaging retort. Only the innocent are at liberty to " reprove, rebuke, and exhort " 
(see Eom. ii. 17 — 23). (3) The law of considerateness. We must consider what is the 
probable effect of remonstrating. If the outpouring of our indignation, though it 
would relieve our own mind, would endanger the comfort, the liberty, or even (as is 
possible) the life of others, then we should restrain ourselves and be silent. If remon- 
strance, though it should bring down bitterness or even blows on ourselves, is likely 
to benefit others, then it becomes our Christian duty to let loose our tongue and give 
play to our indignation. The question to be considered is — Will utterance honour 
Christ and benefit our fellows ? According to that verdict let our behaviour be. 

III. The dignity of innocence. These magistrates will always present to the 
Christian eye the picture of undignified officialism ; first hastily condemning, and then 
ignomoniously retreating. Paul and Silas will ever be to us the types of true dignity ; 
first patiently suffering, then loftily refusing to be secretly dismissed, then composedly 
uniting and comforting the disciples, and then quietly departing. They who have God 
on their side are in a position to be above the fretting and fuming of the world, to 
possess their souls in patience and in calmness. — C. 

Vera. 1 — 8. — Pctul and Timothy. In the intercourse of the great apostle with 
Timothy, and the history of the latter, we have an interesting episode. 

I. The touno disciple. His case shows : 1. The blessing of a pious mother. The 
mother's love gives force to all her lessons, sanctity to the earliest of life's recollections. 
" Knowing of whom thou hast learned them." 2. The blessing of Christian society. 
He enjoyed the testimony of the brethren in Lystra and Iconium. Not only the good 
influences we receive from Christian brethren, but the certificate which their good wiU 
and commendation affords us, is to be considered. 3. The blessing of sound instruction. 
He had an apostle for his teacher. There were things he had " heard and been assured 
of " from those weighty lips. 4. These advantages turned to account. He was the 
pride and consolation of his mother, and the more so as her husband was an unbeliever 
tie was an ornament to his community, as we may see from the Epistles to Timothy, 
from PhiL iL 22 and 1 Cor. xvi. 10; and a joy and support of ttie apostle. 



IH. XTL 1— 40.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. « 

II. Special ENrnoRAOEMENT fob CiiTiiSTiAN mothers. 1, How many examples 
have we not of devout mothers in the Old and New Testaments ! Hannah, the mother 
jf Samuel ; Mary, the mother of Jesus ; Salome, the mother of Zehedee's children ; 
Eunice, the mother of Timothy. And with these may be compared Monica, the mother 
of Augustine. 2. A mother's prayers are as guardian angels about the life of her 
child ; and the godly son possesses the happy harvest of a mother's tears. 3. Tha 
mother's early influence is the best preparation for future service. Paul laid stress 
upon it ; and the happy connection between himself and the disciple — so fruitful for 
both and for the world — rested upon the early foundation laid by the mother. — J. 

Vers. 9 — 15. — The journey to Macedonia: the happy heginning. The transplantation 
of the gospel into Europe was a great epoch. We see the seed-corn of the kingdom 
germinating and growing from small beginnings. 

I. The providential indications. It came, as on many occasions to prophets 
and men called and sent of God, in a vision of the night. The Macedonian appears 
and cries, " Cross into Macedonia, and come to our aid ! " From the 'Confessions' of St. 
Patrick, the evangelist of Ireland, a dream is cited, in which, by a letter addressed to 
him, with the inscription, " The voice of the Irish," he was called as a missionary to 
Ireland, where he had spent some years of his youth, having been captured and enslaved 
by pirates. Let us regard this vision as an allegory of the constant cry of the heathen 
world, " sitting in darkness and the shadow of death," to the loving sympathy of 
Christian hearts. " Christians, help poor Patagonians ! " is the refrain of a plaintive 
mission song. It is a cry that rises from the lands of the West to the lands of the 
East in this narrative ; and again it becomes, in the course of history, a cry from the 
East to the West. It may sound again from now so-called Christian lands, should our 
candlestick be removed from its place, anil the gospel liuht pass over to those who prove 
themselves more worthy to enjoy it. May we know the day of our visitation 1 

II. The happy consequences. 1. Ihere was quick apprehension of the Divine 
ciymmand. They gathered (Luke glides into the narrative) that God had called 
tiem to preach. The presence of the Divine Leader, manifesting itself in such indica- 
tions, is everything in these new enterprises. "Jesus, still lead on!" He was already 
before them in Macedonia, and the vision assured them of this. Here is a great lesson. 
So soon as we are assured of the direction of the Divine will, let us be prompt to obey. 
2. They enjoyed a straight course to their destiiiation. If a man's ways are pleasing to 
the Lord, he makes his enemies to be at peace with him, and the winds and waves to 
be calm as he proceeds. Their confidence g'ew at every step of their cruise. " ' Hearty 
welcome I ' cried Europe " (Bengel). 3. The arrival. They came to Phi lippi, the chief 
city of that part of Macedonia. The arrival at a great city for the first time is an 
impressive moment in one's life. Who can see the dome of St. Peler's in the distance 
the first time without a thrill? The city is the epitome of mankind. Great cities 
have great vices, but likewise contain eminent virtues and flowers of piety. Poets, 
prophets, and apostles have generally found their sphoe in the busy town life. 4. The 
leading of events. The sabbath day came, and the Christian missionary band repaired 
to the banks of the river. How good the simple devotional habit I We are ever in 
the way of getting good and doing good when in the way to prayer. How simple and 
natural the true method of fulfilling a Divine calll 

** The trivial round, the common task. 
Will furnish all we ought to ask." 

We do not need to create opportunities ; they lie to our hand. Work is always waiting 
for willing and called workers. All places are suitable for prayer: the field (Gen. 
xxiv. 63), the shore (ch. xxi. 5), the prison (ch. xvi. 25), and here the river. 5. The 
woman's heart conquered to Christ. Not by conversion en maase, but by gaining the 
hearts of individuals, does the gospel proceed. The kingdom of God is like seed sown 
in the ground. When it takes root in but one life, how great may be the results ! The 
noble Church at Philippi, which gave the apostle so much joy, sprang from the con- 
version of Lydia. How beautiful is the description : " Her heart the Lord opened" I 
The teacher's voice strikes vainly upon the ear, until God opens the heart. But ths 
heart may refuse tn open, and the word runs, " Behold, I stand at the door, and knock : 



42 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLE*. [oh. xn. 1— 4a 

if any man will," eta True works of a heart divinely and graciously opened are 
named. Here is hvmiility — she submits herself to the judgment of Christians more 
advanced. Teachableness, thankfulness to Ood, busy love and kindness, the setting oj 
a good example. She dedicates her house, with herself, to the service of Christ. — J. 

Vera. 16 — 18. — The witness of evil to the gooa. I, The sooTHSATiNa damsel. Here 
was a girl living upon imposture, and bringing gain to her masters out of traffic in 
fancies and lies. Magic and soothsaying trades upon the imagination and wishes of the 
popular mind. Instead of leading the mind to the truth, it leads the mind to the 
habit of postponing truth to device and interest. It is the very opposite temper to that 
of true Christianity. 

II. Her witness to the truth. It was doubtless involuntary, extorted from her by 
overpowering conviction. So does the truth not seldom come from strange lips. The 
girl felt the contrast in these men to herself. Here were sei'vant.s of God ; she was the 
servant of lucre and self-interest. They with truth upon their lips, and their lives in 
their hands ; she with cunning lies and deceits, framed to defraud men of their substance 
and injurious to their souls. They lead on the way to salvation and blessedness ; she, 
to disappointment and ruin. 

IIL The conduct of the apostles. It gives a rule to us. There can be no fellow 
ship, and therefore no pact nor even momentary compromise, between light and dark- 
ness. Truth needs no such help, and never have such devices been known to forward 
its course. Compliments are to be distrusted by the worker for God. The tinder of 
vanity is ever ready to be inflamed. The temptation is to put down to our own merit 
that which is the work of Divine grace. Jealousy against evil is disarmed, watchfulness 
relaxed. Good men may thus be seduced from the service of God into that of men, or 
worse. Before firmness and loyalty to conscience the evil and seducing spirits flee.— J. 

Vers. 19 — 34. — Joy in tribulation., " All that will live godly in Christ Jesus must 
suffer persecution." " We must through much tribulation enter the kingdom." The 
truth of these Pauline sayings had often been tested by experiences, of which this at 
Philippi was one of the most significant. Here, too, was one of the places where he 
learned to say, " Thanks be to God, who always maketh us to triumph ! " 

I. Self-interest in arms against the textth. So often — especially in our day — 
are men's interests and profits on the same side with Christianity ; we need to be reminded 
that godliness and gain (in the immediate and lower sense) are not identical. 1. The 
root <f opposition to the truth. They saw their hope of gain was gone. Wherever 
men strike a blow against pure morality, sound and unrefuted princiiJes of teaching, we 
may rely upon it some " vested interest " is at bottom the cause. The progress of 
the gospel has put an end to many false callings, and, let us hope, will put an end to 
many more. 2. The weapons of falsehood. False accusations, inisrepresentations. 
Malice knows that the most effective mode of attack is the indirect. If you cannot 
disprove a Laan's arguments, you may blacken his character. If his private life is 
blameless, try to show that his principles are dangerous to society. If he speaks 
unwelcome truth, accuse him of breaking up the general peace and good feeling 
(1 Kings xviii. 17 ; Amos vii. 10). The wolf in the fable 1 Crafty use of catch- 
cries is another instrument of passion and malice. The great Roman name and power 
is assailed, and that by hated and despicable Jews ! This the first time that Roman 
law is invoked against the Christian. Observe the half-truth in the arguments of 
malice. Christianity does make men restless — it frightens the evil out of false repose. 
It does unhinge old customs, and was destined to overthrow the Roman pride. Tkua 
was the multitude excited, as often under such circumstances, and, amidst howls of rage 
and gusts of indignation, the apostles are roughly handled, their garments torn ; they 
are beaten and cast into close confinement. So do malice and passion often appear to 
gain their will, while they are preparing for themselves a defeat. 

IL Inward joy amidst odtward darkness ; inward liberty in bonds and pbison. 
At midnight Paul and Silas were praying and singing hymns. What seems to be the 
gate of death and of hell may be converted by prayer and song into the gate of heaven, 
the avenue to Paradise. Tis not the place that sanctifies the spirit, but the spirit that 
sanctifies the {daoe. Great the triumph of the spirit, to sing, not mthin the safe walla 



OH. x-w. 1-40.] THE A0T8 OF THE APOSTLES. 43 

of the church, but behind the barred doors of the dungeon ! Sweet are " songs in the 
Tiight " 1 It is suffering which wrings the very soul of music from the heart ; and to 
the prayers thus uttered, a deep Amen echoes in heaven. 

TIT. Djvinb power made manifest to sense and 8PIEIT. 1. The earthquake. 
This was the outward answer to the prayer and song. Heaven and earth are moved 
at the prayer of the holy. As it trembled awfully through the prison, opening doors 
and loosen ini; bnnds, hearts also were smitten and flew open at the touch of God. 2. 
The at/i.tation of the soul. The jailor wakes, at first to angaish and despair. The 
prisoners have escaped; he is a lost man! There is a sudden tempta'ion to suicide, 
and at ihe eleventh hour crime is averted and salvation received. " Da thy-elf no 
harm : for we are all here ! " Those who love allegorical treatment of texts may find 
matter here. Duty and the will of (Jod are firmer bonds than handouffi and the 
stocks. "We are all here "cry the servants of God, with the witness of our word, 
the pattern of our life, the intercessory prayer of our love. Bat a new fear, more awful 
i.han the forniKr, seizes on the jailor's soul : " What must I do to be saved '? " When 
it comes to this question in earnest, the soul is ripe for salvation. One such cry brings 
all the mercy of Heaven down. 3. The great question. It is not unprep ired for. He 
had heard the apostles praying. Doubtless seeds of trath, dropped into his mind on 
some former occasion, now germinated and swiftly broke into life. As the earth breaks 
forth into greenness after a thunderstorm, so was new life bom in the man's soul in the 
midst of the dread earthquake. 4. The great answer. Believe! "' Faith ' is all your 
wisdom ,'■' said the sceptical einperor Julian. True] and let us abide by it. Affiance in 
the Holiest and Divinest, for time and for eternity ; this and this alone is wisdom. 
Faith in the ever-blessed One makes blessed. In him we obtain a Divine Friend in the 
home; a holy domestic order; sweet domestic peace; assured domestic stability; a 
portion in the heavenly home. 5. The great decision. It is rather implied than 
expressed ; shown by practical results than by words. Faith works in the jailor's heart 
by love. His thankfulness to Christ is shown by attentions of thoughtful kindness to 
his servmts. 'J'he stern keeper of the stocks is transformed by the magic of love 
Into the ^liy^ician and the host. The jailor has become a " prisoner of Jesus Christ." 
Having washed his now honoured guests from the stains of outward defilement, he 
receives at their hands the baptism of spiritual purity. The scene closes amidst purest 
Joy. Thus do the darkest places and most repulsive associations become glorified and 
idealized by the Spirit of the living and loving God. The prison becomes a chapel; « 
dread place of judgment ; a school of penitence and faith ; a home of love and kindness j 
a place of new birth and new life. — J. 

Vers. 35 — 40. — Unexpected deliverance. L Thb sbobbt wokkino of mv hbabt 
CNDEB Divine power. The decision of the magistrates to let the apostles go free is 
not explained. Paul and Silas had given no account of themselves. But the conscience 
of the magistrates had been smitten. While his servants suffer in silence, God conducts 
their affairs. The coincidence must have struck the jailor, and filled his heart with 
joy. Sure would have been the trial to the jailor's new faith had he received command 
to throw his now honoured guests into stricter confinement. Such coincidences, 
although nothing can be demonstrated from them, may nevertheless well convey to the 
believing heart the sense of an ever-working Divine love. 

II. The protest of the apostles. To slink out of prison at the bidding of the 
jailor, as if they were escaped convicts, was not agreeable to Paul's sense of right. They 
were Roman citizens. Cicero, in eloquent words, had said that it was a crime to flog a 
Roman. In this case they had been beaten, imprisoned, thrust into the stocks, treated 
with every harshness and indignity. Paul stands upon his rights as a Roman citizea . 
" Let them . . . fetch us out ! " Christian meekness requires us to reserve our strength, 
to subdue our anger, and to prefer the good of another to our own pleasure; but not to 
connive at injustice and submit to wrong. The Christian ought to maintain his 
honour and insist upon his rights, when his reason is not wounded self-love, but 
injured sense of right and zeal for God's honour; when his course is not thit of a rude 
independence, but that of right and calm self-vindication ; and if his object is not the 
overthrow of the oppressor, but his conviction and improvement. 

lU. The honoubablk disiqssau Alarmed at the attitude of Paul, the magistrates 



44 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. xtl 1—40, 

send to beg the apostles to depart. Thus they receive their dismissal, " Go in peace I " 
from the lips of friend and foe alike — ^from the friends to whom they have brought peace 
and salvation ; from the foes who dare not touch the anointed of God ; from the Master 
himself, who has been with them in their trouble, whose promises have sustained, and 
whose providence has watched over and delivered them. — J. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — Paul's second missionary jowrney commenced. 

L Enlarged wokk the fbuit op enlarged capacity and bxperibnob. 1. In his 
own spirit — by faithful service and abundant grace received. 2. In his higher standing 
among his brethren. The sympathy and confidence expressed by the Churches of Antioch 
and Jerusalem lifted up Paul's spirit to a higher level. 3. In the clearer course opened 
by the settlement of the controversy as to the position of the Gentile converts. 

n. Instruments prepared to meet greater demands. Timothy specially gifted 
to be Paul's companion. His Greek education. His mother's and grandmother's piety. 
His father possibly a proselyte. He himself Paul's son in the faith. Silas more Jewish. 
The Holy Spirit guides us when we seek out helpers in dependence on higher wisdom. 
The young minister had the confidence of the Churches, where probably he had 
exercised his gifts. Those who are selected as candidates for the ministry should 
be approved and well reported of, and in some degree tried. Paul's own judgment was 
sustained by that of others. 

HI. In all work DIFFIOnLTIES AND BOANDALS SHOULD BE SHUNNED, CVen at the COSt 

of suppressing personal feeling. When it was a question of maintaining principle, 
Paul would not consider Jewish prejudice; when it was a question of conciliating and 
preparing the way for the gospel, he would put his own broader views in the background. 
An example showing that promises and conciliation can be mingled in the same character ; 
a warning against self-assertion. 

IV. The INFLUENCE OP A WELL-MAINTAINED ChURCH ORDER ON THE STABILITY AND 

PROSPERITY OF SPIRITUAL WORK. There was no despotism of Jerusalem over the Gentile 
Churches, but these were decrees ordained ; not the decrees of those who sought dominion 
over the faith of others, but the decisions of wise, good, inspired men, who spoke under 
the influence of the Spirit. We should obey the will of the Spirit, whether we hear 
it from Jerusalem or from any other quarter. A true, humble, and zealous desire to 
be strengthened and to increase wiU be the best preservative against schism. There 
is no inconsistency between liberty and reverence. They support one another. — ^R. 

Vers. 6 — 10. — A trtie epoch in the history of the gospel : advance /ram Asia to Europe. 

1. Supernatural guidance led the way. 1. The messengers naturally inclined to 
continue their work within narrower limits. Much against advancing West. Unknown 
region. Great demands in the more educated heathenism of Europe. Possibly the 
Jewish element was powerful in Asia, and therefore some religious basis to work 
upon. But all such considerations put aside when the mind of the Spirit manifested, 

2. The Spirit of Jesus clearly pointed the way Westward, whether by miraculous 
indications, or by providential circumstances too plain to be misunderstood. Troas 
was reached in a waiting, inquiring state of mind. 3. The decisive commandment 
was given by vision to Paul. Not a mere dream, but a prophetic vision, which, being 
accompanied by a supernatural impression of its Divine origin and meaning, left 
no doubt on the mind. 

II. The change op the sphere op labour from Asia to Europe fruitful in results. 
1. On the Gentile world — in the direct assault on heathenism in its stronghold. 2. On 
the character of Paul himself. He was fitted for a higher work than preaching to the 
semi-barbarous tribes of Asia Minor — where great as the success was, it would be 
necessarily almost limited to the region where it was obtained. To touch Greece was to 
open a thousand doors to the world at large. 3. On the development of the Christian 
Church. It was necessary that Christianity should reveal to the world its suiieriority 
to all merely human systems of philosophy; that it should satisfy the intellectual 
as well as the spiritual wants of man. Had Paul never visited Kurope, we should 
not have had his Epistles to the Romans and Corinthians, nor probably that to the 
Ephesians ; for his own views of the Church were raised to a higher level by his contact 
with the larger world of thought aod life. — B. 



OH. XVL 1— 40.J THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 45 

Ver. 9. — 7%e cry of a perishing world after Christ. "And a vision," etc. 

1. Humanity without the gospel. The Macedonian life representative. 1. The 
social failure of Rome. The corrupt state of society. The loss of liberty. The lack 
of real advancemont. Help required in every department of men's lives. 2. The 
intellectual fnilure of Greece. Contradictions of philosophy. Neglect of the poor and 
ignorant. Follies of heathenism. Worship of human nature itself. Awful vices by 
the side of wonderful development of mental faculties. 3. The spiritval destitution of 
the world. Idea of God. Degradation of the masses. Comparison between the state 
of the Greek world and the state of the Jewish. Nothing like synagogues. 4. The 
Macedonian a type of the moral helplessness of men, both in heathen nations ani in 
the heathenish portion of Christendom. " Come over and help us." 

II. The charge of the Spirit to the Church. 1. We must shut our ears to all 
other voices but that of the Holy Ghost ; as, e.g. reasonings about the future destiny 
of the heathen ; attempts unduly to exalt the uninspired books of heathen religions ; 
exaggerations of difficulties and discouragements; pretended special regard to home 
claims. " Look to the marching orders." " Oo over and help them." 2. As God speaks 
to hia most eminent servants, let the voice of the Spirit command us through them. 
If they tell us an enterprise is charged upon them, we must support them with all our 
might. If Livingstone says Africa is open, then follow his lead, even though at great 
cost, and let there be no looking back. 3. The missionary enterprise is a great lesson 
to the Church to find its blessedness in listening to the cries of needy souls. Au extended 
sphere demands a deepened faith and zeal. If we cannot go over with a true gospel 
and with a self-denying spirit, let us stay at home ; if we carry the power of God with 
us, then we shall find, in the fulness of the Gentiles brought in, not only the reward of 
a satisfied conscience, but the elevation of our own faith and the glory of our Jerusalem. 
A larger Christianity has been taking the place of the old and narrow religion of former 
days, since the Spirit was poured out, and we sent the Word forth to the ends of the 
earth. We help ourselves when we help others. Wonderful signs of the times, showing 
that God is opening the minds of men to the universal claims of the gospeL All 
things uniting to say, " Go into all the world," etc. — K. 

Vers, 11 — 15 (or ver. 14). — The opened heart. " And a certain woman named Lydia," 
«tc. Study of personal history specially helpful. A few broad strokes make up the picture. 
Fill in the outline from human nature and experience. Describe the circumstances. 
Philippi a local metropolis. In the midst of perishing heathenism a germ of spiritual 
life. Country market-place outside the gate. Devout women, Jewesses and proselytes. 
The Old Testament read there. Prayer oflfered. Without Christ they could not be made 
perfects Influence of praying women. The contrast. The great heathen city, the 
small gathering of pious souls waiting for consolation. An image of the world with 
the true Church beside it waiting to take possession. " Stone cut out of the mountain." 
Apostles sent to lift up the little one into a thousand. Lydia the first convert from 
Europe. The message came as an answer to prayer. 

I. Thb oospel waiting to find a place in the human hbabt. 1. Devoutness, 
religiousness, not all that is required. Apostles preached Christ to religious people. 
Christianity a positive system of truth, which must be known and received. The moral 
side of it not separable from the spiritual. This specially seen in the mission of the 
Church to the world. If Lydia was herself to preach to her neighbours, she must 
be taught. 2. Attention to truth a work in the heart. Curiosity, habit, sentiment, 
all may fall short of bringing the mind to lay hold of truth. Personal application. 
The spring of affection opened. Love of Jesus shed abroad. Faith fixed on its objects. 

II. The grace of God working through human agbnot. Paul preached ; the 
Lord opened the heart. 1. The distinction must be recognized in all ministrations. 

2. The record of the apostolic ministry an example. The greatest preachers may fail. 
If they succeed, to the Lord's Name be the praise. 3. We are cast by such a mystery on 
prayer. 4. The opened heart is the pre-requisite to the changed and consecrated life. — E. 

"Vers. 16 — 18.— The kingdom of light revealing itself. On the borders of Europe 
where many false spirits were at work. Divination and soothsaying, the resort of men 
(n their blindness— a testimony at once to their moral helplessness and their recognition 



« THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ch. xvl 1—40. 

of a, higher power. The credulity of men was made a source of sordid traffic both 
by philosophy and false religion. Hence the trouble in the mind of Paul. It was not 
for his own sake, but for the gospel's. 

I. Truth needs no falsehood to help it. The Churbh of Rome has acted very 
differently. Had it not been stopped, the gospel would have been regarded at Philippi 
as another form of divination. Simplicity the greatest st length. 

n. Those that abb bestino on the book can afpobd to wait. " After many 
days " the spirit was cast out. 

III. The kingdom of Christ brought into collision with the kingdom of Satan reveals 
ITS viCTOBious might. So throughout the history. " That very hour." The Name of 
Jesus Christ exalted, all the more for the evil device against it. ]\f ercy to the deluded and 
miserable. Judgments to the deceivers. The swine and the spirits perish together. — K. 

Vers. 19 — 40. — The first European persecution. I. It was in no way instigated 
by Jews, but it proceeded from rulebs and magistrates, under the instigation of 
heathenish bbeob. An important distinction. Christianity, when it enlar>;ed its sphere 
of operations, had to encounter the opposition of: 1. The state. 2. False philosophy 
regarding it as folly. 3. Heathen priestcraft, fearing the loss of their profitable 
nperstitlonB. 

II. The method of persecution was generally through lawlessness and ueboab. There 
was no trial, no proper charge. Only the multitude against them. 

III. The gospel brought into light what was good in the ancient wobld, and 
drew it to itself. Boman order and discipline is here distinctly on the side of the 
persecuted, and the persecutors are afraid. So henceforth, when the gospel is seen 
at work in Europe, we find the Roman law serving it. 

IV. God speaks among the heathen by the voice of his providence and of nature. 
The earthquake assisted the cause of truth. A wonderful testimony to the whole 
city and neighbourhood. 

V. The conversion of the Philippian jailor a glorious consummation of thk per- 
secution. So always — the wrath of man praises God. 

VI. The contbast of the praying and singing prisoners and the terrified authorities 
a striking testimony to the truth. Lydia and her companions prayed too. The little 
Church at Philippi, increased by the whole occuiTence, " comforted them and departed." 
" Filling up that which is behind of the sufferings of Christ for his body's sake, which 
is the Church."— R. 

Ver. 25. — Light in the darkness. "But about midnight," etc. Power of facts 
to speak for Christ. The miracles of Christ accompanied his message. " Believe the 
works." We must push this evidence of facts on rmbelievers, because they are not prepared 
to open their hearts to the truth. 

I. A BKTGHT EXAMPLE OF FAITH. 1. It Overcame fear, shame, suffering. 2. It lay 
hold of the future — praying and praising, under the influence of hope. The time was 
midnight, but there was morning in their souls. 3. It was faith which was proved 
by experience ; they remembered past deliverances. " His love in time past," etc. 

II. God wobks with his people. 1. He opens their lips, when the world would 
shut them. The inner prison and the stocks cannot silence truth. The audience 
is there — the prisoners and the Roman jailor. 2. Fellow-workers called in. "The 
earth helped the woman " (Rev. lii. 16). God is doing much imder the suiface of events. 
Streams of providential government unite with streams of spiritual influence. The 
revival of intelligence and humanism preceding the Reform ition. The two great 
currents of the eighteenth century, spuitual and political ; and now science helps the 
advancement of Christianity. 3. Leave God to find opportunity for us. Be patient, 
and hope to the end. The trouble of Christianity to the world works out peace. — B. 

Vers. 29, 30. — A remarkoMe conversion. " Then he called for a light," etc. The 
significance of the jailor's case, as a Roman, and almost instantaneously converted, 
as illustrating the comparative religious freedom of a Roman colony, the openness of 
the Gentile mind to impression, the yearning of the heart after atme religion prevailing 
at that time ia the better class of people. 



OH. XVI. 1—40.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 47 



I. Awakened anxiety. 1. A realization of perstHial dangers and need. 2. A for- 
saking of all other refuses. 3. An appeal for Kelp to those who, by their confidence 
«nd peace, showed that they had a better hope. 

II. Single-minded inqoibt. 1. Different from mere curiosity or speculation. 2. 
Beady humbly to wait for brotherly sympathy and direction. 3. Casting the will as 
well as the mind on the truth. " What must I do?" 

ill. Rising faith. 1. Salvation possible, therefore sought after. 2, Self-surrender 
at the feet of the messenger, as expressing desire for the message. 3. Doubtless " the 
way of salvation," of which the city had heard, was something definitely before his 
mind as something to be found. Why is not such earnestness universal ? — R. 

Ver. 34. — Household salvation. " And he brought them," etc. The family greatly 
honoured in the Bible. Patriarchal religion the religion of families. The household the 
unit of the Jewish nation. All true redemption of society must be through individual 
conversion, but by way of natural relationship. 

I. The household joy. 1. A new beginning. Contrast with the old. 2. A 
new security — both against the evils of a disordered earth and the infirmities and 
sins of human life. 3. A new fellowship. A family may be a Glmrcb; daily 
worship, common service; mutual joy, development of individuality in the light of 
faith. 

II. The hope or the world. 1. Eapid spread of religion when household faith- 
fulness is maintained. 2. Education is the basis of Christian teaching. 3. The 
young the hope of the Chiirch. 4. The representative character of Christian profession. 
We cannot assume respunt.ibilily for children, but we can surround them with a circle 
of light. Our baptism should be their baptism, not insteoKi of the baptism of the Holy 
Ghost, but in view of it. — R. 

Vers. 1 — 5. — Apostolic devotion owned. The opening two little words of the fifth 
rerse must not be neglected. The fifth verse does not merely summarize the incidents 
narrated in the preceding four verses. It connects them as effects with their just 
Eauses, or with that which was in part, and as matter of fact, their just cause. Observe, 
then, that — 

I. The love op apostolic hbabts establishes faith in the heaets op othbhs and 

tNCHBASBS the SPREAD OF XT. 

II. The kindly pastoral visiTUfa of those op superior knowledge, and who 

HAViS BEEN SET AND CALLED OP GrOD, AS LEADERS, ESTABLISHES THE FAITH OF WHOLE 
ChUBCHES and INCREASES THEIR NUMBER. 

III. The ACTIVE zeal op the older and honoured LEADERS IN SEEKING AND 
ENCOURAQINQ young RECRUITS THEOWS ENERGY INTO EXISTING FAITH AND PROVIDES 

BiBECT MEANS FOR PROPAGATING IT. 1. Paul Selects Timothy, observini; him to be the 
right sort. 2. Paul recognizes the need of new blood and young blood, and lets the 
Churches see that he does so. 3. Paul suggests the circumcision of Timothy, as son 
of a Jewish mother, that no time should be unnecessarily lost in removing objections 
«n the part of the Jewish elements in the Churches he was visiting. 

I V. An EQUITABLE ADMINISTRATION OP THE DECISIONS OF THE " APOSTLES AND ELDERS," 
AND A JUST ATTENTION TO ECCLESIASTICAL ORDER, STEADIES THE FAITH RESIDENT IN 

THE Church and promotes the growth op it elsewhere. (Ver. 4.) To try to " put 
a yoke upon the neck " of any Church is to " tempt God " (ch. xv. 10). To give it true 
liberty i« like giving it air and light. — B. 

Vers. 6 — 12. — The Spirits course. It may be laid down as a canon, that the facts 
marking periods of special gifts and special inspiration and special "dispensations " point 
to principles available for other periods in the whole history of the Church and the 
world. What might otherwise seem among the driest historical or sometimes almost 
geograi)hical statements are accordingly threaded together by an invisible bond of 
connection, which lends them abundant interest. And here, from the apparently bare 
narration that is given us of where Paul and Silas went, where they did not go, and 
wliarft ihi'V wislied to go hnt were overruled, we may learn — 

L The BEALJi'V Qf TUH SI'ibit's pbopfebkd conduct of the Church. 



« THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLEa [cH.xvi.l-4e. 

IL The absolute ebbob involved in not SBBKiNa, ob not following, the tbaoes 

OF THE SpIBIT. 

III. The cleab dibection the Spibit may be belied on to oivk to a beallt 

FEBVBNT LOVE, EARNEST PDBPOSE, AND ACTUAL ZEAL. 

IV. The confidence that mat be inspired, amid all the weakness of a XEBb 

HUMAN heart, IN THE UNERRING AND UNFAILING ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE SPIRIT. 

V. The " comfort of the Holt Spirit " fob those who subeendbb theie goings 
AND themselves TO HIS LEADING. Devout musings, holy feelings, and right resolves 
will be as much and more to them than " vision " or dream ? Nor would that comfurt 
be least gratefully felt and acknowledged, when across the famed straits Paul heard 
an unusual voice, in the accents of an all too unusual prayer. At a moment's glance 
he saw why he had been prevented from halting, nor suffered to turn to the right hand 
or to the left, that he might the rather now come direct to Europe, and there preach and 
plant the gospel. And to lee the meaning of all was comfort and " joy of faith " for 
him. — B. 

Vers. 14, 15, 40. — The day that looked like the day of small thingt. It may be 
said, indeed, that " the kingdom came not with observation " into Europe. To the 
silence, modesty, and unostentatiousness of its first steps, nothing seems wanting. The 
notoriety came, again, not from the studied purpose of its heralds, who did their bidding 
in so ]iacific a manner, but from the vain attempt to crush them. Let us notice in some 
detail wijat we know Irom the present passage of Christianity's very first rooting of 
itself in Europe. Observe — 

I. The opportunity that was embraced bt the apostle. We must judge that 
there was little or no choice open to him. We are glad even to take up the position that 
this, too, \\ as of God. It may be worded, therefore, in this way, that the opportunity Paul 
used was that which Providence offered. With how many is it the case that opportunity 
is the very thing which is slighted, unheeded, altogether ignored! The opportunities 
that life offers, that our existing position offers, that God therein offers, are those that we 
despise, dreaming of others, which lor that very reason, if for no other, may well be with- 
held ! Let us honour, then, the God who sent and the servant who faithfully used this 
opportunity, by looking at it somewhat minutely. 1. Landed in Europe, some " certain 
days" seem to have counted for little at Philippi ; the only record of them this: "We 
were in that city abiding certain days." 2. The sabbath day comes, and there is no 
fine building into which to enter to preach ; there is no respectable synagogue — Judeea is 
far away now ; there is no excited and eager crowd as at Antioch to be harangued, with 
all the skiU of the inspired logician and the He;iven-born orator and the laithful gospel 
preacher. Dull will the hours of this sabliaih pass compared with those of many other 
of late years fresh in the recollection of Paul. 3. The day is nevertheless to be made 
use of and to be turned to account. And Paul and his companions resolve to join the 
uumble prayer-meeting of a ^arfy of women, outside the city and by the river-side. 
The occasion is unique, pretty ne.irly as much so as could be. It must be taken from 
H*e tenor of the narrative that there were few, if any, men there. But Paul and his 
companions neither seem to view themselves nor to be viewed as intrusive. And they 
Eat down and in a most informal manner " spake to the women." It were the essence 
of preaching sometimes rather to speak ; and to speak to a few, and to speak 
appropriately to them and pointedly and unassumingly and kindly. This was the day, 
and this was the place, and these were the persons, and this was the manner of Paul 
and his friends, which made up the opportunity that looked so humble. 

If. The first show of results. There is one woman among the little group who is 
to become the first known Christian convert in Europe. And she came from Asia. By 
all appearance she was a proselyte, and knew and worshipped one God, according to her 
light and scanty opportunity, among a mere disunited remnant of Jewesses, if it were so 
Indeed. And she was presumably a woman who did a good business, and had a "house ' 
to the hospitality of which she cuuld pressingly invite the new-comers, and invite them 
to stay there, too, days together (vers. 15, 18, 40). 1. Lydia is a woman not altogether 
shut off from light and knowledge. 2, She is a woman who owns to her own conscience 
and does " worship God." 3. She is one of no bigoted conservative prejudice, and she 
" listens " patiently, respectfully, to what the strangers said. 4. For all thatt her heart 



OH. xn. 1—40.] THE ACTS OF THE APUSTLEa 48 

was as yet sealed, shut. There may be some light, some knowledge, some movement 
and life of conscience in a Person, and yet the heart itself bo shut to the pure truth of 
OtoA and of the soul. (1) Sin may keep shut the heart. (2) The pride of nature may 
obstruct it (3) Stolid habit may fearfully close it. (4) The simple "love of the 
world " may effectually exclude all better, higher things from the heart. And some- 
thing of this kind was the state of Lydia. Nature had closed her heart, or nature had 
not availed to open it, and at this time it was in some material sense shut. And the 
one first result of this occasion was now seen. "The Lord," with his omnipotent 
power and with his facile grace, " opened the heart of Lydia " — opened it so that " she 
attended to the things which were spoken of Paul." It is evident that the change that 
took place within, under the touch of the Lord, led her to attend with ear, with mind, 
with heart, and with life. For " she and her household " are baptized speedily. 

IIL A FUKTHEB GLIMPSE OF RESULTS. 1. A generous heart is unlocked. More than 
one prophet's chamber is found, and more than a meal or a day's entertainment. 2. A 
very graceful way of showing generosity is exampled. Lydia does not proffer 
hospitality in any patronizing tone. She begs to be allowed to render it ; and rests her 
urgency on Paul's faith in her sincerity. 3. Lydia becomes installed in that place as 
one who may be " counted faithful " to give an asylum for the persecuted, and a home 
to the released prisoners (ver. 40). 4. A strangely significant type is given of that 
elevation of women which Europe should ere long be destined to witness, and which 
has been just due to one presence — the presence of Christianity. Since the time of 
Lydia, what influences for good in the Church of Christ, what very saviours and leaders 
of the Church, humanly speaking, have women been, whose "hearts the Lord has 
opened"! Thus the gospel began its course in Europe, thus for " many days" silently, 
thus condescendingly. And as the Master himself seldom more significantly marked 
the character of his own condescendingness than in condescending to do the apparenUy 
little, to heal only one out of a multitude, to " choose " only a "few," to fill for a long 
time but a small space in the eye of the world, so has his true Church and its humbler 
history rejoiced to share his lot ; and when it has done so, has then most testified its 
own approximation in likeness to him. — B. 

Vers. 16 — 39. — An illustrious triple triumph of Christianity. Soft as the step with 
which Christianity entered the fair fields of Europe, and kindly as the welcome given 
to it then, its uniform lot was not long in making its appearance. It soon wakens close 
attention, it rouses strong opposition, it vindicates its genius and rights, and the lustre 
of its moral victory must often have been felt by the faithful apostles enough of itself 
to compensate for the persecutions and sufferings they encountered. Barely was there 
a more consummate instance of the kind than that here recorded. Let us notice — 

L The rise of the opposition, and victory the first. The first note of discord 
was sounded by an agent unusual but not altogether unknown, and it was uninten- 
tionally occasioned by that actor in the whole scene. 1. The damsel possessed by the 
spirit of divination, possibly responsible in the first instance for being thus the victim of 
evil powers, may be held to be not responsible in her present conduct. 2. The 
utterances of spirits of evU by means of her bodily organs of speech need not be 
supposed to be necessarily the utterances of mockery, or of any evil design to prejudice 
those who might have listened to Paul, had he and his companions not been advertised 
by an agent of so unwelcome a kind. It is said Christ " suffered not the devils to speak 
because they knew him." And the possessed slave spoke what she spoke because she 
was under the influence of those who really discerned and knew of what sort Paul and 
Silas were. 3. The objection of Paul may have been due (1) to a repetition, which 
of itself might turn seriousness into mockery ; (2) to the deep grief, that he would 
inevitably feel that the words of truth should be now, not the utterance of intelligent and 
converted human beings, as such, but of human powers usvvped, and though under the 
domination of superior power, not under the governance of superior goodness, but the 
contrary, 4, Paul is empowered to speak the command of dispossession, with which 
the " many days' " cry stopped, and the evil spirit went, and her " right mind " r*turaed 
to the slave. And from the barest facts of the painful but wonderful incident we learn 
how tyrannical is the usurpation of the powers of evil ; how nevertheless the powers of 
evl' do sometimes press into the service of the truth ; how their unsought aid (if aid it 
*«x* — ^n. ■ 



60 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xvL 1— *a 

be) is refused by the Spirit of truth and by the true themselves, who will not encourage 
the evy that good may come ; on the other hand, how their designed injury if 
baulkii ; but finally how, from all the humbling mournful scene, a victory " in the 
Name vl the Lord Jesus" was won by Paul. Whatever it was that was most offensive 
in what had been taking place was summarily ended, human powers were disen- 
thralled, a whole market of human iniquity was soon closed, if not bankrupt, and the 
true p'O'S'er was exalted and magnified. 

II. The opposition itself, and victory the second. 1. The opposition was not 
on account of the religious views or preaching and teaching of Paul and Silas. They 
were Gentiles and Remans who were the opponents now, not, as so often hitherto, Jews. 
The cause of the opposition was most radical to the human heart. The miserable slave 
had been gain to cruel masters, never so cruel as when cruel to humanity, and as her 
gaiufulness was gone their opposition was come, and was decided and determined and 
bitter, and withal (disingenuous. They pleailed they were Romans, and they forgot to 
malce sure that there was not a sense in which Paul and Silas were Romans to whom it 
was yet more necessary to show respect. But the cause was stated to consist in what 
Paul taught as a " Jew." 2. The opposition was conducted in every sort of disregard of 
justice and order. Angry people and rulers, and magistrates and multitude, are mingled 
together against a couple of men who had brought a possessed slave to her right mind ; 
and stripes and imprisonment, and innermost prison and stocks, are their punishment, 
and, it is supposed, the silencing of them. 3. The opposition, instead of silencing them, 
had taken the means to keep them awake even at midnight, when perhaps every one 
of their enemies slept. What can they do but pray ? But prayer sometimes brings 
very ready, very present help, and they sang praises, and though the jailor heard them 
not, other suffering prisoners did. And God above heard, and brought speedy and full 
daliverance. No stone of the prison building but it moved, no locked door but it opened, 
no fetter but it was loosed. And immediately the second great victory began to be 
jippareut. (1) The cause of Paul and Silas is one for which miracle and earthquake 
and Heaven will appear. (2) The jailor's life is saved by prisoners forsooth — those 
whom he had fastened so securely and so hastily a few hours before. (3) A greater, 
better life is roused in that jailor, so that his hands to wash the stripes, and his house 
and his meat and his very heart, are all at the feet of his prisoners, and " he and all 
his " numbered among the followers of Christ I Wonders like these passed all Philippl 
had ever dreamed of before. 

III. The entire collapse of the opposition, and victory the third. 1. When 
God's judgments are abroad in the earth, the very air is rife of their rumour. The magis- 
trates, before ever day dawned, had heard, if it were only a whisper, what moved them 
more than the earthquake. They send simplest order that the men be " let go." It is 
not only humble hearts moved to salvation, that own to the interposition of Paul's God 
and Saviour ; hearts proud, unchanged, and haply unchangeable quake to their centre, and 
will try the shortest way and the least-observed way or any way, if they may feel free 
again to breathe, and free from what is to them the most dread incubus. 2. But the 
hour of the supreme triumph of the servants of Christ had arrived. They show no 
hurry to go. They have been silent when the market-place howled around them. 
But when an almost deathly stillness prevailed that daydawn, and those who were 
about spoke with hushed and bated breath, a very few, very quiet, but very 
authoritative words of Paul's lips finally complete the transformation of the scene. 
What a contrast, and what a proud hour for truth, when Paul pronounces on certain 
magistrates a sentence of more moral grandeur and far-reachingness, than all the sentences 
they for centuries have pronounced ! You can hear those wvrds, and the climax of them, 
" Nay verily 1" Certainly all the rest "went indeed by saying." Nor caa we doubt 
that to God Paul and Silas gave the glory; to Jesus, Master, King, Captain, they gave the 
glory; to the energetic Spirit of light and power and conversion, they gave the glory; 
nor took one atom of the proud satisfaction to themselves when the " magistrates came" 
in person, "and besought" them and brought them out, and desired them to depart out 
of the city." What triple triumph Jesus won in Philippi of Europe, when he dis- 
enthralled the body and the mind of the slave, when he made the jailor's heart and life 
all his own, and when he sent the magistrates on their knees to the scourged, imprisoned, 
hue now dictating Paul and Silas I — B, 



CH.IVI.1— 40.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 61 

Yet. 1. — The character of Timothy. This young man was lo closely associated with 
the Apostle Paul, and with such complete sympathy shared his thoughts and his work, 
that he deserves a careful study, and his character will be found to have points of 
interest from which important practical lessons may be drawn. He is introduced to us 
in this passage, but we must assume the fuller Imowledge of him that is conveyed by 
historical references in the Acts and Epistles, and by the letters of counsel addressed 
by St. Paul to him personally. Of him Canon Parrar says, " He was, in fact, more than 
any other, the alter ego of the apostle. Their knowledge of each other was mutual ; 
and one whose yearning and often lacerated heart had such deep need of a kindred spirit 
on which to lean for sympathy, and whose distressing infirmities rendered necessary to 
him the personal services of some affeotit)nate companion, must have regarded the 
devoted tenderness of Timothy as a special gift of God to save him from being crushed 
by overmuch sorrow."" Timothy was brought to Christ by St. Paul's preaching, and 
the way in which the apostle reminds Timothy of his sufferings at Antiooh, Iconium, 
and Lystra (1 Tim. iii. 10, 11), suggests that Timothy was an actual " witness of St. 
Paul's injurious treatment ; and this at a time of life when the mind receives its deepest 
impressions from the spectacle of innocent suffering and undaunted courage. And it is 
far from impossible that the generous and warm-hearted youth was standing in that 
group of disciples who surrounded the apparently lifeless body of the apostle at the 
outside of the walls of Lystra." 

L The advantages of Timothy in a godly anoestet. It is certain that he was 
of k naturally amiable and affectionate disposition, and had this advantage from his 
birth. His mother, and her mother before her, were amiable and pious women, and 
transmitted their natural grace to this young man. It is often observed that children 
bear the disposition of their mothers ; and just such a gentle tone of character as 
Timothy showed has often been traceable to such a godly ancestry as he had. It may 
seem as if women had but little work to do; but what a noble mission is theirs if their 
patient culture of natural disposition gives their children the vantage-ground of amiable 
and attractive character I Few blessings resting on our life surpass that of the hereditary 
influence of good and godly ancestors. 

n. The advantage of a wise and oaebfui. eably tbajnino. "Of a child he 
had known the Scriptures." Show how this involved (1) an early awakening of the 
intelligence; (2) a guardianship of his youth and young manhood from folly and 
temptation ; (S) a preparedness for the fuller light and truth brought to him by the 
apostle; (4) a fitness for the Christian ministry to which he subsequently became 
devoted. It may also be shown how the infiuence of his early teachers tended to encourage 
(1) a studious habit ; (2) a cultivation of the passive graces almost to the disadvantage 
of the active. No more beautiful characters are found on earth than those who are 
naturally amiable, and whose amiability is sanctified by Divine grace. 

TTT. The ohabacteristio bxcbllbncbs of his sanctified manhood. Prom the 
Epistles written by St. Paul to him we gather what were the leading features of his 
character. 1. Great affectionateness of disposition, which made him cleave closely to 
any one he loved, and enabled him to make cheerful sacrifices for them. 2. Great 
steadfastness and trustworthiness, so that St. Paul found he could always rely on 
him. He acted from principle, not mere impulse ; and had a, strong sense of duty. 
3. A studious habit of mind, which, no doubt, made him valuable to St. Paul for his 
writing work, but became a snare to him, as unfitting him, to some extent, for public 
ministerial duties. Out of this, and the consequent frailty of his health, came a shyness 
and timidity which St. Paul urges him to overcome. It has been well said that Timothy 
is a beautiful example for young men, as " one of those simple, faithful natures which 
combine the glow of courage with the bloom of modesty." — B. T. 

Vers. 6 — ^10. — Hie leadings of the Holy Ohost. Apart from any doctrine of the 
personality and work of the Holy Spirit, there is a practical realization of his presence, 
and gracious working in us and by us, which is a source of continuous strength and 
comfort to the believer. It is this which we find illustrated in the passage now before 
us. The apostolic conception of the Holy Ghost has not been adequately studied apart 
from doctrinal theories. It is forgotten that the apostles were Jews, aud that help 
is the apprehensicm of this Divine gift and indwelling they must have soaght in 



6a THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. Toh. ivt 1— 4a 



their Old Testament associations. The Spirit of God in the prophets must h»Te been 
to tiiem the model and the foreshadowing of their larger gift. And this must hav« 
lieen their chief thought. All Christ's people are propliets ; the Spirit of God dwells 
in them all, and is the Inspiration of all they say and the Guide of all tliey do. Their 
idea of the old prophets is well expressed by St. Petsr (1 Pet. i. 21), " Holy men of 
God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost ; " and his wnrds precisely coQvey 
the idea which is to be entertained concerning the apostles and first iiiiNsiunaries. la 
the passage before us the Holy Ghost as the actual pieserit Guide of the apostles, 
directing them where they may go and where they may not go, is presented to us. 
Lives that are truly and fully consecrated to the seivice of the Lord Je.-us Christ are 
taken out of men's own control and committed to the charge of the Holy Spirit ; and 
those who realize such a full consecration find no practical difficulty in loUowing the 
Divine lead. Reviewing the incidents narrated in these verses, it will be seen that 
St. Paul expected no external revelations and no miracnlous guidances. In whatever 
way he realized the presence and the guidance of the Holy Spirit, it was a way in 
which we may realize it too ; and we may set forth two of the ways which are common 
features of Divine leading in all generations. 

L The Holy Ghost leads by inwaed impulses. Men's actions are decided upon 
more subtle motives and considerations than they usually imagine. Perhaps it would 
be found that very few of them depended upon deciKiona of the intellect. Some result 
from careful judgment ; some from self-will or passion ; some from emotion ; and into 
many men are led by the passing influences of the hour. Men are acted upon by many 
influences, which reach the mind, the heart, or the will. But the supreme inward 
influence is that of the Divine Spirit. He has access to every part of our inward being. 
He can (1) suggest thought for consideration ; (2) direct the judgment to wise deci- 
sions; (3) move the will to fitting resolves ; (4) tone the feelings to right harmonies; 
(5) and preside over the plans which are formed. It is by missing this relation of the 
iloly Ghost to the very springs of action within us, that men — Christian men — so often 
doubtingly ask, " But how can we know that we are doing what God would have us 
do ? " Openness to God's inward lead is surely followed by God's response in an 
inward leading; and when we are set right towards God we may feel sure that the 
ileiisions of our judgment and the resolves of our will are divinely controlled and 
ordered. St. Paul followed the inward feeling that he must not go into Mysia, etc. 

II. The Holt Ghost leads thhouoh providential circumstances. These will 
always be found to match the inward leadings, and they help to give us assurance that 
we are following in the way that we should go. Nothing is more surprising in our 
lives than the opening of providential doors, if we will but (1) wait, (2) watch, and 
(3) pray, the path will surely clear before us, and the Divine finger |>oint us, and tho 
Divine voice in circumstances say, " This is the way, walk ye in it." We may, on 
this matter, fall into errors which may seriously de[iress us. 1. We may mistake 
providences for accidents, and so fail to see God in them. 2. We may cherish the 
unbelieving notion that God does not work by t/iings. 3. We may take up notions 
oi natural law which deprive us of faith in God's living working. 4. And we may fail 
to wait for God's providential openings, and try to force our own way ; ao grieving 
that Holy Spirit which dwelleth in us. — R. T. 

Ver. 14. — Tht opened heart. " Whose heart the Lord opened." Describe the joy 
that St. Paul must have felt in this first sign of the Divine blessing attending his 
labours in a new sphere. If God was with him, opening the hearts of the peii|ile,'then 
his labour could not be in vain. Review the circumstances under which the apostle 
had been brought to Philippi — the night vision at Macedonia, etc. Explain thai 
Philippi was the first city, regarded geographically, not politically. Show the distinction 
between a synagogue and a proseucha. Commend St. Paul's sabbath habits ; and 
describe the scene at the river's side. It is interesting to note that the first Christian 
convert made in Europe was a woman, and a most important part of the work of 
Christianity in Europe has been the elevation of woman. Fixing attention on the 
sentence taken for a text, we notice — 

I. The bbinoino or a soul to Christ is the work of the Spirit. The Lord 
the Spirit, is the Opener of hearts. Such opening is the necessary beginning of th« 



OH. XVL 1—40.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 63 

work of grace Mother, friend, minister, have the simple power of agency ; none of 
them can, by any endeavours, reach to the heart and effect the saving change. Illus- 
trate by tlie way in which the florist produces new colours and new varieties of flower. 
He carefully puts the pollen grains on the top of the pistil, but ho cannot get them down 
the pistil to fructify the seeds below. The mysterious power of nature can alone 
accomplish that. Or illustrate by the peculiar kind of stone which may be smashed 
to pieces, but, if set ariyht to the blow, will split into useful slabs. God alone can set 
men right for the influence of the preached Word. It is our duty to bring saving truth 
and sinful souls together, but with the Lord aloue is the opening to receive. Show liow 
this may become an encouragement to all Christian workers who can see that God is 
working with them, and that in some of those whom they seek to bless the work of 
grace is evidently begun. 

II. God the Spibit has various wats op bringing souls to Christ. That 
which describes the work of grace in the heart of Lydia is not said of any one else. 
it was just the way in which the Spirit was pleased to deal with her. We find that in 
creation God always acts on fixed principles, but he is never trammelled by the necessity 
for expressing those principles in fixed forms. Landscapes, plants, trees, countenances, 
minds, aU take form upon definite and invariable vegetable, or animal, or mental laws ; 
but no two of them are alike in their form. Infinite diversity is quite compatible with 
vital unity. It is equally true in the new creation. God has laid down certain 
principles on which the return of souls to him must be arranged. There must be 
(1) penitence, (2) humility, (3) faith ; but the exact way in which these are to find 
expression is left undefined. Show, then, how improper it must be to make any one 
man's experience a necessary model for another man ; and consequently how injurious 
Christian biographies may become to young seekers after God, if such seekers take up 
the idea that they must think and feel and act precisely as others have done. The 
workings of the Divine Spirit in man are divinely free. 

III. The gentleness and the grace of Divine dealings abb been in the 
adaptation of methods of conversion to individuals. Some can only hear Sod 
when he speaks in the loud tones of earthquake, storm, or fire. But it is equally true 
that others pay no heed until there comes to them the " still small voice ; " and therefore 
the voices of God are so graciously varied to men. Illustrations of the variety and 
adaptation of God's methods may be taken from Scripture. Shepherds from the 
Bethlehem plains were guided to the infant Saviour by direction of the holy angels ; 
and star-gazing Magi were guided by the sign of the heavenly light. Godless and 
persecuting King Manasseh was humbled in the dust, put in a prison-house, and 
prepared by affliction to listen to his fathers' God. The eunuch of Queen Candace was 
led by Divine providence, and prepared by studious and meditative habit, to see in 
Jesus of Nazareth the Messiah-Saviour of Old Testament prophecy. St. Paul was brought 
to faith by a sudden and overwhelming revelation suited to convince a man of so 
impulsive a character. The jailor at Philippi was broken down by terror, and plucked 
from the very edge of a self-inflicted death. And Lydia felt the constraining power of 
the story of the Crucified. In each case the grace of Divine dealing may be shown in 
the adaptation to character and circumstances. 

Apply to : 1. Those who have long known the power of God opening their hearts to 
the truth. What is now needed is the full acce|itanoe of faith. 2. Those just conscious 
of new feelings and desires. Whence do they come ? They must be the Spirit working 
in you. Whither do they tend? Surely to the faith in Christ that saves. 3. Those 
■who fear that they have had no inward movings of the Spirit of God. Perhaps they 
are only unnoticed. Maybe that even now you are ready to hear of Christ, the living 
Saviour, who wants your love and trust. — B. T. 

V«. 17. — The witness of evil spirits to Christ. This poor slave-girl was subject to 
soma kind of convulsive or epileptic fits. Brain-disease, and the various forms of 
hysteria, were very imperfectly understood in the olden times. |' Nothing was less 
understood in antiquity than these obscure phases of mental excitation, and the strange 
flashes of sense, and even sometimes of genius, out of the gloom of a perturbed intellect, 
were regarded as inspired and prophetic utterances." General opinion associated such 
fbriaa of disease with possession of some spirit, good or bad j and it is cuiious to not* 



»4 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLE& [oh. xvl 1— 4a 

that the great physician Hippocrates attributed epileptic diseases to possession by Apollo, 
Cybele, Poseidon, etc. "At this period, and long before, people of this class — usually 
women — were regarded as prophetesses, inspired by the Pythian Apollo." "As a 
fortune-teller and diviner, this poor girl was held in high esteem by the credulous 
vulgar of the town." "The fact that St. Luke, who in his Glospel describes like 
phenomena as coming fi«m dcBmonia, evil spirits, unclean spirits, should here use 
this exceptional description, seems to imply that either this was the way in which the 
people of Philippi spoke of the maiden, or else that he recognized in her phenomena 
identical with those of the priestesses of Delphi, the wild distortions, the shrill cries, 
the madness of an evil inspiration. After the manner of sibyls, sorceresses, and 
clairvoyantes of other times, the girl was looked on as having power to divine and 
predict, and her wild cries were caught up and received as oracles." Remembering the 
well-established doctrine that the Bible is not given as a revelation of science, medical 
or other, we are able to recognize in this narrative simply the general opinion of the age 
concerning spirit-possessions, and we need not affirm that either our Lord, or the 
apostles, in dealing with such cases, seal for us the truth of this explnnation of them. 
In view of the common sentiment, it was not well that such persons should be allowed 
to witness to the Christian teachers. Their witness may have been true enough, but 
it was certainly liable to be misunderstood. No wholly satisfactory explanation has 
yet been given of the devil-possessions recorded in the New Testament, but this much 
we may fully admit — there was a remarkable accession of spiritual-evil force in the 
early Christian age. 

I. OuB Lord's treatmbmt or these phenomena. For the apostles followed the 
example of their Lord. One striking instance may be referred to (Matt. viii. 28 — 34). 
Our Lord (1) delivered the victims from the evil power ; making this an illustration of 
his moral and spiritual mission ; and (2) he resisted the association of his work with 
the witness of disease, mania, hysteria, or evil possession. It was necessary that every 
association of the conjurer should be dissociated from Christianity. Its appeal is to 
the sober reasonings of the mind and the normal and natural demands of the heart. 
The gospel is for men in their senses; and it properly refused then, and refiises 
still, all testimony from ecstasy, spiritualism, jugglery, oracle, or any unnatural forms 
of excitation. A truth may be sadly disgraced and misrepresented and prejudiced by 
its champions, though it does not therefore cease to be the truth. The witness of evU 
spirits too certainly bears for men an evil tone, so Christ refused to permit it. 

II. The apostles' treatment or these phenomena. Something may be due to 
St. Paul's personal annoyance at the constant repetition of these clamorous cries, which 
hindered his work, and very possibly disturbed him when talking in the proseucha. 
He may also have felt great pity for the poor suffering girl ; but no doubt his chief 
reason for putting forth the miraculous power entrusted to him was the misapprehension 
of his character and his work which her witness was likely to produce. Men might be 
led by her to think that he was possessed by some of the gods, or was a messenger of 
some of the idols, and so his work would he hindered, as it had been at Lystra. We 
must remember that the apostles' message was directly antagonistic to paganism and 
idolatry, and they were right in jealously guarding it from so perilous an association 
with it. Impress, in conclusion, that Christianity makes its appeal to the intelligence, 
conscience, and affections; and, then and now, it needs, and it will bear with, no 
■drentitious or questionable aids. — E. T. 

Ver. 25. — Christian triumph over circumstances. It is hardly possible to exaggerate 
in describing the sufferings of St. Paul and his companion on this occasion. The 
frailty of St. Paul's frame and the sensitiveness of his nervous constitution must be 
taken into account. Moreover, he appears to have hardly recovered from a very serious 
fllness. Canon Parrar says, " It was the first of three such scourgings with the rods 
•f Roman lictors which Paul endured, and it is needless to dwell even for a moment on 
its dangerous and lacerating anguish. We, in these modem days, cannot read without 
» shudder even of the flogging of some brutal garotter, and our blood would run cold 
with unspeakable horror if one such incident, or anything which remotely resembled 
it, had occurred in the life of a Henry Martyn or a Coleridge Patteson. But such 
jkarrors occurred eight times at least in the stoiy of one whose frame was more fri^ with 



OH, xvi. 1— 40.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 6£ 



years of gnfifering than that of our English missionaries." With their wounds untended, 
St. Paul and Silas were roughly thrust into the inner prison, a foul and loathsome 
dungeon, there to sit for hours with cramped limbs, shivering in the dampness and 
cold. Everything in their circumstances was against thera, and yet "with heroic 
cheerfulness they solaced the long black hours of midnight with prayer and hymns." 
They would doubtless sing well-known psalms, and selections may readily be made 
of such as would precisely suit their purpose. It is a remarkable incident. It is a 
triumph of character; a triumph of grace ; a sublime declaration of what Christ's 
realized presence can be to the suffering believer. He can give " songs in the night ' 
Making the incidents the subject of meditation, we observe — 

I. The unity of body and soul. A unity so complete that the one never cau 
suffer without the sympathetic suffering of the other. If the soul be depressed ui 
distressed, the nervous condition of the body is sure to resjjond. Vigorous bodily 
health can never be known when the mind is diseased or the soul overworn ami 
troubled. And, on the other hand, depression of soul comes oftentimes out of pain of 
body; and as long as the pain is limited the deiiressiun continues. It is singular to 
note that a prolonged little frailty is more trying to the spirit than a sudden and intense 
distress or pain. The soul seems to make a great effort to meet a great occasion, but 
fails to resist a continuous wearying influence. Illustration may be taken from various 
classes of physical and mental sufferers. It may be shown how often spiritual doulit 
and distress are found to be due to the sympathy between the body and the soul. 
And, in view of this, the infinite tenderne.ss of God's dealings with us may be urged. 
Most gracious God, "he knoweth our frame, he remembereth that we are dust I" 

II. The divoboe of body and soul. It can be said that "as the outward maa 
perishes, the inward man is renewed dsty by day." The records of the afflicted will bear 
out the statement that, under two circumstances or conditions, the soul may force itself 
freeof the body and rise above bodily reach iu the power of its own life. 1. When paiu 
is extreme. Illustrate from martyrology, or from records of great sufferers. There 
seems to be a possibility of pjun reaching such an extreme as to swing the body loose 
from the sou), and leave the soul free to sing. This we may, perhaps, see in the case of 
St. Paul ; the very intensity of his suffering in part explains his triumph. 2. When 
the soul-life is strong. Swelling into power under sudden impulse, as in the martyrs ; 
nourished into a holy fulness of vigour, as in the afflicted and diseased, and as ia 
St. Paul. 

III. The fulfilment of Divine promises in this mastery of the soul over 
THE body. Such promises in the Old Testament as, " When thou passest through the 
waters, I will be with thee," etc. And in the New Testament as, " Lo, I am with you 
alway, even unto the end of the world." Impress what a holy witness is made for 
God by all Christian sufferers who can win calmness, submission, and peace, and even 
sing their " songs in the night." — B. T. 

Ver. 30. — The jailor's question. It puts into a single sentence the great cry of the 
human soul. And yet see how difficult it is to get the soul to realize this its greatest 
need, and to utter this its greatest cry. 

L Many of you are not quite subb tbt that tou need to be saved. That 
is the gravest hindrance to the preaching of Christ to you. You attach very little 
meaning to the expression. You say, " Saved 1 Saved from what ? " You need to be 
saved from two things : (1) the penal consequences of your sin ; and (2) the moral 
power of your sinfulness. That is, you need to be saved from all that is gathered up 
i^ the word " hell," and from all that is gathered up in the word " self." You are not 
yoiL own ; you are a creature of God's. Your first duty is to love, trust, and obey GocL 
To help you God has made his will known with sanctions. Do you think he will fail 
to keep his sanctions? His "Law is holy, his commandment is holy, and just, and 
good ; " and " The soul that sinneth, it shall die." Moreover, you are as one stricken 
with • foul disease, the leprosy of sinfulness. You need to be saved from a foulness 
that pollutes you, from delusions which vainly seek to shatter yon, and from_ bondages 
which you are powerless to break. How can a man be just before God, a smful man 
be clean in the presence of his Maker V Verily you need to be saved. 

IL £VBN WHEN ABOUSED 10 AXXIETY, MANY TURN ANYWHERE FOB BKFUOS BATHE! 



*• TflHJ Atrre 0J<' 'l-UK AWSTliBS, LOH. xvu 1— 40. 

TBAK TO Cbbist. Many are like Lot — they will not do just what the angel-rapssenger 
oommands, tliey will seek for some little city near to wbich they may flee ; but there 
are no Zoars now ft* seeking sinners, they must flee to the mountain. Show some of 
the suhtle refuges in which awakened souls try to find shelter and rest ; e.g. waiting 
for deeper conviction ; intenser effort to make themselves good; deyotion to the exter- 
nalities of religion ; expecting to get more feeling, etc. 

m. Even when dbiven from othbb cohfidenoeb, akd led to Cbbist, xakt 
OP vs OAK BOABOELT BE SATISFIED WITH "ONLY BELIEVE." The Very Simplicity of 
the gospel terms of salvation we turn into a hindrance. Yet this is the gospel — God, 
of his free mercy, is willing to pardon, deliver, and receive all who seek mm, solely on 
the ground of what his Son has done for them, and is in relation to them. And God 
is pleased to make their justification depend on their helieving in his Son. " God hath 
given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son. He that hath the Son bath life," 
etc " By this Man is preached unto us the forgiveness of sins." Does any man now 
ask, " What must I do to he saved ? " The old answer is ever new, " Belle v« on the 
Lora Jesua Christ, and thou shalt he saved," — B. T. 

Vw. 31, — The faith that eaves. Introduce by a review of tke Incidents connected 
with the text. Both the prisoners and the jailor heard the songs and prayers of the 
apostles ; and the jailor had in all probability heard of the testimony of the Pythoness 
(ver. 17), so he was in a measure prepared for sudden conviction. There are historical 
bints of a serious earthquake occurring in this district at this time, and the effects 
described, — ^loosening doors from their jambs and staples from the walls, — are quite such 
as might be caused by earthquake. The anxiety of the jailor was aroused by the 
certainty that his own life would be forfeited if any of his prisoners had escaped. No 
allowance would be made for the extraordinary cause of such escape. Suicide was the 
Roman's way of escaping from what he esteemed to be disgrace. St. Paul's words, 
" We are all here," exactly met the occasion, and removed the man's fears. Then 
came a tumult of emotions. The man seemed to feel that God was there, and these 
men were his servants. In a sudden impulse he called for a light, and sprang in, and 
came trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas, and brought them out, and said, 
"Sirs, what must I do to be saved?" St. Paul sets before him Jesus, and says, 
" Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved." What is this faith that 
saves? We observe that our Lord always asked for it, or expected to find it, or 
reproached men for the lack of it. To the blind man he said, " Dost thou believe on the 
Son of God?" To the Syro-phoenician woman he said, " woman, great is thy faith." 
Of the centurion he said, "I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel." Of the 
men who let the sufferer down through the roofing, it is said, " When Jesus saw their 
faith." Of the people at Capernaum the sad remark is made, " He did not many mighty 
works there because of their unbeliefl'' And the apostles also required faith. "All 
that believed . . . had all things common." " If thou believest with all thine heart, 
thou mayest." " Faith cometh by hearing." " With the heart man believeth unto 
righteousness." "Tbe just shall live by faith." " Perceiving that he had faith to be 
healed." Faith is seldom won by mere descriptions of what faith is. Such descriptions 
too often only hinder and bewilder. Faith is most surely won by setting forth the 
great Object of faith, Jesus Christ, crucified and risen, and able to save unto the utter- 
moat. From the text we note two points. 

L The faith that saves is faith in a Febson. Illustrate from the appeal at 
Pentecost. " That same Jesus . . . both Lord and Christ " (ch. ii 36). The appli- 
cation of the sermon connected with the healing of the lame man is, " God, having 
raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you" (ch. iii. 26). Philip drew near to 
the eunuch, and " preached unto him Jesus." Peter said to the sick Mnea.a, " Jesus 
Christ maketh thee whole." To Paul of Tarsus the Person Jesus appeared and spoke. 
At Athens Paul declared that God would judge the world by one Man whom he 
had appointed. The object of saving faith is (1) not any scheme of doctrine ; 
(2) not any historical record; (3) not any finished work, conceived as distinct from 
a living person with a present power. A salvation that was a mental apprehension 
of a form of truth could not suit everybody. Trust in a person is possible to every- 
body. Bo Christ's own way of salvation, is this: "He that hath the Son of God 



OH. xvn. 1 — 34.] 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES, 



S7 



hath life." And the apostles' way is : " Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thoa 
shalt be saved." But it may be urged that we must know something about Jesua 
if we are to trust him. It may be answered that the essentials of a saving knowledge 
are very few and very simple. They are these : Jesus was the promised Messiah ; 
Jesus lived a life of innocence and self-denial ; Jesus died on the cross, a sacrifice for 
sin ; Jesus rose from the grave that he might have power to redeem; and Jesus lives, 
able to save us now. It is Christ himself lifted up who draws all men unto him. 

IL The faith that saves re faith with thb heart. Minds believe doctrines, 
hearts trust persons. It is necessary to distinguish carefully between faith in a thing 
and faith in a person. We believe things on reasons which can be submitted to the 
intellect We believe persons because we feel their goodness, their character. Illustrate 
by the trust of a child in a father ; of a patient in his physician ; of a wife in her 
husband. It is that kind of faith or trust which the Lord Jesus seeks to win as the 
condition in us to which he may respond with his saving grace. If we " know him " 
well, we shall find in him just the goodness which will make our faith in him easy. 
Do you say, " Is the Lord Jesus really one whom I may fully trust " ? See him taking 
the children in his arms. See him speaking so tenderly to the woman who was bathing 
his feet with her tears. See him talking to Mary in the Bethany home, whose "eyes 
were homes of silent prayer." See him standing np on the great day of the feast, and 
yearning over the multitude, and calling them to come to him, and drink, and live for 
ever. See him on his veiy cross praying for his murderers. Surely we can trust him. 
Onr hearts respond to such goodness. He is worthy of our love. Appeal that Jesus 
is really God manifest, Qod revealing himself to your souL He would win your love 
What will your resjponse to him be ? — B. T. 



BXPOSITIOIT. 



CHAPTER xvn. 



Ter. I. — Amphipolis. Tbla wm the 
ancient capital of that division of Mace- 
donia (Macedonia Prima) ; see ch. xvi. 12, 
note. It was situated on the Via Egnatia, 
thirty-four miles south-west from Philippi, 
and three miles from the .^gean Sea. It 
lay in a peninsula, surrounded on three 
sides by the Btrymon, whence its name, 
Amphipolis ; its modern name is Neokhoria, 
now a village. Its original name was 'Evt>4a 
'OSol, The Nine Ways. Originally a Thra- 
cian city, it wa« conquered by tlie Athenians, 
then by the Lacedcemonians, then fell under 
the dominion of Philip of Macedon, and 
finally, with the rest of Macedonia, became 
part of the Boman empire. ApoUonia ; now 
probably Polina, thirty miles due west of 
Amphipolis, on the Via Egnatia. Tlie 
modern track from Amphipolis to Thessa- 
lonica does not pass through Polina, but 
beneath tt. Ihessalonica ; on the Via 
EgnaLia, now the important seaport of 
SaUmiki, on the ^gean Sea or Archipelago, 
thirty-eight miles from ApoUonia, and con- 
taining about sixty thousand inhabitants. 
Its ancient name was Therma (whence the 
Thermean Bay), but it took the name of 
Thessalonioa under the Macedonian kings. 
It continued to grow in importance under 
the Bomana, and was the most populous 
eity of the whole of Macedonia It was the 
eapital of Macedonia Secunda under the 



division by Emilias Panlns (eh. zvL 12, 

note), and in the time of Theodosius the 
Younger, when Macedonia consisted of two 
provinces, it was the capital of Macedonia 
Prima. But from its situation and great 
commercial importance it was virtually the 
capital of "Greece, Macedonia, and lUy- 
ricum " (Howson, in ' Diet, of Geog.'). Its 
trade attracted a great colony of Jews from 
before the time of St. Paul, and through the 
Eoman and Greek and Turkish empires, 
down to the present day, when " one-half of 
the population is said to l>e of Israelitish 
race " (Lewin).' Thessalonioa had a terrible 
celebrity from the massacre of its inhabit- 
ants by order of the Emperor Theodosius, 
hi revenge for the murder of Botherio, his 
general, which led to the famous penance 
imposed upon the emperor by St. Ambrose 
(Gibbon, ' Decline and Fall,' ch. xxvii.). It 
was also taken three times in the Middle 
Ages: by the Saiacens, with fearful 
slaughter, A.D. 904 ; by the Normans, with 
scarcely less cruelty, a.d. 1185; and by the 
Turks, in 1430. Its ecclesiastical history 
under its archbishops is also of gieat interest 
(see ' Diet, of Greek and Eoman Geog.'). 
Where was a synagogue. It is needless to 
point out the exact agreement of this brief 

■ The numbers are variously give* •■ 
twenty thousand, thirty thousand, and 
thirty-five thousand (Conybeare and How- 
ion, vol. i. p. 848). 



58 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. xm. 1 — 34, 



statement with historical fact as pointed out 
above. There is said to have been twenty- 
two Jewish syna;j;oKue8 at Thessalonica 
after the expulsion of the Jews from SpHin 
in the fifteenth century, and the number at 
the present time is stated to be thirty-six. 
The existence of a synagogue at this time 
was the reason of St. Paul's visit and 
sojourn there. 

Ver. 2. — Custom for manner, \.\.; for 
three for three, A.V. ; frmn for out of, A.V. 
Eeasoned (see note on ver. 17). 

Ver. 3. — It beJwved the Christ to suffer, and 
to rise for Christ must needs have suffered, 
and risen, A. V. ; whom, said he for whom, 
A.V. ; 'proclaim for preach, A.V. ; the Chrid 
for Chrift, A.V. The line of reasoning 
adopted by St. Paul in his preacliing to the 
Thesaalonian Jews was the same as that of 
our Lord to the disciples and apostles on the 
day of his resurrection, as recorded in Luke 
xxiv. 26, 27 ; 44—47, and that of St. Peter 
(oh. ii. 22—36; iiL 18; iv. 11, etc.), 
and it is irresistible. The fulfilment of 
prophecies relating to the Messiah in the 
person of Je^us is like the fitting of a key 
to the intricate wards of the lock, which 
proves that it is the right key. The preacher 
of the gospel should carefully study and 
expound to the people the word of prophecy, 
and then show its counterpart in the suffer- 
ings and glory of Christ. This did St. Paul. 
Opening {dmi'oiyav) ; as our Lord had done 
[dffjyoLyev rjfiiv Tas ypa^ds, Luke xxiv. 32), the 
hidden meaning of the prophecies, and then 
alleging (iraparifle/ieras), setting before them 
the propositions which had thus been estab- 
lished. The process is described in Luke 
xxiv. 27 as interpreting ("expounded," 
A. v.). In this verse the opening was showing 
from the prophets that the Messiah was to 
die and rise again ; the alleging was that 
Jesus was that very Christ. 

Ver. 4. — Were persuaded for helieved, A.V. 
(^iweiffOricrav^, Consorted with ; Trpoffe/tXrjpcS- 
driffav, a word only found here in the New 
Testament, but, like so many other words 
in St. Luke's vocabulary, found also in Plu- 
tarch, in the sense of being "associated 
with," or " attached to " any one ; literally, 
to be assigned to any one by lot (comp. the 
use of the simple verb iK\rtf(iSi]ii.(v, Eph. 
i. H). Of the devout Greeks. Observe the 
frequent proofs of the influence the syna- 
gogues had in bringing heathen to the 
knowledge of the true God (see ver. 12 ; ch. 
X. 2 ; xi. 21 ; xiii. 48 ; xiv. 1, etc.). The chief 
women (juv ivpciTwv). So in ch. xiii. 50 rois 
irptiTovs Trjs TToAfcos means "the chief men 
of the city." And Luke xix. 49, oi iipurot 
ToS \aov are "tho chief of the people" 
(" the principal men," E.V.). It has been 
already remarked that St. Luke especi- 
ally notices the iustancei of female piety. 



In ver. 12 we have tUv tlitrxfilt^yr in 
the same sense as the tSv vpdray in thii 

verse. 

Ver. 5. — Jews for Jews which believed not, 
A.V. and T.B. ; being moved for moved, 
A.V. ; jealousy for envy, A.V. (see ch. xiii. 
45, note) ; vile fellows of the rabble for lewd 
fellows of the baser sort, A.V. ; gathering a 
crowd, set for gathered a company and set, 
A.V. ; the city for all the city, A.V. ; assaulting 
. . . they (or assaulted . . . and, A.\.; forth 
for out, A.V. The house of Jason ; where 
it appears from ver. 7, as well as from this 
verse, Paul and Silas were lodging. If, as 
is very probable, the Jason here mentioned 
is the same person as the Jason of Rom. 
xvi. 21, it would seem that he joijied the 
apostle, either at this time or on his visit 
to Macedonia mentioned in ch. xx. 3, and 
went with him to Corinth, where the 
Epistle to tlie Romans was written. He 
was a relation, irvyyeviis, of St. Paul's, and 
doubtless a Jew. Jason was a Romanized 
form of the name Jesus, or Joshua, as we 
see in the case of the high priest, the 
brother of Onias (Josephus, ' Ant. Jud.,' 
xii. V. 1). It was borne also by Jason of 
Oyrene, the Jewish historian (2 Maco. ii 
28), and by another mentioned in 1 Maco. 
viii. 17, etc. St. Luke seems to introduce 
Jason as a well-known person. 

Ver. 6. — Dragged for drew, A.V. ; before 
for unto, A.V. Certain bretluren; some of 
the Thessalonian Christians who happened 
to be in the house of Jason. The rulers of 
the city (rofis iroXtrdpxas, and ver. 8). This 
is a remarkable instance of St. Luke's 
accuracy. The word is unknown in Greek 
literature. But an inscription on an ancient 
marble arch, still standing in Thessalonica, 
or Saloniki, records that Thessalonica was 
governed by seven politarchs (see the in- 
scription in Conybeare and Howson, vol. L 
p. 360). Thessalonica was a Greek city, 
governed by its own laws. Hence the 
mention of the Sriiios in ver. 5. The polit- 
aichs also were Greek, not Roman, magis- 
trates Crying ; fioavTes, often followed by 
/^f7a^p ipavf (ch. viii. 7 ; Mark XV. 34, etc.), 
but whether so followed or not, always 
meaning " a loud cry " or " shout " (oh. xxi. 
34; Luke iii. 4, etc.). Turned the world 
upside down ; orao-TOTiJM is used in the New 
Testament only by St. Luke and St. Paul 
(ch. xxi. 38 ; Gal. v. 12) ; to unsettle or dis- 
turb; i.e. to meike people literally ayaffri- 
Tous, homeless, outcasts, from their former 
settlements, or, metaphorically, unsettled in 
their allegiance to their civil or spiritual 
rulers, is the meaning of the word. In the 
mouth of St. Paul's accusers it contains a 
distinct charge of sedition and disobedience 
to the Eomiin law. The world {rijv oiKov/ie- 
vrjy) ; the Roman empire (Luke iL 1), viewed 



nu. XVII. 1—34] 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES, 



59 



as coextensive with the habitable globe (see 
ver. 31 ; ch. six. 20 ; li. 28, note). 

Ver. 7. — Act for do, A.V. Eeoeived; f«. 
as the word uiroSt'xo/ioi always means "re- 
ceived as a guest " (Luke x. 38 ; xix. 6 ; 
Jas. ii. 25, etc.). Hence the substantive 
4iroSox^, an entertainment or reception. 
The insinuation is that, by harbouring these 
seditious men, Jason liad made himself a 
partner in their sedition. That there is 
another king, etc. (oomp. John xix. 12, 15). 

Ver. 8. — Multitude for peoph, A.V. (rhr 
iSxAoi', not Sriiiov), 

Ver. 9. — From for of, A.V. ; the rest for of 
the other, A.V. The rest, or others, are of 
course the " certain brethren " of ver. 6. 

Ver. 10. — Beraea for Berea, A.V. ; when 
they were amie for coming, A.V. Bercea. In 
the third division of Macedonia, about sixty 
miles from Thessalonica ; its modern name 
is Verria. Went into the synagogue. No 
amount of ill usa^e from the Jews could 
weaken St. Paul's love for "his brethren, 
his kinsmen according to the flesh " (Rom. 
ix. 3) ; and no amount of danger or suffering 
could check his zeal in preaching the gospel 
of Christ. 

Ver.ll. — NowtheeefoT these, A.V.; examin- 
ing for and searched, A.V. ; these for those, 
A.V. Note tlie immense aidvantage which 
the preachers and the hearers had in the 
previous knowledge of the Scriptures gained 
by the Berceans in the synagogue. Note 
also the mutual light shed by the Old and 
New Testaments the one upon the other. 

Ver. l'2.-^Many . . . therefore for therefore 
many, A.V. ; the Greek women of honourable 
estate for honourable women whuA were 
Greeks, A.V. Honourable ; evaxw^'"'"'' *■ 
ch. xiii. 50, where it is coupled with rohs 
Trpdrovs Trjs iriiAfoJs (see ver. -4 ; comp. Mark 
XV. 43). Meyer thinks that it is meant that 
the men were Greeks too ; but this is un- 
certain. The only Beroean convert whose 
name we know is Supater (ch. xx. 4), or 
Sosipater, who is probably the same (Rom. 
xvi. 21). If so, he was apparently a Jew, 
whose Hebrew name may have been Abishua. 

Ver. 18. — Proclaimed for preached, A.V. ; 
Bercea also for Berea, A V. ; likeviise for also, 
A.V. ; stirring up and troubling the multi- 
tudes for and stirred up the people, A.V. 
and T.B. 

Ver. 14. — Forth for away, A.V. ; as far as 
for as it were (ews for is), A.V. and T.B. ; 
and for but, A.V. and T.R. ; Timothy for 
Timotheus, A.V. As far as to the sea. 
If the reading of the T.B. is right, as 
merely indicates the direction. laterally, 
is liA, K.r.K., means " with the thought of 
going to the sea," but thence, by a com- 
mon usage, it describes the action without 
reference to the thought. The English 
phiase, " they made for the sea," ia nearly 



equivalent. The object of going to the sea, 
seventeen miles from Bercea, was to take 
ship for Athens. This he probably did 
eitlier at Pydna or at Dium. Silas and 
Timothy. Whether Timothy left Pliilippi 
with St. Paul, or whether, as is not im- 
probable, he joined him at Thessalonica, 
cannot be decided. Anyliow, Paul now left 
Silas and Timothy to watch over the Thes- 
salonian converts. 

Ver. 15. — But for and, A.V. ; as far as 
for unto (Has), A.V. ; Timothy for Timotheus, 
A.V. ; that they should come for for to come, 
A,V. They that conducted, etc. (oi Ka9t- 
•TToii/Tcs). The verb KoBiaTrnju, in its primary 
sense, means to " place any one " in a given 
spot ; and thence secondarily, to " conduct " 
or " escort " any one to a place, to " set him 
down " at such a place. So Homer (' Odyssey,' 
xiii. 294) uses the word of transporting any 
one by ship to this or that town (quoted by 
Meyer). There is no indication in the word 
of St. Paul's defect of sight or infirmity. 
Receiving a commandment, etc. We learn 
here that St. Paul sent a message to Silas 
and Timothy to join him at Athens as 
quickly as possible, and at ver. 16 that he 
waited at Athens for them. From 1 Thess. 
iii. 1, 2, we learn that he sent Timothy from 
Athens back to Thessalonica ; and from 1 
Thess. iii. 6 we learn that Timothy came to 
St. Paul at Corinth (where the Epistle to the 
Thessalonians was written) from Thessa- 
lonica. We also learn from 1 Thess. i. 1 
that Silas and Timothy were both with him 
at Corinth when he wrote the Epistle, and 
from oh. xviii. 5 that they had both come 
to Corinth from Macedonia, some weeks 
after Paul himself had been at Corinth (ch. 
xviii. 4, 5). All these statements harmonize 
perfectly (as Paley has shown) on the sup- 
position that Silas and Timothy did join St. 
Paul at Athens ; that for the reasons given 
in 1 Thess. iii., when he was unable to 
return to Tliessalonica himself, as he much 
wished, he sent Timothy back to Thessa- 
lonica, and Silas probably to Beroea; and 
that Silas and Timothy came together from 
Macedonia to Corinth, where St. Paul had 
gone alone ; where it may be noted, as an- 
other undesigned coincidence, that whereas 
the First Epistle to the Thessalonians implies 
that Silas did not go to Thessalonica (1 TJiess. 
iii. 2), ch. xviii. 5 does not say that Silas 
and 'Timothy came from Thessalonica, but 
from Macedonia. The inaccuracy supposed 
by Meyer (on this verse) is purely imaginary. 
Ch. xviii. 5 does not say that Silas and 
Timothy " only joined Paul at Corinth," but 
merely relates some change in St. Paul's 
procedure consequent upon their joining 
him at Corinth. Alford (on this verse), in 
saying that Paul sent Timothy from BeroeE^ 
not from Athens, is guided by his ovn idea 



60 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLEa 



[oh, XTn. 1 — 84 



of what IB probable, not by the letter of the 
narrative (see fuitlier note on eh. xviii. 5). 

Ver. 16. — Provoked within tat stirred in,, 
A.V. (Trnprn^iviTo : see oh. xv. 29, note); 
as he beheld for when he saw, A.V. ; full of 
idols for whdlly given to idolatry, A.V. The 
Greek KaTeiSaiAos occurs only here, either in 
the New Testament or elsewhere. But the 
analogy of otherwords similarly compounded 
fixes the meaning " full of idols " — a de- 
scription fully borne out by Pausanias and 
Xeiiophou and others (Steph., ' Thesaur. ; ' 
Meyer, etc.). 

Ver. 17. — So he reasoned for therefore dis- 
puted he, A.V. ; and the devout for and with 
the devout, A.V. ; market-place every day for 
market daily, A.V. Beasoned (SieXeyero, 
as in ver. 2 ; ch. xviii. 19 and xxiv. 12). 
"Disputed" gives the force of SiaK4yecreai 
better than " reiisoiicd," because the word 
in Plato, Thucydides, Xenophou, iElian, 
etc., is especially used of discussions and 
arguments in which two persons or more 
take part. AioAe/cToi is "discussion;"^ 
SmXfKriirn is the art of drawing answers 
from your opponent to prove your conclusion ; 
Siixoyos is a " dialogue " (see, however, ch. 
XX. 7). The market-plaoe. " The celebrated 
'A-yopa, . . . not far from the Pnyx, the 
Acropolis, and the Areopagus, . . . ricli in 
noble statues, the central seat of commercial, 
forensic, and philosophic intercourse, as well 
as of the busy idleness of the loungers" 
(Meyer, in loe.). 

Ver. 18. — And certain also of the Epicurean 
and Stoic philosophers for then certain 
philosophers of the Epicureans, and of the 
Stoicks, A.V. ; would for will, A.V. ; preached 
for preached unto them, A.V. and T.R. The 
Epicureans (so called from Epicurus, their 
founder) and the Stoics (so called from the 
aToi, the colonnade or piazza where Zeno 
their founder taught) were the most 
numerous sects at Athens at this time ; and 
their respective tenets were the most 
opposite to the doctrines of the gospel. 
Encountered him ; iriy^PaWop. In ch. iv. 15 
it is followed by vpSs, and is properly 
rendered " con firred ; " here it is followed 
by the dative, and may be understood to 
mean "disputed" (avix^aXKew \iyovs). It 
may, however, not less properly be taken in 
the sense of a hostile encounter of words, 
as Luke xiv. 31, and frequently in classi- 
cal Greek. This babbler {a-wepfioXAyas) ; 
literally, a picker-up of seeds, applied to a 
crow (Aiistoph., 'Aves,'232,579). Plutarch 
too ('Demet.,' 28) has irirep/iox6yi>i SpyiBes, 
birds picking up seeds. Hence it is used 
of idle hangers-on in the markets, who 
get a livelihood by whnt they can pick up, 
and so generally of empty, worthless fellows. 
Hence it is further applied to those who 
pick up scraps of knowledge from one or 



another and "babble them indifferently la 
all companies " (Johnson's ' Dictionary,' 
under " Babble "). A setter forth of strange 
gods. There does not seem to be the least 
ground for Ohrysostom's suggestion that 
they took Ana^tasis (the Resurrection) for 
the name of a goddess. But the preaching 
of Jesus the Son of God, himself risen from 
the dead (ver. 31), and hereafter to be the 
Judge of quick and dead at the general 
resurrection, was naturally, to both Stoics 
and Epicureans, a setting forth of strange 
gods. HeVa Scu/iJvia are "foreign deities," 
or "daemons," inferior gods. The word 
KaTayye\eis, a setter forth, does not occur 
elsewhere. But the nearly identical word 
KaTdyye\os is used by Plutarch. 

Ver. 19.— TooJ; hold of for took, A.V. ; tht 
Areopagus for Areopagus, A.V. ; teaching U 
for doctrine . . . is, A.V. ; which is spoken 
hy thee for whereof thou speakest, A.V. Took 
hold of him. The word iviXi^iaBM meaua 
simply to "take hold of" the hand, the 
hair, a garment, eto. The context alone 
decides whether this taking hold is friendly 
or hostile (for the former sense, see Matt 
xiv. 31 ; Mark viii. 23; Luke ix. 47; xiv. 4; 
ch. ix. 27 ; xxiii. 19, eto. ; for the latter, 
Lute xxiii. 26; ch. ivi. 19; xviii. 17; 
xxi. 30, 33). Here the sense is well expressed 
by Grotius (quoted by Meyer): "Taking 
him gently by the hand." The Areopagus. 
Mars' Hill, close to the Agora ("th« 
market ") on the north, was so called from 
the legend that Mars was tried there before 
the gods for the murder of a son of Neptune 
It is (says Lewin) a bare, rugged loc]^ 
approached at the south-eastern comer by 
steps, of which sixteen still remain perfect 
Its area at the top measures sixty paces by 
twenty-four, within which a quadrangle, 
sixteen paces square, is excavated and 
levelled for the court. The judges seem to 
have sat on benches tier above tier on the 
rising rock on the north side of the quad- 
rangle. There were also seats on the east 
and west sides, and on the south on either 
side of the stairs. The Areopagus (the 
upper court) was the most august of all tlie 
courts at Athens. Socrates was tried and 
condemned before it for impiety. On the 
present occasion, there is no appearance of 
judicial proceedings, but they seem to have 
adjourned to the Areopagus from the Agora, 
as to a convenient place for quiet discussion. 

Ver. 20. — Strange things. •S.eviieiv, in 
this nse of it, means to aot or play the 
foreigner, to imitate the manners and 
language and appearance of a foreigner 
ii^vos), just as 'lovSaiC^iv, 'EWnrtCeiv, 'At* 
-rixiCeiv, etc., mean to Judaize, Hellenize, 
Alticize, etc. Here, then, the Athenians say 
that St. Paul's doctrines have a foreign air, 
do not look like native Athenian specuutjou. 



SB. xvn. 1— 34.J THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES, 



61 



Ver. 21. — NoK for /or, A.V.; the gtrangers 
Mjouirning there for strangers which were 
tliere, A.V. Spent their time. This gives 
the general sense, but the margin of the 
R.T., had leisure for nothing else, is much 
more accurate. EuKatpelv, which is not con- 
Bideied good Greek, is only used by Poly Hub, 
and in the sense eitljer of "being wealthy" 
or of " having leisure " or " opportuuity." 
In the New Testament it occurs in Mark vi. 
31 and 1 Cor. xvi. 12. Some new thing. So 
Cleou (Thucyd., iii. 38) rates the Athenians 
upon their being entirely guided by words, 
and constantly deceived by any novelty of 
speech (itoii'iiTTjTos \ti701;). And DemostI.enes 
in his first 'Philippic' (p. 43,7), inveiglia 
against them because, when they ougiit to be 
up .ind doing, they went about the Agora, 
asking one another, "Is there any news? 
(Aeyeral ti Kaivilv;)." The comparative 
Kaivdrepov is a little stronger than xaivivi 
"the very last news" (Al oid). 

Ver.22. — And for ihen, A.V.; the Areopagiu 
for Mars' hill, A.V. ; in all things I perceive 
that for I perceive that in all things, A.V. ; 
tomewliat for too, A.V. In the midst is 
simply a local description. He stood in the 
midst of the excavated quadrangle, while 
his hearers probably sat on the seats all 
round. Ye men of Athens. The Demosthenes 
sf the Church uses the identical address — 
AvSpes 'ABrivaioi — which the great orator 
used in his stirring political speeches to the 
Athenian penple. Somewhat superstitious. 
There is a difference of opinion among 
commentators whether these words imply 
praise or blame. Ciirysostom, followed by 
many others, takes it as said in the way 
of encomium, and understands the word 
5eifrtSaifiov€ffTepovs as equivalent to fv\a- 
PeiTTfpovs, very religious, more than com- 
monly religious. Ami so Bishop Jacobson 
(' Speaker's Commentary '), who observes 
that the substantive SfiffiSai/iovia is used 
five times by JosephuB, and always in the 
sense of "religion," or "piety." On the 
other hand, the Vulgate {superstitiosiores), 
the English Versions, Erasmus, Luther, 
Calvin, etc., take the word in its most 
common classical sense of "superstitious;" 
and it weighs for something towards 
determining St. Luke's use of the word 
that Plutarch uses SeicriSaiiiovta always in a 
bad sense, of superstition, as in his life of 
Alexander and elsewhere, and in his tract 
* De Superstitione ' (^AeunSaifiovia). Perhaps 
the conclusion is that St. Paul, having his 
spirit stirred by seeing the city full of 
idols, determined to attack that spirit in 
the Athenian people which led to bo much 
idolatry ; which lie did in the speech which 
follows. But, acting with his usual wisdom, 
he used an inoffensive term at the outset of 
bis speech. He could not mean to praise 



them for that Setffiiai/iovta which it was th* 
whole object of his sermon to condemn. 
Josephus ('Oontr. Apion.,' i. 12) calls the 
Athenians roiis (vffe^itrr&TovsTav 'E\Kiivav, 
the most religious of all Greeks (Howson). 

Ver. 23. — Passed along for passed by, A.V. ; 
observed the objects 0/ your worship fer 
beheld your devotions, A.V. (t4 cf0da-iiaTa 
6fiai> : see 2 Thess. ii. 4) ; also an altar for 
an altar, A.V. ; an for the, A.V. ; what for 
whom, A.V. and T.R. ; worship in ignorance 
for ignorantly worship, A.V. ; this for him, 
A.V. and T.K. ; set forth for declare, A,V. 
AN UNKNOWN GOD. There is no direct 
and explicit testimony in ancient writers to 
the existence of any one such altar at 
Athens, but Pausanias and others apeak of 
altars to " unknown gods," as to be Been in 
Athens, which may well be understood of 
several such altars, each dedicated to an un- 
known god. One of these was seen by St. 
Paul, and, with inimitable tact, made the 
text of his sermon. He was not preaching 
a foreign god to them, but making known 
to them one whom they had already in- 
cluded in their devotions without knowing 
him. 

Ver. 2i.—The God for God, A.V. (surely 
a change for the worse) ; he being Lord for 
seeing that he is Lord, A.V. Made with 
hands (xeipoiroi^rois) ; see the same phrase 
in Mark xiv. 5, 8 ; oh. vii. 48 ; Heb. ix. 11. St. 
Paul applies it, too, to the circumcision made 
with the knife, as distinguished from that 
wrought by tlie Holy Spirit (Eph. iii. 11). 
It is frequent in the LXX. It is a striking 
instance of St. Paul's unlinching boldness 
and fidelity to the truth, that he should 
expose the hollowness of heathen worship, 
standing within a stone's throw of the Par- 
thenon and the temple of Theseus and the 
countless other temples of gods and god- 
desses, which were the pride and glory of 
the Athenian people. Note how be begins 
his catechetical instruction to the Athe- 
nians with the first article of the Creed : 
" I believe in God the Father almighty, 
Maker of heaven and earth." 

Ver, 25. — Is he served by for ia worshipped 
with, A.V. ; he himself for he, A.V. Served 
by men's hands. ©cpoTreueToi, is "waited 
upon," as a man is waited upon by his ser- 
vant, who ministers to his wants; eepdwav 
and Sepairevriis are " an attendant." So in 
Hebrew : lay, to serve God ; na^, a servant 
of God; iTibj) service as of the Levites in 

the temple, etc. Anything ; or as some take 
it, as if he needed anybody's help or service. 
The argument, as ChryBostom suggests, is 
similar to that in Ps. 1. 8 — 12. 

Ver. 26. — He made for hath made, A.V. ; 
of one for of one blood, A.V. and T.K. ; every 
nation for all nations, A.V. ; havi'^ detei-- 



n 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[os. xvn. 1— S4. 



mined fheir appointed seasont for and hath 
determined the times before appointed, A.y. 
From the unity of God Paul deduces the 
unity of the human race, all created by 
God, all sprung from one ancestor, or one 
blood (whichever reading we take), and so 
' not to have their several national gods, but 
all to be united in the worship of the one 
true and living God, the Father of them all. 
It may be remarked by the way that the 
languages of the earth, differing like the 
skins and the features of the different races, 
and corresponding to those various bounds 
assigned by God to their habitations, yet 
bear distinct and emphatic testimony to 
this unity. They are variations, more or 
less extended, of the speech of man. Bounds 
of their habitation ; ras dpoBea-ias, k.t.K. : tlje 
word only occurs here ; elsewhere, though 
Yarelv, ra opoBeaia. 

Ver. 21.— God for the Lord, A.V. and 
T.R. (Meyer does not accept this reading) ; 
ia for be, A.V. ; each for every, A .V. If haply 
they might feel after him. VriKafda is " to 
touch, feel, or handle," as Luke xxiv. 39 ; 
Heb. xii. 18 ; 1 John i. 1. But it is espe- 
cially used of the action of the blind grop- 
ing or feeling their way by their hands in 
default of sight. So Homer describes Poly- 
phemus as x^P"^ i|'»|Aa((>(i<oj', feeling his way to 
the mouth of the cave with his hands after he 
was blinded by Ulysses (' Odyssey,' ix. 416). 
And in the LXX. of Deut. xxviii. 29 we read, 
"£(77? i|'i}Aa0a;i/ fiecnjfi^pias u>s €% tis yp7}\a(piiaai 
rv<p\hs iv T$ o-kSth, " Thou shalt grope at 
noonday as the blind gropeth in darkness." 
The teaching, therefore, of the passage is 
that, tliough God was very near to every 
man, and had not left himself without 
abundant witness in his manifold gifts, yet, 
through the blindness of the heathen, they 
had to feel their way uncertainly toward 
God. In this fact lies the need of a revela- 
tion, as it follows ver. SO, etc. And hence 
part at least of the significanoe of such 
passages as, " Ye were sometimes darkness, 
but now are ye light io the Lord"(Eph. 
V. 8) ; " Who hath called you out of dark- 
ness into his marvellous light " (1 Pet. ii. 9 ) ; 
" God who commanded the light to shine 
out of darkness hath shined in our hearts to 
give tire light of the knowledge of the glory 
of God in the face of Jesus Christ " (2 Cor. 
iv. 6), and many more like passages. 

Ver. 28. — Even for also, A.V. For in him, 
oto. This is the proof that we have not far 
to go to find God. Our very life and 
being, every movement we make as living 
persons, is a proof that God is near, nay, 
more than near, that he is with us and 
round about us, quickening us with his 
own life, upholding us by his own power, 
sustaining the being that we derive from 
him (oomp. Ps. oxxxix. 7, etc.; xxiii. 4). 



Certain even of your own poets ; viz. Antu 
of Tarsus (270 B.C.), who has the exact 
words quoted by St. Paul, and Cleanthes of 
Assos (300 B.C.), who has 'E/c aoS yap yevos 
iafiiv. As he had just defended himself from 
the imputation of introducing foreign godi 
by referring to an Athenian altar, so now, 
for the same purpose, he quotes one of their 
own Greek poets. (For the statement that 
man is the offspring of God, comp. Luke 
iii. 38.) 

Ver. 29. — Being then for forasmuch then 
as we are, A.V. ; device of man for man't 
deviee, A.V Graven by art, etc. In the 
Greek the substantive x'^P'^W^t"! graven 
images, things engraven, is in apposition 
with the gold, silver, and stone, and a 
further description of them. Art, Texvv, is 
the manual skill, the device ; evSinrims is the 
genius and mental power which plans the 
splendid temple, or exquisite sculpture, or 
the statue which is to receive the adora- 
tion of the idolater. Compare the withering 
sarcasm of Isaiah (xliv. 9 —17). 

Ver. 30. — The times of ignorance therefore 
God overlooked for and the times of this 
ignorance God winked at, A.V. ; he com- 
mandetli for commandeth, A.V. ; men for all 
men, A.V. ; that they should all everywhere 
repent for everywhere io repent, A.V. and 
T.B. The times of ignorance ; perhaps with 
reference to ver. 23, and also implying that 
all the idolatry, of which he had spoken 
in ver. 29, arose from ignorance. God over- 
looked ; or, as it is idiomatically expressed 
in the A.V., winked at; made as if he did 
not see it ; " kept silence," as it is said in 
Ps. 1. 21 ; made no move to punish it. 
That they should all everywhere. The 
gospel is for the whole world : " Their 
sound went into all the earth, and their 
words unto the ends of the world " (Bom. 
X. 18) ; "Preach the gospel to every creature" 
(Mark xvi. 15). Eepent. T.ie key-note of the 
gospel (Matt. iii. 2 ; iv. 17 ; ch. xx. 21). 

Ver. 31. — Inasmuch as for because, A.V. 
and T.E. ; the man for that man, A.V. He 
hath appointed a day. Hitherto the Athe- 
nians seem to have listened with interest 
while St. Paul was, with consummate skill, 
leading them onwards from the doctrines 
of natural religion, and while he was laying 
down speculative truths. But now they 
are brought to a stand. They might >• 
longer go on asking, Ti xaivdv ; A day fixed 
by God, they were told, was at hand, in 
which God wovdd judge the world in 
righteousness, and in which they themselves 
would be judged also. And the certainty 
of tills was made apparent by the fact that 
he who was ordained to be Judge was raised 
from the dead, and so ready to commence 
the judgment The time for immediate 
action was come; God's revelation had 



OH. xvn. 1 — 34.] 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



63 



reached them, nie man (i,vSpt). So ch. ii. 22, 
'Ifjtrovv rhif tJa^wpatov, &vSpa airh rnv ®eov 
imoSeSeiyjifvov, k.t.A. And so in John v. 
27 our Lord himself says of himself that 
the Father save him authority to execute 
judgment " because he is the Son of man ; " 
and in Matt. xsvi. 24, " Hereafter shall ye 
see the Son of man sitting on the right 
hand of power." (For the connection of 
thejudfrment with Chiiot's resurreotlun, see 
especially ch. x. 40 — i2.) So too the Creeds. 

Ver. 82. — Nmc for and, A.V. ; hut for 
and, A.V.; concerning tM» yet again for 
again of this matter, A.V. Some mocked. 
Athenian scepticism could not accept so 
spiritual a truth as the resurrection of the 
dead; and Athenian levity of purpose 
deferred to another day the decisive step 
of accepting the salvation of the risen 
Saviour, just as it had deferred resistance 
to Philip of Maopdon till their liberties 
were gone and their country enslaved. 
(For "We will hear thee again," comp. 
ch. zxiv. 25.) 

Ver. S3.— Thus for $o, A.V. and T.R.; 
went out for departed, A.V. The meaning 
is that he left the assembly in the 
Areopagus. At ver. 22 we were told that 
he stood ^v itffft^ Tov 'Apeiou -rrdyov (where 
see note) ; now he went out ix ft,e<rov avrav, 
leaving them still sitting on their benches, 
while he walked down the steps to the city 
again from the place where he stood. 

Ver. 34. — But for howbeit, A.V. ; whom 
alio tat the which, A.V. Sionysius the 
Areopagite. The earliest notice we have of 



him in ecclesiastical writers is the well- 
known one of Eusebius, ' Eccl. Hist.,' iil. iv., 
in which he says, "We Mre told by an 
ancient writer, Dionysius the pastor of the 
diocese of Corinth (ob. 178 a.d.), that his 
namesake Dionysius the Areopagite, of 
whom St. Luke says in the Acts that he 
was the first who embraced the fuith after 
St. Paul's discourse in the Areopagus, be- 
came the first bishop of the Church in 
Athens." Eusebius repeats the statement 
in his long notice of Dionysius of Corinth, 
in iv. xxiii. Other uncertain traditions 
speak of him (Suidas) as one who rose to 
the height of Greek erudition, and as having 
Buffered a cruel martyrdom (Niceph., iii. 11). 
" The works which go by his name are 
undoubtedly spurious " (Alford). Damaris ; 
" wholly unknown " (Meyer), but certainly 
not the wife of Dionysius, as Chrysostom 
(' De Sacerd.,' iv. 7) and others have thought 
(' Dictionary of the Bible '). And others with 
them. These would seem to be but few 
from St. Luke's way of mentioning them, 
and from our hearing nothing more in the 
Acts about the Church at Athens. It is 
remarkable that this small number of con- 
verts coincides with the weakness of the 
synagogue at Athens — too weak to persecute, 
and too weak to make proselytes among the 
Greeks of Athens. It seems clear that no- 
where else had St. Paul won so few souls 
to Christ. And yet God's Word did not 
return to him wholly void. The seed fell 
on some good ground, to bring forth fruit 
onto eternal life. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — ^16. — The strange alliance. Among the hindrances to the progress of the 
gospel in the world we have often to notice the combination of the most discordant 
elements for the purpose of obstruction. Pilate and Herod were made friends together 
when they united in crucifying the Lord of glory. When the chief priests and Phari- 
sees, in their blind hatred of the Lord Jesus Christ, sought his death, they did not 
scruple to invoke the aid of the Eoman power, the object of their bitterest hatred and 
continual resistance, and to profess an entire devotion to that detested rule. " We 
have no king but CKsar." So in politics, men of the most opposite principles often 
combine to crush the object of their common dislike. In religion, too, we see extreme 
parties joining hands to discomfit a third party to which they are equally opposed. In 
all such combinations there is want of uprightness and truth. There is a culpable 
indifference to the nature of the weapons which men use to compass their own end. 
There is a clear evidence that it is not the cause of righteousness and of (Jed's truth 
that men are seeking to promote, but some end of their own. When these combina- 
tion* take place to oppose the progress of Christian truth, though they may be formid- 
able for a time, they carry with them the evidences that they are from benenth and 
will not prevail. The Church of God need not be afraid of them. The Jews of Thessa- 
lonioa combined with the heathen rabble of their town, under a pretence of loyalty to 
Cjesar, to silence Paul and Silas. When they fled they pursued them to Bercea, and 
drove them thence onwards to Athens and Corinth. But the breath intended to extin- 
guish the flame did but make it blaze up from place to place. So will it be with every 
conspiracy to put out the light of Christ. Philosophy and sensuality, science and 



64 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [««• ^t^tt 1— 8^ 

lawlessness, atheism and superstition, may join hands and combine to remove the 
candlestick of God's Church j it will but shed its light brighter and wider in the 
places where God wills it to shine, until at last the whole earth shall be filled with 
the knowledge of God's glory, as the waters cover the sea. 

Vers. 16 — 34. — The cross of Christ in the metropolis of art and philnsophy. rhere is 
a singular interest in this first encuunter of the gospel with the art and philoscphy of 
Athens, and it is instructive to note the attitude taken by the great preacher in the 
encounter. Whether Sr. Paul had artistic taste we have no means of knowing. But 
probably, as a devout Jew, seeing that sculpture was so largely employed in the images 
of the gods and the deified emperors, his eye would not have been trained to look with 
pleasure even upon the master-pieces of Grecian art. In like manner Greek architecture 
was mainly devoted to glorily the temples of the gods. The Parthenon at Athens, the 
temple of Diana at Ephesus, the temples of Apollo and Diana at Antioch, at Baalbec, in 
the many cities of Asia adorned by the SeleucidsB, were indeed materially beautiful, but 
that material beauty was eclipsed by the moral deformity of their consecration to 
idolatry, to imposture, and to falsehood. The devout eye of the apostle would therefore 
be more shocked by the dishonour done to God, and the injury to the moral nature of 
man, than gratified by mere beauty of form, or architectural grandeur and grace. 
Hence, as far as we learn from the inspired narrative, the dominant effect upon his 
mind of the sight of the unrivalled statues and temples of Athens was grief and 
indignation at their homage to idolatry, rather than admiration of the artistic genius 
which produced them. In like manner he found himself face to face with philosophy. 
He was treading the courts of the academy v.here Plato had taught ; he was in the 
city where Socrates had lived and died; there Aristotle had both learnt and taught; 
there the successors both of Zeno and Eijicurus were still inculcating the tenets of their 
respective schools. What was to be the attitude of an evangelist in the presence of 
these august representatives of human intellect? In what language was the apostle of 
Jesus Christ to address himself to them ? In that of apology ? In that of compro- 
mise ? in that of conscious inferioi ity ? or as if the possessors of so much wisdom had 
nothing to learn from him ? Or, on the other hand, was he to speak the language of 
scorn and indignation — was he to shut his eyes to all that might be true and noble 
in the sentiments of those men, and to put them on a level with the vilest of mankind, 
because they were ignorant of the great truths of revelation ? The actual conduct of 
St. Paul was as modest as it was wise, and as dauntless as it was modest. Looking 
around him at the altars of the gods, he .seized upon the one favourable aspect of them 
— their witness to a worshipful spirit in the people towards the Unseen. Gathering 
from Greek literature a true description of the relation of man to the living God, he 
proceeded with wonderful simplicity and force to enunciate those truths of natural 
religion which an untainted reason perceives and approves. And then, rising to those 
higher truths which are the domain of revelation, he preached, as he had done before 
in the Agora, Jesus and the resurrection. He bid them repent of their sins done in 
ignorance ; he told them of the coming of the day of judgment ; he spoke to them of 
the awful Judge, and of his unerring righteousness. There was no faltering in his 
speech, no watering down of the severity of the gospel, no wincing at the subtle wits 
or the pretentious wisdom of those who heard him. He spoke as a man who knew that 
he had the truth of God, and that that truth would prevail. And such should ever be 
the attitude of the Christian teacher before the powers of the world. Bumble, chari- 
table, confident, and firm ; owning all that is good and beautiful and true in the world 
around him, but always feeling, and acting as if he felt, that the gospel of Jesus 
Christ is better and truer and more beautiful than all ; valuing true wisdom, and 
prizing the great gift of reason as the brightest jewel of our human nature ; yet always 
remembering that in our fallen state reason could bring no remedy for sin nor cast a 
light upon the world to come ; but that the only Name whereby we may be sared ii 
the Name of Jesus, and that he alone has abolished death, and brought life aad immijr. 
tal ity to light through the gosfeL To him be gloiy for ever and ever. Amen. 



aa. xvn. 1— 34.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 66 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTH0B8. 

Vers. 1 — 9. — A fulfilled and an unfulfilled prophecy. These verses would supply us 
with other material for thought. They present to us j 1. Christian workers patiently 
and conscientiously proceeding with their mission (vers. 1, 2). 2. Christian advocate's 
employing the weapon which was prepared for their use (ver. 3). 3. Christian labourers 
reaping a blessed spiritual harvest (ver. 4). 4. Faithful followers of the Lord partaking 
of his sufferings (vers. 5 — 9). But we rather find here— 

L A GREAT piioPHBOT FULFILLED. " Alleging that Christ must needs have suffered," 
etc. (ver. 3); i.e. must needs have so done in order that the Scriptures (ver. 2) might be 
fulfilled (see Luke xxlv. 26, 46). The death of the Messiah was the reaUzatiou of 
(1) the predictions contained in the Jewish sacrifices (the sin offerings and trespass 
offerings, and notably the ofTering of the goat on the great Day of Atonement; the 
Passover lamb, etc.) ; and of (2) such predictions in word as those contained in the 
fifty-third chapter of Isaiah. The Law must have remained fatally incomplete and 
prophecy unfullilled if the Christ had not suffered as Jesus of Nazareth did suffer, 
if he had not died the death which he underwent. In the crucified Nazarene the 
greatest of all prophecies had been fulfilled. 

n. An uNOONscioas pbophecy to be fulfilled. The language of the complainants 
(ver. 6) was unintentionally prophetic. Thiy indeed stated, hyperbolically, as some- 
thing already accomplished, that which the ambassadors of Christ are engaged in doing. 
But they indicated, truly and graphically, what the gospel of his grace is doing — it is 
turning the world upside down. We may put the facts thus to our minds : 1. When 
Christ came evil was everywhere uppermost. The reiguing forces of the world at the 
time of the Incarnation were " not of the Father, but of the world." Within the one 
favoured and enlightened nation were hypocrisy, superficiality, bigotry and unhrother- 
liness, spiritual delusion; without that circle were superstition, ignorance, atheism, vice, 
cruelty — all tlie abominations into which a corrupt heathenism had sunk. Language 
will not tell the enormity of the world's condition. Nothing would be of any avail but 
a radical revolution, the overturning of all exibtiug thoughts, habits, methods, institu- 
tions — turning the world upside down, bringing to the dust of humiliation everything 
tliat was on the throne of honour. 2. The gospel of Jesus Christ is destined to overturn 
It. (1) It has adequate means for so doing — Divine truth, the aid of the Divine Spirit, 
a Divine institution (the Christian Church). (2) It has the true method, a spiritual 
me ; its weapons of warfare are not carnal, but spiritual, and therefore mighty to puU 
down strongholds (2 Cor. x. 4). It wins by teaching, persuading, leavening, renewing ; 
acting upon the life through the mind, the heart, the will— through the whole spiritual 
uature. This is the one conquering course, the one method which really and perma- 
nently subdues. (3) It has the assurance of success ; both in the promise of a Divine 
Lord, and in the history of its own triumphs. It is turning the world upside down. 
In many districts " the idols are utterly abolished;" many " islands are waiting for his 
Law ;" hoary systems of idolatry and iniquity are pierced through and through with the 
shafts of truth, and promise to fall prone as Dagon before the ark of God ; the vices 
of civilized lands are being successfully assailed ; the kingdom of error and of evil is 
disappearing, and the kingdom of Christ is coming. The triumphs of this last mis- 
sionary century are a distinct assurance that iniquity shall be cast down and righteous- 
ness be exalted. — C. 

Vera. 10 14. — The duty of individual research. This interesting and cheering 

episode teaches us one lesson in particular ; but there are three suggestions we may 
aain preliminarily. 1. That the Christian pilgrim (and workman) may hope that 
shadow will soon be succeeded by sunshine; that the tumult of Thessalonica will soon 
be followed by the reverent inquiry of Beroea. 2. That he must expect sunshine to 
pass, before long, into shadow; the fruit-gathering of Beroea to yield to the flight to 
Athens (vers 12—14). 3. That true nobility is in excellency of character : " These 
were more noble " (ver, 11). The word signifies (derivatively) those of noble birth, 
and it is here applied to those who had chosen the honourable course and were domg 

ACTS — II. * 



66 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xvn. 1— 34 



the estimable thing. This is the true, the real nobility. That which is adventitious, 
dependent on birth and blood, is only circumstantial, is liable to be dishonoured by the 
chances and changes of time, is of no account with God. That which is based on 
character and born of wise choice, pure feeling, estimable action, is real, human, unalter- 
able, of Divine origin, and enjoying the Divine approval. But the particular lesson of 
our text is — 

The duty of individual research. The Beroeans are commended in the sacred 
narrative as " more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they received the Word 
with all readiness,** etc. (ver. 11). Their excellency was in their reaiiiness to receive 
and investigate, to study and search for themselves whether the new teaching was or 
was not in accordance with the will of God. Whence we infer: 1. That blind opposition 
to all new doctrine is a sin as well as a mistake. It may be that men who propound 
views different from those that we have held come to us from God and offer us that which 
is in the hicriptures, though we have not yet discovered it there. There are more things 
in that living Word than the wisest man has ever seen yet. Unqualified resistance of 
doctrine which is different from " that which we have received to hold" may be the 
rejection of God's own truth; in that case it is both injurious and wrong. 2. That it is 
the duty of every Christian man to test all new doctrine by the teaching of the Divine 
Word. We are to search the Scriptures whether these things are so or not. There is no 
eicuse for declining to do this; for (1) God has placed his Word well within reach of us 
all. It is in a small compass ; it is printed in our own language (no bools so lends itself 
to translation and is so widely translated); it can be obtained for a small sum. (2) He 
has so formed us and so written it that it is level to our understanding ; he has given 
us the necessary mental faculties to comprehend it, and he has made the substance of 
it so simple, plain, appreciable, that the wayfaring man may rejoice in it. It is not the 
recondite, abstruse, mystical utterance which some disclosures are. (3) He is ready to 
grant us his own Divine aid in mastering and applying it. For what can we ask he 
help of his Holy Spirit more confidently than for the study of his own Word ? When 
is he more certam to fulfil his promise (Luke xi. 13) than when we ask for his 
enlightening infiuence as we " search the Scriptures " (John v. 39)? It is not only cur 
right but our duty to listen to all and to try all (1 John iv. 1) ; to "judge for ours ilves 
what is right " (Luke xii. 67). It is God's plain will concerning us that we sh mid 
all bring what we hear to the standard of his own revealed will in his Word, To 
do this effectually, we must study that Word (o) diligently, (6) intelligently, (c) 
devoutly. — C. 

Vers. 15 — 17. — A taddening spectacle : a missionary sermon. The spirit of Panl was 
" stirred in him " (ver. 16) by the statues which crowded the city of Athens. That 
which would yield intense gratification to any modern traveller plunged the apostle 
into deep melancholy and gloom. But there is a vast difference between then and now. 
Then idolatry was regnant ; now it is dethroned. Then the worship of the liviu" God 
had but one representative in that populous city ; now there is not one idolater to be 
discovered there. To Paul those statues, meeting him at every turn and almost at 
every step, were abominable idols ; to us they are interesting relics of a distant age. 

I. The badness of this spectacle as it appeared to Paul. The aspect which 
Athens wore to the apostle is expressed by the sacred historian. It was a "city 
wholly given to idolatry," or filled with idols. He would have discovered on inquiry 
if he did not already know, that these statues were not worshipped as gods them- 
selves by their devotees. Nevertheless, he would have called them "idols;" for they 
were distinctly condemned by the commandments of the Lord (Exod. xx. 4 5)- 
they were prohibited by the Law of God as idolatrous. Though the intelligence of 
Athens saved its citizens from idolatry in its last and worst stage, the identification of 
the image with the deity, it had not saved it from the idolatry of an earlier stage the 
association of the image with the deity it represented. Against this form of sin so 
severely denounced in Scripture, so offensive to God, so dangerous and delusive' to 
man, the spirit of Paul rose in strong rebellion. The sight of its outward manifesta- 
tion filled him with inexpressible sadness ; his " spirit was embittered." 

II. The aspect which this Athenian statuary wears to us. To us it is a sad 
proof that the world b;i wisdom does iot know God. Human wisdom can never hop* 



OH. xvn. 1— 34.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLEa 67 

to go further than it went in Athens. If ever, anywhere, human philosophy, human 
art, the human imagination could have reached truth and found God, it would have 
triumphed at Athena. But there was the melancholy exhibition of error and immo- 
rality. The utmost exertion of human thought had ended in (1) the worship of many 
gods; (2) the worship of gods to whom lust and cruelty were ascribed; (3) the worship 
of these gods with debasing rites. No city in the world gives surer or sadder proof that 
Bin so injures and disables us that our unaided manhood cannot rise to the sacred 
heights of truth and purity. 

HI. The sad spectacle it suggests to ds now. If Athena needed the ministry of 
Paul 80 terribly then, how much must all heathen cities require the gospel of Christ 
to-day I In the vast populations of the Asiatic and African continents, and among the 
hundred " islands of the aea," where human intelligence has never attempted to scale 
the heights which Grecian philosophers tried to reach, what awful degradations must 
exist and do exist 1 If Athens was an idol-covered city, what must be the condition of 
the barbarous towns and villages of an unevangelized world ? What sights are there 
to stir our spirits now I What idolatry, what superstition, what cruelty, what lascivi- 
ousness, what falsehood, what dishonesty! what utter absence of piety, holiness, and 
love! what an absolute reversal of God's tirst thought of human nature and human life! 
What infinite reason to address ourselves to — 

IV. The sacked dutt to which it calls vb. " Therefore disputed he . . . daily " 
(ver. 17). The Christian Church must giid itself to the work of meeting pagan error 
with Divine truth. It is a great task to undertake. But aa the lonely apostle went 
on, single-handed, with his mission, trusting in him " to whom all power is given in 
heaven and in earth," and knowing that " the foolishness of God ia wiser than man," 
and that " the weak things of the world can confound the things which are mighty," 
even so muat we. If only the Church went forth to this its work with half the zeal 
with which the spirit-stirred apostle wrought out his life-work, the time would not be 
counted by centuries when the idols would be utterly abolished, and the Lord Jesug 
Christ would alone be exalted. — C 

Ver. 18. — Christianity and Epicureanism. Against the doctrine of Epicurus, tht 
truth as it is in Jesus teaches us — 

I. That all things peocbed feom the intelligent opekation or the living 
God, and are by him sustained. That all our springs are not in any " it," but " in him " 
(Ps. Ixxxvii. 7); that " every gift cometh down from the Father of lights, in whom,'' 
etc. (Jas. i. 17); that he (a Divine One) made the worlds, and upholds all things, etc. 
(Heb. 1. 2, 3 ; Gen. i. 1 ; ver. 24 ; etc.). 

IL That the human spirit, as distinct fbom the human body, is the onb 

OBJECT OF inestimable VALUE. 

ILL That the chief good and final end nr human life is bighteousness. 
Not irapaila through ^piv7\(ns, but righteousness by faith and love. 1. The being 
counted right (or righteous) by God. 2. The possession of inward, spiritual rectitude. 
3. The exhibition of integrity in word and deed. This ( ) by faith in Jesus Christ, and 
(2) as the outgrowth of love to him. 

IV. That the possession of bighteousness issues in peace and jot. We are 
not to regard a state of mental equability as the great end to be diligently and per- 
sistently attained, as the one supreme accomplishment ; but to " seek first the kingdom 
of God, and his righteousness," in the assurance that, thus seeking, we shall find • 
" peace which passes understanding," and a joy which cannot be taken from us. 

V. That thkrb is an assured future fob the faithful, which will realize 
THE largest human HOPE I that the mind does not perish with the body, but lives on 
in another world, entering a brighter realm, moving in a broader sphere, living a fuller 
life, in the home of God, in the abode of purity and blessedness. — 0. 

Ver. 18. — Christianity and Stoicism. While there were points in Stoicism which 
harmonized with the doctrine of the great Teacher, there was very much indeed 
in which it was wholly dissimilar and even antagonistic. The fact that it conducted 
so freely and frequently to suicide is a melancholy confession of its failure ; some- 
thing more and sometMng other was needed to meet the wants of the soul than its 



68 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xvn. 1— 34. 

proud, self-sufficient, but insufficient egoism. Christianity differs from it in that it 
teaches — 

I. That a Divhtb Father, and not an inexorable fate, is the btjmno powbb 
IN the univbesb. It is not true that Deity is subject to all-conquering fate ; it is true 
that all circumstance is under Divine control. 

II. That controlled and consecrated FBBLiNa, hot an inflexible apathy, 
18 THE HIGHEST ATTAINABLE CONDITION. We are Dot to quench our feeling, or to 
impose on ourselves or others by the appearance of apathy. We are to weep and to 
rejoice; but (1) our sorrow and our joy are both to be regulated — we are to "let 
our moderation appear unto all men ; " and (2) our sorrow and our joy are both to be 
consecrated to God, — the one is to be borne with a resignation which is not a sullen 
endurance of the inevitable, but a filial acceptance of the decision of the wise aud 
faithful Father of spirits ; the other is to be accepted with thankfulness, and dedicati d 
to the service of the Supreme One and the surrounding ones. 

III. That a tbce spiritual condition is attainable, not by unaided indi- 
vidual WILL, BUT BY HELP OP THE DiviNB Spirit. (2 Cor. xii. 10 J Phil. iv. 13.) 

IV. That neither iJltimate absorption, nob utter destruction, but am 
ever-living spirit in a glorified body, is the hope of the wise and true. " He 
preached unto them Jesus, and the resurrection." — 0. 

Vers. 18 — 21. — Curiosity at the feet of Christ. In the company which gathered on 
Mars' Hill, to listen to the Christian teacher, we have a picture of curiosity sitting at 
the feet of Christ. For it is clear that this was not a court sitting to try a prisoner, 
but a chance company of citizens, wishing to hear what new and strange doctrine this 
visitor had brouglit them. 

L The curiosity which is contemptuous. " What will this babbler say ? " said 
some, using the language of superciliousness. They evidently thought it was hardly 
worth while to pause in their gossip to li.sten to this new speaker; nevertheless tliey 
condescended to hear him for five minutes or a quarter of an hour I When men assuu e 
this attitude toward Christ and his gospel, they may expect to gain nothing at all from 
him. " God resisteth the proud." Except we be converted from the spirit of contemp 
tuousness, we shall not enter the kingdom of heavenly truth. 

II. The curiosity which is frivolous. The audience on the Acropolis includej 
some who were not contemptuous, but simply curious ; they wanted to hear "some new 
thing " (ver. 21), to learn what was to be said of those " strange gods " which this Jew 
was "setting forth" (ver. 18). If there is nothing directly unfavourable, there is 
nothing actually favourable in this spirit of undevout inquisitiveness. No one attend- 
ing the sanctuary in this temper has any right to expect a blessing. The disciple who 
brmgs nothing better than this to the feet of the Master may expect to go away unen- 
lightened. But he may not depart unblessed. Of the men who clave to Paul and 
believed (ver. 34), there were probably some who came on no high purpose bent, and 
who found more than they sought. Better come and listen, even from empty curiosity, 
than refuse to hear ; better bring in the multitude with this inducement, than leave 
them outside in ignorance and error. 

III. The curiosity which is earnest. Shall we not think that among the " certain 
men " who did believe, there were found a few who went up the steps of Mars' Hill 
sincerely desirous of learning what was true ? Was not Dionysius or Damaris one 
whose heart had some " hunger after righteousness " ? Certainly it is they who come 
in order that they may know the truth, who are curious to hear that they may be 
prompt to do the will of God — it is they who are likely to " be filled with the knowled"e 
of his will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding." " Of such is the kingdom of 
heaven ; " and to such it is that the Master says," Seek, and ye shall find ; knock, and 
it shall be opened unto you." Those who earnestly desire to know (1) what is the 
character and the attitude of God, (2) what are the real conditions of salvation and 

eternal life, (3) how they may best live to please God and to benefit the world, these 

shall not return empty-minded ; they shall be filled (Matt. t. 6). — C. 

Vers. 22 — 29. — Ood revealed : his nature and relation, Paul's spirit was " stirred " 
irith holy indignation, and with pure and strong compassion, as he witnessed tha 



«H. xvu. 1— 34.] THE ACTS OF TU.: APOSTLES. 69 

nboiinding signs of superstition in the streets of Athens. But he had the wisdom to 
begin his address to these " men of Athens " by an expression which they would take 
to be complimentary. He told them that he perceived they were abundantly religioui. 
He did not conclude this from witnessing their numerous divinities, but from tba 
inscription he had read on an altar, "To the unknown God." Adroitly seizing on this 
as proof positive that they were in ignorance as to the true object of worship, he said 
that he could declare to them the Deity whom they were ignorantly or unconsciously 
worshipping. Then he spoke out the everlasting truth concerning the living God, 
which he had learned, and in the knowledge of which he stood superior, not only to 
those degenerate philosophers, but to the wisest man that had ever spoken their lan- 
guage and immortalized their city. 

I. The natubb of God. 1. Paul taught the unity of the Godhead. " fforf that made 
the world," etc. ; a very noticeable singular. He taught, concerning his nature, that this 
was : 2. Spiritual ; such that it is a vain and senseless thing to try to make any like- 
ness of him. " God is a Spirit," we ourselves being his children, and it is not in gold 
or stone or silver to produce any sort of semblance of him (ver. 29). 3. Independent ; 
so that he does not need the service of human hands. Except as expressions of our 
feelings of penitence, or trust, or gratitude, or homage, all offerings are an insult to his 
majesty and his power (ver. 25 ; and see Ps. 1. 8 — 13). 4. Omnipresent. We need 
repair to the interior of no temple walls to find him, for he is " Lord of heaven and 
earth " (ver. 24), filling immensity with his presence. He is not far from any one of us ; 
he compasses our path and our lying down ; he besets us behind and before ; we cannot 
go where he is not (ver. 27). 6. Sovereign. He is Lord of heaven and earth ; he is 
the Divine Euler of all. 

II. The DrvTNB relation to mankind. We not only want to know generally who 
and what God is ; we also and equally want to know what is the particular relation in 
which he stands to us. And what, we ask, does he desire we should be to him ? Here 
is the answer : 1. He is the Maker of the world in which we live : he " made the world 
and all things therein " (ver. 24). 2. He is the Divine Benefactor from whom all bless- 
ings flow : " He giveth to all life," etc. (ver. 25). 3. He is the Divine Provider and 
Arranger of all human affairs (ver. 26). His intelligence has foreseen, and his wisdom 
directed everything. 4. He is the Father of all human spirits : " We are also his off- 
spring" (ver. 28). And we are so in that (1) he is the Author (ver. 26) of our common 
humanity (ver. 26) ; (2) he is sustaining us all in constant existence : " In him we live," 
etc. (ver. 28) ; (3) he is deeply interested in us, and desires our approach to him ; ho has 
so wrought that men should " seek him, if haply they might feel after him and find 
him." He desires to be sought and found of us, that we may commune with him and 
rejoice in him, that we may attain to his likeness and prepare for his nearer presence. 
If such is the nature of God, and such the relation in which he stands to us, then : (1) 
How pitiful a thing is (a) heathenism, the ignorance of God ; and (5) atheism, the 
denial of God ; and (c) indifference, the rejection of God I (2) How excellent and how 
wise a thing is (a) reverence for God ; (6) obedience to Goid ; (c) an earnest effort to 
obtain the Divine favour, and to live in his love 1 — 0. 

Ver. 30. — Qod revealed : his attitude toward the sinner. It is worth while to note, 
preliminarily, that Paul speaks of the pre-Christian ages as " times of ignorance." 
We know that these included much human learning. The words of the apostle were 
uttered on that spot where there was everything to call this to remembrance. But he 
would have said, and would have had us consider also, that any age in which God 
remained unknown was an age of ignorance. " The fear of the Lord is the beginning 
of wisdom." No art, no philosophy, no science, no literature, no intellectual attainments 
or achievements of any kind whatever will compensate for ignorance of God ; the soul 
that knows not him is an ignorant man ; the time that knows not him is an ignorant 
age. But the text suggests and answers a very urgent question — What is the attitude 
of the holy Father ot spirits toward his sinful children ? His holiness would lead to 
impartial severity ; his fatherhood to exceeding tenderness and clemency. The answer 
is found in the words of the apostle nere. 

I. God's attitude in the pke-Chbirtian ages. This was one of magnanimous for- 
bearance. God " winked at " (as tne text unhappily renders it), ho overlooked, bor« 



70 THE ACTS OF THE AP0S1LE8. [oh. xvn. 1— 34. 

with all that was so painful in his sisht, all the unimaginahle iniquity of forty centuries 
of human sin. Not, indeed, without many proofs of his Divine displeasure ; not without 
manifestations of his holy wrath. He sent sickness, sorrow, calamity, death, as marks 
of his meaning in regard to sin. But for long ages of evil, in which men were every- 
where Binning directly against him hy their idolatries and their atheisms and their 
practical infidelities, and indirectly against him hy their sins against one another and 
the wrongs they did themselves, God's chief attitude toward his rebellious subjects was 
that of Divine magnanimity. 1. He did not punish them in proportion to their ill 
deserts. He " kept silence " (Ps. 1. 21). He " dealt not with them after their sins," 
etc. (Ps. ciii. 10). 2. He did confer on them great and continuous loving-kindness 
through every age (ch. liv. 16, 17). 

II. His attitude since the cominq op his Son. Hp " now commandeth all men 
everywhere to repent." The entrance of the " kiH'idom of God" was attended with 
the utterance of this strong imperative, " Repent" (Matt. iii. 2 ; iv. 17 ; Mark vi. lli). 
The last, solemn commission of the ascending Lord was to sound this note of repent- 
ance "among all nations" (Luke xxiv. 47). The apostle of the Gentiles, divinely 
taught, preached to Jew and Gentile " repentance toward God," etc. (ch. xx. 21). And 
wherever this gospel is preached unto men, there is announced the Divine mandate, 
" Kepent." We know : 1. Its real significance. It is the turning of the heart, and 
therefore of the life, from sin aud folly to God and to his service. 2. Its breadth q/ 
application. It is coextensive with the race ; it reaches to the remotest land and to 
the most distant age ; none so pure of heart and life that they need not, none so base 
that they may not, none so old that they cannot repent. 3. The consequences of impeni- 
tence. They are (1) God's displeasure now, and (2) his final condemnation and 
punishment. — 0. 

Ver. 31. — Ood revealed : his holy purpose. We ask not only — ^Who or what is he ? 
what is his character and spirit? what is his present attitude towards us? we ask 
also — What is his purpose concerning us t That one infinite God, " in whom we live, 
and move, and have our being," who holds our destiny in his sovereign hand, — is it his 
intention that the lamp of his lighting;, the human spirit (Prov. xx. 27), shall go out 
utterly at death, or that that spirit shall shine in another sphere ? And if so, what are 
to be the conditions of that life beyond the river ? The reply is — 

I. That God will continue to us oub existence in another statb, and will 
JUDOE US fob oub ACTIONS HEBE. " He hath appointed a day in which he will judge 
the world." We do not suppose that time hereafter will be measured as it is now, and 
that the " day " of the other life will correspond with " a day " of our present experience. 
But the time will come in the future life when " we shall appear before the judgments 
seat." God has " appointed unto man once to die," and " after this the judgment." 
Clearly enough, in the thought and purpose of God, this life is only the commencement 
of our existence, the probation period on which the long results of the eternal world 
depend. So far from this being " the be-all and end-all " of humanity, it is but the 
preface to the large volume that succeeds ; it is but the river which runs down to and 
is lost in the sea. 

II. That God's judgment of us will be one of perfeot exohteousness. "In 
righteousness," 1. There will he no trace of partiality, no smallest shade of 
favouritism ; none will fare the better, none the worse, for class, or sex, or parentage, or 
nationality. 2. Regard will be had to all the particulars of human action. " God will 
bring every work into judgment with every secret thing" (Eccles. xii. 14): all 
thoughts — the "work" of the understanding; all feelings — the "work" of the heart; 
all choices — the " work" of the will ; as well as all words — ^the " work " of the tongue 
and all deeds — the " work " of the hand. 3. Respect will be had to all that enhances oi 
lessens responsibility ; to all special privilege and opportunity on the one hand, and to 
all privation and disadvantage on the other. 

nL That God will judge the world bt his Son, oub Savioub Jesus Christ. 
" By that Man," etc., even the Son of man, to wncm all judgment is committed (John 
V. 22), who will have authority to execute judgment " because he is the Son of man " 
(John v. 27). Christ will be our Judge. His special relationship to ua eminently fits 
'im for that supreme position. 1. He is the Lord of our nature. 2. He knows out 



IH. XVII. 1—34.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES, 71 

natnre perfectly (Heb. iy. 15). 3. He claims that we shall all come into living 
relation to himself; we must all be "found in him "(Phil. iii. 9; John xv. 4, 6- 
IJohnii. 28). 

IV. That God hab given us btbono assubancb of his Divink purpose. " Whereof 
he hath given," etc. We have an assurance of such intention in : 1. Our own conscious- 
ness of ill desert and incomplete retribution. We feel that sin demands condemnation 
and punishment, and that our own individual guilt has not received its due penalty. 
For how much and how many things do we deserve the reproval of the Divine voice, 
the infliction of the Divine hand ! 2. Our observation of the course of abandoned 
and wicked men. How many are they who go down to the grave with (as it assuredly 
appears) unpunished sins on their soul 1 3. The general apprehension of mankind. 
4. But the assurance of God's purpose is in the language and the life of Jesus 
Christ; more especially in the fact of his resurrection, preceding, predicting, and 
ensuring our own. (1) How foolish to treat as if it were the whole of our career that 
which is no more than the commencement 1 (2) How wise to live in view of that great 
day of account I (3) How needful to be rightly related to the supreme Judge ! — 0. 

Vers. 1—9. — Paul at Thessalonica. I. His wobk. The synagogue was here again 
the scene of labour ; the substance of the evangel again the theme of his discourse. 
1. This is in contents ever the same ; founded on the Scriptures. His special function as 
an apostle did not set him free from the authority of the past. Eeligion at any epoch 
is the fulfilment of all that has gone before and the prophecy of all that is to be. But 
let us beware of the slavery of the letter, and seek the truth of the freely developing 
Spirit. Fresh light and truth are to break forth at every epoch from the Scriptuii«8. 
Preaching culminates in Christ. The Messiah must suffer and rise. Paul had no other 
theme than the crucified and risen One. The triumph of the spiritual element in 
mankind in and through, in spite of and ovei, suffering, — this is the eternal message of 
Christianity to mankind. 2. Z%e results the same. Some believe, others not. The 
good ground for the seed is there or it is not there. Vain to seek to penetrate below this 
mystery. Women again are specially named as favourable to the gospel. It is fair to 
argue that; when the feelings and the intuitions lead the judgment, the verdict will 
be for Christ and his religion. Divine grace does not court those in high station; 
certainly it does not repel them. 

U. The beaeino of the enbmibs of the gospel. 1. Instinctive perversion of th* 
truth. As before, jealousy, whether proceeding from self-interest or sectarian pride, 
attacks the apostles. Their enemies would misrepresent the emissaries of peace, as 
public disturbers and revolutionaries. 2. Glaring inconsistency. They conunit the 
very offence of which they accuse the apostles. They play on the feelings of the mob. 
It is a sign of weakness or of insincerity when men must drag the fickle multitude 
into such questions. The mob may be turned momentarily to any account. If they 
favour the gospel, they are despised as stupid (John vii. 47 — 49). K they can ho 
stirred up against it, their clamour is equally used as evidence. 

IIL The episode of hospitality. Good Jason shelters these dangerous guests. The 
guest who is loved and cherished in spite of danger to the host, will bring a blessing on 
the head of the latter. Be mindful of hospitality — the true hospitality, which gives 
without asking in return (Heb. xiii. 2). — J. 

Vers. 10 — 15. — Nobility of soul at Bercea. Beroea stands out as a bright oasis in the 
dreary landscape of persecution. When Paul and Silas enter the synagogue, they find 
themselves in a new atmosphere. They find " men of nobler soul " then the dishonest 
cavillers and intriguers of Fhilippi and of Thessalonica. What were the elements of 
tkis nobility of soul ? 

I, Willing and unpbbjudiced becbption of novel vibwb. This spontaneous 
receptiveness springs only from the rooted love of truth. Let us not forget how startling 
and how shocking was the story of a crucified Messiah to Jewish prejudice ; it may 
help us to appreciate the candour of these men. 

U. Independent inquibt. They did not carry on a battle of notions with notions ; 
they went to the sources, they studied the documents and facts. Let Protestants leara 
ft lesson, and be true to themselves. In our time people are only beginning to und><r- 



72 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xvii. 1—34. 

stand the Scriptures in the new light thrown by history upon them. The study of the 
Bible is a right, a duty, and a profound science. Hasty generalizations and fixed 
opinions must give way before larger light. 

III. Teub faith and free inquiry go hand-in-hand. It is only the profound 
believer who can afford to doubt. The faith which condemns inquiry, or stops it at a 
certain point, or is afraid of " going too far," is a blind laith. On the other hand, the 
"free-thinking," which owns no religious impulse, is never deep nor sound thinking. 
The sincere spirit of inquiry, as seen in the noblest scientifio men, is closely allied to 
the true evangelical temper. What we all need is a living love in all our studies, as 
opposed to a dead and notional knowledge. The enthusiasm for truth is a noble 
form of faith ; and each who pursues it for himself will enjoy a measure of its rewards. 
We must try the grounds of faith as we try the metal of coins, and with the greater 
attention, in that more is at stake. No resting upon the ip$i dixit even of an apostle 
satisfied the Berceans, nor ought it to satisfy us.— -J. 

Vers. 16 — 34. — Paul at Athens. Paul stands in Athens, amidst the master-pieces of 
Greek art and the memorials of f Greek wisdom. It is not admiration or aesthetic 
delight which is awakened in him, but moral indignation. Christianity is not opposed 
to art ; but Christianity does not approve the worship of sensuous or ideal beauty apart 
from moral earnestness. In the true relation, religion absorbs art into itself ; when art 
is substituted for religion, there is moral decay. Kor is Christianity hostile to philosophy. 
On the contrary, there was in Greek philosophy a preparation for Christ. There were 
germs of truth in the Epicurean and the Stoic schools which Christianity incorporated, 
while it corrected the one-sidedness of these philosophies. The Epicurean built his 
practical system on human weakness, the Stoic his on pride. The gospel will not 
excuse sin on the ground of weakness ; nor found a righteousness of man's own on pride 
(see the noted discussion of these schools, and the relation of the gospel to them, in 
Pascal's ' Pens^es '). Between these extremes, as between those of Sadduceeism and 
Phariseeism, the gospel ever makes its way. These academicians of Athens might well 
be anxious to know what the " ugly little Jew '* had to say. Long had the mighty 
logos or dialectic of Plato and Aristotle and their successors and rivals ruled the world. 
WTiat could the fanatical Jew have to say ? An immortal discourse is the reply to these 
questions of curiosity. 

I. God unknown, yet knowable. The speaker recognizes the reverence of the 
Athenians. The heathen were prepared for the gospel, all the more from the weariness 
and failure of their age-long " groping after God." In the inscription on the altar was 
the witness of the desire to worship all forms of divinity, whether to thfem known or 
unknown. Both Greeks and Romans recognized, above and beyond the definite gods 
and goddesses of the Pantheon, the indefinable in Deity, the mystery of that Essence, to 
us and to all, as to them, incomprehensible. So far we are all on a level with the 
Athenians. I3ut there are special senses in which God is unknown to the worshipper. 
1. To the sensual and sin-loving heart. Many there are whose heart is like the Agora 
of Athens or a Pantheon ; one idol stands beside another. Wrath, pride, lust, avarice, 
treachery, ambition, — these are their gods. And again, science, art, money, the husband, 
the wife, the goods of this world. And in a neglected corner stands the altar with the 
inscription, " To the unknown God 1 " 2. To the wise in their own conceit. " For the 
wisdom of this world is foolishness with God; " " He resisteth the proud, and giveth grace 
to the lowly." 3. To the formalists and externalists in religion. For the drama of an 
external ritual is ratherascreen between the soul and God, if the soul be not bent on finding 
him. 4. To all who seek him otherwise than with the pure and lowly heart, coming 
by the Way, the Truth, and the Life to the Father. Though in one sense " God is great ; 
1 know him not," must be the confession of all hearts, from the lowliest to the wisest, 
in another the good news of the gospel proclaims — God may be known, is known ; and 
every name by which he is known resolves itself into love. He is concealed, yet 
revealed; unknown, yet known ; defined, yet indefinable, "i'is a great yet a small part'' 
of his ways that we can understand. 

II. God revealed in the creation. He has made the world and all things therein. 
Animate and inanimate nature, booy and spirit, all have the stamp of omnipotence 
and of onmiscence in the unity of a Mird. Every step in science makes more cleai 



OH. xvn. 1— 34.J THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



this unity; and in the last resort this unity is not conceivable as "law " or " force " 
merely, but only as the living and the loving God. In his infinite majesty, heaven is 
his throne, earth his footstool. He is in himself both Temple and Inhabitant. The 
voice of God bursts asunder the system of idolatry and superstition. The latter denies 
that God can be found only in fixed places, by means of fixed rites and mediations. 
The true temple is everywhere ; " The walls of the world are that." In the Church, 
where the gospel of his Son is heard, and above all in the heart, where he indwells in 
the power of his Spirit, is the temple of the living God. 

III. God revealed in the government of the world. As love. Needing nothing 
from men's hands; they incessantly leel the need of him. Life itself is sweet, and in 
that sweetness we have an instance of his love. There is a joy in breathing, moving 
about, looking, learning, experiencing manifold experiences in this " fair world of God." 
And each and every pleasure, lower and higher, leads up to God and his love. The tie 
that binds us to our kind is an expression of the same love. Sympathy is possible, 
is actual, between men of every colour and clime. The mechanism of thought and 
feeling is alike in all. All men suffer and rejoice from the same causes. The unity of 
the human race reflects the unity of God's mind in wisdom and in love. Men form 
one people, one race : this is the great thought the gospel throws upon the world, and 
teaches us to say, in deeper senses than the heathen knew, " I am a man ; nothing human 
is foreign to me." He has set bounds to man's habitations. All the effects of climiite, 
of physical configuration of the earth, distribution of land and water, so interesting to 
the student of man and his dwelling-place, are conditions fixed by the same wise ami 
loving hand. God is in history. His thoughts alone are living. Athens was not for 
ever, nor Rome; but the Divine thought, whence proceeded the culture of Greece, the 
law and order of Rome, lives on, and is revealed in changing forms from age to aiie. 
And towards the " far-off goal " of an infinite love, we doubt not, the whole of creation 
and of history moves. The end of all is the union of man with God. Though in one 
sense he " needeth not anything," in another he needs all — the whole love of his whole 
rational universe. The process of thought in the world is a process of " groping after " 
and of finding God. God wills that we should find him, but only as the result of our 
seeking. Therefore he " half reveals " and " half conceals " himself. He is far off, yet 
near; in each and all the spheres of our knowledge. Our being rests on his; ours are 
borrowed lives (Isa. liv. 6 ; 1 Cor. viii, 6). " In the Father," says Cyprian, " we are, 
from him all life comes ; in the Son, who lives, we have life ; in the Spirit, who is the 
Breath of all flesh, we have our being." His offspring we are — by creation in his image, 
by redemption through his Son. This truth we know from Scripture, from the human 
heart, from life ; and the effect of this knowledge may well be to produce holy humility, 
mixed with confidence and joy. 

IV. True theology and worship. 1. The heathen draw a wrong infennce from 
the true saying on men being the offering of Ood. If we are of Divine origin, they seemed 
to argue, then the gods are of human kind, and images of them may be made. On the 
contrary, Paul argues, those who are of Divine origin despise themselves if they render 
worship to any but the supreme Head and Lord. When we say that God is in affinity 
with man, we do not affirm that man can represent him in thought, much less in 
images of plastic art. The philosopher Xenophanes had said that if the animals had 
gods, they would imagine them in their own likeness — the god of the horse would be a 
horse, etc. The truth is that only our ideal or higher nature is the mirror of God. 2. 
In conscience we find his clearest reflex. And ignorance of him in this nearest sphere of 
knowledge is not excusable, as St. Paul teaches in Eom. i. Men did not lihe to retain 
God in their knowledge. At the same time, the conscience needs light from without. 
There are dark ages of the world, when men have comparatively little light, and which 
may be viewed as ages of God's forbearance, wherein he " overlooks " much that men 
do, " not knowing what they do." 3. But Christ is a Turning-point of history. Before 
him, the period of " ignorance ; " with him and after him, the true light. Before him, 
forbearance ; henceforward, the just judgment of the world. The description of the 
person and functions of Christ. He is Man ; a member of humanity, a partaker of 
human flesh and blood, subject to death. As High Priest, he is one " touched with a 
feeling of our infirmities." And as Judge, ne is qualified on the same groundH. It is 
a common feeling which requires that a man should be judged by his peers. Know- 



?♦ THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xvn, 1— 34 

ledge and pity, severity and compassion, are united in Christ. •*. The call to repentance. 
It is an urgent call. The more indifferent and light-hearted the listeners, the more 
urgently it must sound. It is an absolute call, admitting of no exceptions. No 
ignorance and no philosophy, no dignity or rank, can exempt men from the immediate 
command of God to repent. Amidst the depths of sin and the heights of virtue, in 
paganism and in Christendom, the new heart aad the new life are indispensable. 

V. The kbception of the gospel at Athens. (Ver. 32.) 1. Some scoffed, wme 
procrastinated. These are ever the two main classes of those who turn a deaf ear to 
the Divine Word. Some make light of the truth, some put off attention to it until the 
" more convenient season." " Faith in to-morrow, instead of Christ, is Satan's nurse 
for man's perdition." Paul departed from among them, and came not back ; the " tender 
grace " of the day of salvation vanished, not again to be found. 2. But some believed. 
Of whom Dionysius among men alone is mentioned ; and of the women, Damaris, with 
some others. We need, however, to remind ourselves that great numbers are no sign 
of the true Church. There are many more of common stones than of jewels in its 
structure, according to the ordinary valuation ; but God's measures are not ours. 
According to ancient testimonies, a bright light went forth from the Church at Athens. 
The splendid intellectual culture of Athens remains the heritage of the few ; the gospel 
pours its common blessing on mankind. The relation of the Christian to the art and 
science of the world. (1) He is not to despise them. The master-works of <jenius are 
gifts of God ; and in their way they bear testimony to the universal striving of the 
human spirit after the reconciliation of sense and spirit, the human with the Divine. 
The aberrations of great spirits are more instructive than the meaningless commonplaces 
of ordinary minds. (2) At the same time, he is to apply to them the Christian scale of 
judgment. Christianity cannot countenance immoral art or godless science. If the 
heart of the artist and scientific man be sanctified, their works and studies will tend to 
the glory of God. — J. 

Vers. 1 — 9. — Thessalonica. Interest of the occasion, in view of the two Epistles 
afterwards written. The contrast between the Thessalonian and Philippian populations 
partly due to the presence of the Jewish synagogue. The Greek proselytes numerous. 
The Jews divided into two classes, the devout and the fanatical. The political element 
always ready to be called into use against the gospel, so that the multitude and the 
rulers were troubled. 

I. Take the whole narration as affording a glimpse into the state of the Roman 
EMPIRE at that time. 1. The elements of hope in it — the Jewish religion and 
synagogue worship, the openness of Gentile mind to inquiry ; the two forces of Roman 
order and Greek intellectual culture. 2. The elements of corruption. The rabble at 
the mercy of evil-minded men stirring them up. The decrees of Csesar mere despotic 
acts of power. Ignorance and indifference to religious questions. Had they under- 
stood Christianity, they would never have supposed it to be against civil order. 3. 
The certainty foreshown. The spiritual power must prevail. Such a world must be 
overturned. 

II. The CHBisTiANirr which Paul preached. 1. Pounded on the Old Testament 
Scriptures, and therefore seeking a basis in the synagogue. 2. Setting forth the 
redeeming work of Jesus Christ as its substance. 3. Adapted to all, Jews and Greeks 
alike, and calling the influence of women to its service. 4. Though itself peace, yet, 
by its contrast with the world, turning it upside down. We must be quiet and 
orderly in our methods, but we must expect that spiritual forces will stir up opposition. 
The end is with the truth.— E. 

Ver. 6. — The power of Ood in the world. " These that have turned," etc. Thessa- 
lonians excitable, especially on the subject of political change (see Epistles). The mis- 
representations of spiritual work proceed from two causes : (1) fanatical opposition to 
the truth as it is in Jesus ; (2) the ignorant fears of sordid and selfish minds. Yet the 
progress of the work must be maintained. 

L The thoughts of men contrasted with the thoughts of God. 1. Of the 
religious fanatics and superstitious. The fears for truth leading to false alliances. 
Compromise of principle. 2. Of rulers. Government is apt to fear for itself, becaust 



CH. xvn. 1— 34,] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 75 

it know* not its own true basis. Decrees of Caesar must sometimes be resisted. 8. Of 
the populace. IMistaken ideas of their own interests. I^eceivableness under the 
influence of demagogues or those who pander to their lowest feelings. The blessing 
was rejected. Jesus was a better King for the people than Csesar. 

II. The mission of the gospel in the world. 1. To explain the Divine dealings 
with mankind, and reveal the purpose running through both the Jewish and Gentile 
histories. 2. To lift up the multitudes and deliver them from despotism and deception. 
3. To proclaim a new world in place of the old, the coming of the kingdom, which is 
uot the exaltation of au imperial throne, but the reign of God on the earth, in the 
coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. 4. To stir up in the hearts of men a desire for the 
better things. The world within ua must be turned upside down before the true 
peace is built up. — R. 

Vers. 10 — 15. — Bercta. The different state of mind among the Jews. The unbelief 
and opposition of men overruled by God to the fulfilment of his purposes. The foot- 
steps ot the apostolic messengers quickened. The sudden stride of the message from 
Beroea to Athens — scarcely likely to have been taken by Paul without an impulse in 
the circumstances driving him forward. Yet, as so much depended on the one man's 
work, as no one else so fitted to lay the foundations of Christianity in Greece, he 
must be lifted above the level of his own thoughts and plans. The whole passage 
illustrates the union of providence and grace. — E. 

Ver. 12. — Preparation for the truth. " Therefore many of them believed." Contrast 
between the ignoble prejudice and the noble openness of mind. Responsibility for our 
faith. Knowledge and practice bound up together. 

I. The true preparation for Divine blessings. 1. A state of mind. At liberty 
to think. Open to teaching. Desire for instruction. The two kinds of scepticism 
(scepsis), inquiry for truth, inquiry for reasons against faith. 2. A course of action and 
habit. Reading of the Scriptures daily, with a set purpose, devoutly, in connection 
with the preached Word, with an intention to follow their guidance. 

II. The true faith settled on its eroad foundation. 1. As distinguished from 
mere individual self-assertion and ignoble pride. 2. As accepting the standard of 
revealed truth. 3. As apostolic, seeing that " those tbinss were so," i.e. as Paul repre- 
sented them. The Pauline faith was the only faith which linked together the Old 
Testament and the New. 

III. Results following teb vex or ueans. A lesson to both preachers and 
hearers. — R. 

Vers. 16 — 34. — Paul at Athens. Consider — 

I. The connection of the whole with the histort of Christianitt. The Greek mind 
evangelized. The function of Greek thought in the development of doctrine. The 
contrast between the gospel and philosophy. The step towards the conquest of the 
world. 

II. The illustration of the apostolic method. Adaptation of the truth to every 
class of mind. Difference of the preaching when the foundation of the Jewish Scriptures 
was for the time foisaken. Important difference of results, showing that there must 
be something intervening between idolatry and Christian faith, besides natural religion. 
The resurrection must stand ou its true foundation, or it is mocked at. The spiritual 
truth is mere " babbling " to those who look upon it from the naturalistic point of view. 

III. The picture of human helplessness presented. Intellectual restlessness of 
A.thens. The judgment of God overhan<;injj; the moral corruption. Times of ignorance. 
Idolatry ,the more hideous in its decoratious of artistic beauty. Worship of the human 
body. Social miseries of the Greek world. The one man among the multitude, 
type of the spiritual force which, though a grain of mustard seed in apparent magni- 
tude, was a germ of life in the midst of the universal decay and death. So in the 
decline and fall of the Roman empire. A great lesson on (1) the sufBciency and powef 
of the gospel ; (2) the responsibility of man. — B. 

Ver. 18. — The vmrld'i want supplied. " He preached Knto them Jesus, and the 



76 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh, xvn. 1— ii 

resurrection." Paul at Athens a typical fact. No place so representative. No preacher 
so equal to the occasion. His spirit stirred within him. Idolatry — turning human 
greatness into ruin. " To the unknown God." Great opportunity well employed. No 
dreary denunciations. No lowering the gospel by admixture with human speculations. 
He presages the time when the intellect of Greece and the power of Eome would both 
alike be Christ's. He dared their mockery, to win their hearts. 

I. A PERSONAL Saviour. Jesus : 1. Presented as Divine. " Setter forth of strange 
gods." The facts of the gospel so described as to reveal the Divinity. 2. Set forth as 
an Oifect of trust. Just what such minds required, to look away from self and the 
vagaries of the mind. Names enough in the ancient world. This Name above every 
name. 

II. A PRACTICAL APPEAL. 1. To a true worship in place of the false. Eeligion 
universal. Paul's preaching was not intended merely to change the forms, but the 
substance ; to place religion on its true foundation, not as man's oflfering to propitiate 
the Deity, but as his acceptance of God's love — in fellowship. Jesus is in the midst 
of us, therefore we worship no longer an unknown God. 2. To a new life in place 
of the old. A great city like Athens reminds us of the world's wants — power to live 
a better life. He did not preach a mere story of the past, but a proclamation of a new 
kingdom of grace, which should make all life afresh. Words ! Examples I They had 
them. But they wanted power. There was a new fact before their eyes, a living man 
changed and made from a persecutor into a missionary. Nothing like it in Greece. 

3. To a great future. The resurrection. Personal prospect. A fact more than arguments. 
Messages to Corinth. " In Christ shall all be made alive " (1 Cor. xv.). May such 
doctrine prove its sufiBciency in us 1 — R. 

Ver. 23. — The worship of faith. " Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare 
I unto you." Christianity aggressive. Insufficiency of all forms of religion apart from 
true knowledge. The true philanthropy of the missionary spirit. 

I. The world's ignorance of God inconsistbnt with acceptable worship of him. 
1, Athens the representation of the moral helplessness of men without revelation. 
Knowledge which is ignorance. 2. The practical view of the Divine character. 
Indifference to righteousness, vain trust in benevolence, mere sentiment of dependence 

II. The faith op the Christian the true basis op religion. 1. As a simple 
acceptance of Divine teaching. 2. As a growth of knowledge through experience and 
practical endeavour. " If any man will do his will," etc. 3. The actual fellowship 
of the spiritual life. Influence of the higher mind and larger soul upon the lower. 
Effect of loving self-sacrifice in opening the mind to larger views of the Divine character. 

4. The oppoitimities of the world rightly used. Nature leading to God, not enslaving 
the soul. Culture lifting up the intellect and desires. " AU things are ours." — R. 

Ver. 28. — Man in God. " In him we live, and move, and have our being.'' The 
greatness and humility of the apostle — an illustration of the nature and method of 
Christianity. Over all the glory of Athens the pall of spiritual death. An unknown 
God amongst them. The pride of the ancient world still clung to empty superstitions, 
only half, if at all, believed in. Boldness of the messenger. Polytheism is false. The 
human heart is claimed for God. From their own altar to the Christiau announcement 
of coming judgment. An appeal to reason, conscience, experience, the universal spirit 
of humanity. 

I, A GREAT primary TRUTH Set forth in two aspects — natural and spiritual. 1, Al" 
religion rests on a natural foundation. We are creatures of God. Threefold view 
of humanity — as Ufa, as activity, as being or character. Unsatisfactory view of human 
nature which omits any of these. We live not alone for earth, but for eternity. Not 
alone to exist, but to unfold our possibilities, intellectual, moral, spiritual. God the 
God of providence. History. Social life. But natural religion insufficient. Has 
proved itself so — must be so. 2. Eeligion is the work in man of (he spiritual. The 
great fact of a moral ruin cannot be overlooked. Ancient heathen admitted the 
irreconcilable opposition of heaven and earth. Refuge in Promethean pride. 
Despondency. They openly said, " It is better to die than to live." Errand of the gospel 
was one of hope. Proclamation of the life of man in God. Spiritual power at hand. 



DH. xvn, 1— 34.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLEa 7T 

The message written out in the facts of the gospel. Paul led up his hearers to Christ 
To us religion is Christ. The resurrection is the seal on the promise of life. 

II. Consider the applications of such a teuth. 1. The essential and supreme 
question of every man's existence is what he is to God, and what God is to him. Oar 
life m Mm. 2. There is only one religion which meets man's wants, that which has 
come from God. 3. The religion of Christ is adapted to the humblest as well as the 
highest mind, to the lowest as well as the loftiest condition. — B. 

Vers. 32, 9&. — Opportunity. " Now when they heard," etc. The hearing of truih 
is the demand of man's position. Temptation "of such minds as the Athenians" 
to regard themselves as ahle to be their own teachers. Facts oltca stranger than fiction. 
Pliilosophy has been a great obstacle to Christianity. So still intellectual pride and 
prejudice. The two classes of hearers still represented — mocljers and tritiers. 

I. Kesponsibility in hearing. 1. Application of mind. Concentration on the 
suViject. Openness to persuasion. 2. Surrender of the heart to truth. Tlie message 
not addressed simply to reason. A s]ieculative spirit may easily admit a cloud of 
objections and difficulties which obscure the Word. Procrastination means indifference. 
Enough is already understood and lelt to justify practice. 

II. Special cbisis op oppoktunitt. Whether in listening to the Word, or in receiving 
Divine invitation through providential circumstances, opportunity at times gathers 
to a point where resistance becomes guilt. So it was in the Jewish nation at thf; 
advent of Christ. So at Athens by the visit of Paul. The Word may be taken away : 
I. By the work of sin within us, hardening the heart. 2. By changes in the outward 
life. 3. By summons into eternity. " Take heed how ye hear ; " " Work while it is 
yet day ; " " Now is the accepted time." — R. 

Ver». 2, 3. — The work of three sabbath days. It was a great idea, and much more 
than mere idea with Paul, to " redeem the time." He would not have stayed a continuous 
three weeks in one place doing nothing at all, much less doing what was good for nothing, 
or for very little. The time he gave, therefore, to a subject, and the stress he laid upon it, 
may fairly measure to a certain degree his persuasion of the value of it. There are 
subjects which depend upon their very mode of treatment, not in the merely ordinary 
sense for producing greater or less impression, but for apprising us of the estimate they 
purport to put on tliemselves. And this thought may certainly help to guide us, even 
lu these days. It may help work conviction as to the reality of things long "believed 
among us," but perhaps never more attacked or less boldly grasped than at this present. 
For we here may notice that — 

I. Paul takes the Old Testament Scbipturbs as his text-book. 1. It would 
have been particularly like Paul to have dealt with his subject or subjects through a 
p<)riod of upwards of three w eeks, on their ovm merits, and not have laden them with 
any unimportant connection with things that had gone before. His method shows 
ihat the coimection was not deemed unimportant by him. 2. If Paul does deal with 
great subjects, which might have been discussed on their own merits, in very close 
connection with their associations with the Old Testament, it were inevitable that 
those associations must cling to tlieni. They will in a sense bring with tliem the atmo- 
si)here, or the fragrance of it, to which they have been accustomed. 3. There can be no 
doubt, no contradiction, as to the connection of the promised Messiah in the Old Testa- 
ment with the sacrifices, which are really its most unique feature ; nor can there be any 
doubt of the great sacrifices themselves, that ihey were in the main propitiatory. 

II. The death of Christ is the Old Testament topic selected out op all others 
BY Paul. For what conceivable purpose should the apostles have taken all the trouble 
and encou tered all the dangers they did, in order to reconcile the minds of the Jews, 
to whom they preaclied, to the identity of the foretold Messiah of the Scriptures with 
the Jesus crucified of late at Jerusalem ? There could bo no satisfactory reason for 
this but one, that the suffering of Christ unto death was the central requirement of 
the whole position. While the Jew from first to last objected to the subject (1) because 
the crucifixion of Christ lay at his door and on his conscience; (2) and because the 
Jew had never consented to believe in such a King as Christ, such a grandeur ta the 
grandeur of the cross for him, or such a method of recovering and exalting the distinction 



78 THE ACTS OF THE APOS TLBS. [oh. xvil 1—34 

of his own nation, as the method which went right down to the root of its decay, dis- 
order, misery 1 It would surely seem that nothing could be more nugatory than to 
labour as apostles laboured, and to suffer as they suffered, and to be filled with zeal 
as they were filled with zeal, if it were for mere persistence' sake in the matter of an 
unwelcome historical identification. Whether for Jew or Gentile, the death of Christ 
was with the apostles the foundation theme. But with the Jew it was argued as now, 
with all the light and necessarily with the associations that his Scriptures must throw 
upon it. 

III. The invabiablb sequel-subject of the death of Cheist — the eesuebectiok 
— IS PP.EAOHED BT Paul. As much as all the deepest traceable .significance of the 
death of Christ tends to humble those to whom it is preached, as " the way of salvation," 
so much avails the significance of his resurrection to comfort and to raise them 1 The 
glory of glories for Christ, it is, and it is ever scriptuially exhibited as, the joy of joys 
for the believer in Christ. These, then, were the great topics upon which Paul 
and his companions and other apostles were constantly insisting. Let it be explained 
as it may, these purport to be the message of Heaven to earth ; let it be objected to 
as it may, nothing else comes in their place. The forces that lie hidden, yet scarcely 
hidden, in both of these are now at least testified by an unsurpassed mass and variety 
of practical and irrefutable evidence. Men's hearts have been suftened, hiimbled, and 
won to the exercise of profoundest trust and firmest faith by the fact of the suffering! 
and death of Christ. Their highest nature has answered to the quickening infiuence of 
the clearly revealed and clearly exhibited fact of the Resurrection, and so far forth its 
correlative, immortality. The pride of man rarely finds its gain or its object in rejecting 
the latter, yet is it abundantly doubtful whether any man come to it rightly, much less 
come to it to the purest and truest advantage, except through that approach which Paul 
found so often "to the Jews a stumbling-block, and to the Greeks foolishness," but to 
" some" others even at Thessalonica (ver. 4) "the power of God and the wisdom of 
God."— B. 

Vers. 11, 12. — A comparison justly invidious. In harmony with the directions of 
Jesus Christ himself, and with the dictates of wisdom as against presumptuousness. 
Paul and Silas, when endangered by their ministrations in one place, sped on in all 
fidelity and zeal to another. It may also be not without its significant interest that, 
as we are told, they were " sent away," or " sent on," by the brethren. Had they gone 
away at any time and ceased from their work, they and their motives and their love 
might well have been objects of suspicion. But the continuity of their devotion, and 
the renewal again and again of work after disappointment upon disappointment, protect 
them from suspicion, and even add to their praise. It is one of the greater practical 
difficulties of life to resist successfully the distressing and disintegrating natural 
operation of perpetual disappointments, and it is one of the severer tests of an uplifted 
faith and enduring purpose that "often foiled" is not accepted as failure, and that 
"cast down" does not mean "destroyed." On the other hand, (1) had the apostles 
been enabled to hold their ground against every attack of the spirit of persecution this 
would have been equivalent to an unceasing repetition of miracle ; and the enmity of 
the human heart might have been silenced indeed, but long before it was destroyed 
or had proved its own intrinsic collapse. And (2) those apostles would not have covered 
anything like the same ground, nor secured anything like the same experience of human 
nature. The language of these verses is one result, simple enough and direct, of the 
experience that came from the comparison of one people with another. The contrast 
is brought sharply into prominence by the conduct of Bercea, in quick succession upon 
that of Thessalonica, The people of, Beroea are boldly pronounced " more noble than 
those of Thessalonica." Let us consider the ennobling reasons. 

I. Readiness to beoeive the Wobo, 1. There is, indeed, a " readiness to receiTe ** 
which marks greed. 2. There is a readiness to receive which marks credulity. 3. 
There is a readiness to receive which marks the inertness of indifference. 4. There 
is a readiness to receive which marks a nature conscious of need, and responsive to 
the proper supply of that need, when proffered. The readiness to receive which now 
distinguished the Berceans marked thus a good and a healthy and a spiritual instinct. 
For their readiness was turned toward receiving a " word " that was true and purs 



OH. xvn. 1—34.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 7S 

and not flattering, but faithful to reprove and to teach, as well as to stimulate and uplift 
by promises. Such readiness as this is noble and ennobling. It saves souls pining. 
It saves wasted energies. It obviates vagrant pursuits. And for all such it substitutes 
a genuine education. 

II. Detbkmination to be competent to "give a rbascw of thb hofb" which 
THBRB HAD BEEN " READINESS TO RECEIVE." 1. The Very attitude of the inquirer has 
something of the noble in it, when compared with the custom of the decrier. 2. The 
mastery of prejudice is in itself a sign of nobility, while the rei^^n of prejudice means an 
obstructiveness which infers to none greater loss than to the subject of it. 3. The searcher 
into truth does in the very act ingratiate himself with truth. "Hapfiy is the man" 
who seeks for it as for silver, and searches for it as for hid treasure (Prov. ii. 2 — 5). 
4. Openness to evidence comes inevitably of inquiring honestly, as surely as prejudice 
makes a shut heart and undiscerning mind. Many persons do not see because they 
never set themselves to look. They scarcely think it is given them to use their own 
natural powers. 5. Inquiringness has it in it to infer advantage (1) to individual 
happiness; (2) to social kindliness; (3) to public and general progress. 6. Inquiring- 
ness, when it is turned to things of higher and deeper significance, to things invisible 
and spiritual, to the great themes of the sonl and its need of a Saviour, to the grand 
themes of God and his pitying love to man — this inquiringness carries its own praise 
in it. It is bound to enrich him who practises it and extorts conviction from the 
unwilling, while the spontaneous tribute of commendation is laid at its feet by the just 
and good. That kind of moral certainty that lies in strong conviction is the price won 
by all those who will take the trouble, in matters of Divine import, to "search" 
whether and how they agree and hold together. — B. 

Vers. 23 — 32. — The gospel's kindly encounter with novel foes. The opportunity now 
presented to Paul he must at once have recognized to be one of the grandest and most 
critical of his career. He was for a while separated from his two loved companions, 
and was permitted to face his work alone in the long-time metropolis of the world's 
learning, grace, and art. We are perhaps to understand that Paul somewhat sensitively 
felt his position to be one of a special kind of responsibility. It was certainly none the 
less one of so much the more honour. He does not delay his work. He appears in the 
synagogue (ver. 17) with the Jews and the " devout." In the market-place also he is 
found ready to debate with those who may be willing. The citizens of Athens, and 
the character which now obtained to so remarkable a degree among them, promised 
ground upon which rapid and easy impression, at all events, might be made, whether 
lasting or not. This, however, was held in check to a considerable degree by the 
presence of not a few who not only were naturally likely to fight hard for their pet 
philosophies, but whose very philosophy it was in some cases to attempt to " prove all 
things," at least in their own idea of proving. Paul is not long in being brought into 
the place of chief notoriety. The kind of treatment showed to him by that ancient 
centre of refinement and of intellectual inquiry is vastly different from the treatment 
to which he had become only too accustomed at the hands of the Jews ; and the kindly 
method and tone of the address of Paul seem to be some reflection of it. Still the 
gospel is to grapple, and in Athens it had its work before it. The incisiveness of Paul's 
style does not fall behind its courtesy. Let us notice what Paul has to say when now 
brought fairly in contact with all most typical of a heathen world. 

I. The tboe apostle op Christianity purports to " declare " what the world 
SAT8 18 " UNKNOWN," i.e. GoD. He " declares : " 1. A personal Creator-God, against 
Epicurean* and all various others who either held the world to have been ever or to 
have come of chance. Neither Jesus himself nor Scripture records generally from 
beginning to end presuppose atheism, nor apply themselves to prove the existence oi 
a personal Deity. But when nature, with all her ten thousand voices, has nevertheless 
let down men to a degraded unbelief, or when men have thus let down nature, these 
do pronounce and " declare " in no faltering tone this one starting-point of all upward 
progress, all knowledge, and all goodness (ver. 24). 2. A Creator-God, the opposite_ of 
depending for anything on man, inasmuch as all men depend for all things on him, 
including the initial breath of life, and thereupon every breath they draw. 3. A 
Cre»tor-aod who, bo for a* this world is concerned, knows one family alone, but thai 



80 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xvn. 1— 34 



family the universal one. 4. A Creator-God who does not forsake men to their own 
inventions, but is the present and ruling Providence among them. There is such a 
reality as an administration of the wide empire on earth, and that administration in 
each part, each greater or less distribiitioD, is Divine, is that of God, the sovereign 
God. 5. A Creator-God who admits of no proxy whatsoever of idol fashion. 

II. The true apostle of Christianity undertakes to make an unfaltering 
AFFIRMATION OF THE THDjas MOST DISTINCTIVE OF CHBiSTiANiTy. These shall be facts 
or truths, not grown of reason, not even surmised of reason ; very likely not, in all their 
bearings and all the questions they suggest, such as can be accounted for by reason. 
They occupy by intention a unique place. They come of the pronouncement of One 
who brings aU-siiflBcient credentials, and whom to disbelieve rationally is a greater 
difficulty for reason by far than to believe. This grand, surpassing voice of Heaven is here 
given as threefold. 1. It bids repentance on the part of man. 2. It declares judgment 
to come by Jesus Christ. 3. It declares hereunto the resurrection of Jesus Christ ; and 
certainly, if the resurrection of Jesus Christ is here instanced as speaking volumes for 
his likely judgeship, it will carry all that is necessary for showing men present at his 
solemn judgment-bar. Evidently nothing so much arrested men, when the world's 
clock was then striking, as this announcement of resurrection from the dead for Judge 
and judged. 

III. The true apostle of Chkistianitv does not hide away the element of 

HUMAN RBSPONSIBILITT AND THE NECESSITY OP HUMAN CO-OPEBATION WITH DiVINB 

WORK. This is but one among many ways of asserting that man is himself a creation 
of reason and of heart and of conscience ; in brief, of just so much as to constitute him 
justly responsible to his Creator. Beyond a doubt, we cannot draw the line that says 
where the exertion of man's will and the interposition of God's providence end or 
begin, nor, in all probability, could we see the line if it were drawn. It is none the less 
certain that both of these are facts in human life. Paol goes so far as to say that 
Divine arrangements (ver. 27) lead to Divine inquirings on the part of men, and are 
directly adapted to suggest " seeking the Lord." Notice, therefore : 1. That it lies with 
men, part of their simplest, first, ha|)piest duty, to " seek the Lord," in distinction from 
the vain theory or degrading wish that the belief in the reality of the existence of God 
should be an absolutely necessary owicome of our life or natural iracome of our con- 
viction. It is a remarkable fact that in all highest senses it is both one and the other 
of these things, but that in lower and liteial sense, if it were so, it would bereave 
human knowledge of God of its noblest aspects, noblest tokens, and noblest uses. 
2. That there is so much uncertainty about finding him we seek, as might well give 
zest and energy and trembling vigour to endeavour. 3. That the uncertainty lies 
much in some moral direction of our nature. To " find God " is not the quest of the 
intellect merely or chiefly. It will lie nearer the heart, at aU events, and it will be 
greatly dependent on, say, the conscience) what it is in any man and how he heeds it. 
To " find God " will depend on " feeling after " him. The absence of a certain kind 
and amount of sensibility will in many a case decide, and "that right early," our not 
finding some one or some thing. Some truth and some people are coy. ■ And very 
indisputable it is that sometimes it is of the highest truth and the highest style of 
human character that this is most chiefly true. 4. That to win the crown of " finding " — 
finding really, finding blessedly, finding for ever — is quite among the possibilities ; ay, 
it is among the sure promises exceeding precious to the true seeker. 5. That the 
grand object "sought," "felt after," and "found" is all the time "not far from " any 
one, i.e. really near to every one. He is so near us in our breathing life itself. He is 
so near us in all those qualities which are derived from his parentage. He is ao near 
us in bountiful goodness and in pitying, strong love. — ^B. 

Vers. 32 — 34. — Three hinds of hearing. It is not always given to the hardest and 
most conscientious labourer to reap a large harvest. The day had been a day of hard 
work and faithful work for Paul. Arrived at sunset, he counts more disappointment 
than gain. This passage speaks of three kinds of hearers. And it is telling us of 
facts — facts that were, facts that too often are. Notice — 

L There abb who hear and mock. 1. They mock when they hear something and 
fear something. 2. They mock when they cannot confute what is spoken into theii 



OH. xm. 1—34.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 81 

outer ear, nor silence what speaks of itself in their inner ear. 3. They mock when they 
don't understand and don't try to understand. 4. They mock when they are ready 
to risk everything, rather than yield anything of self and self-will. 

II. There are who hear and peoobastinatk. 1. They procrastinate when they 
ire persuaded — almost. 2. They proerastinate when it is no matter of " two opinions " 
but of active duty or public declaration of themselves. 3. They procrastinate when 
their mind is quite clear, but their heart neither honest nor earnest. 4. They pro- 
crastinate when they feel they must say something, but are not prepared either to do 
or to say the right something. 

III. These are who hear asd believe. 1. They believe when "the Lord has 
opened their heart to attend to the things spoken." 2. They believe when they feel 
that the things spoken are true to their need and are for them. 3. They believe when 
they are practically ready, if needs be, to " forsake " all the rest in order to " cleave to " 
that one Being who has " the words of eternal life." — B. 

Ver. 2. — PauPi manner. "And Paul, as his manner was" (Bevised Tersion, 
" ciistom "). Luke thinks it necessary to record St. Paul's habits in connection with 
his missionary labours, and his point is, not that the apostle kept the sabbath day, but 
that he consistently observed the injunction to the first preachers that they should 
" begin at Jerusalem ; " that is, deliver the gospel message first to the Jews. Whenever 
St. Paul went to a fresh town, " his manner was " to find out the Jews and join them 
at their meeting-place, whether that were proseucha or synagogue. In either case he 
would have the opportunity always offered to visitors to say a word of exhortation to 
the people. Here, at Thessalonica, the fact that St. Paul was allowed to preach for 
three sabbaths in succession shows the respect commauded by his character as a rabbi, 
and, it may be, by his earnest eloquence. We dwell on the fact that Luke recognizes 
a fixed custom and settled habit of the apostle, and seems to feel that anything so 
orderly and regular it was singular to find in so impulsive a man. A great part of 
religious duty concerns the formation and the preservation of godly hibits, and the 
subject is one which may be practically and usefully treated in a Christian congregation. 

I. Settled habits. It is singular that our most common association with the word 
" habit " should be bad habits, and that a much stronger form of teaching should go in 
the direction of warning against or curing bad habits, than in that of culturing and 
nourishing good ones. Moralists have given abundant counsel in respect of common 
habits of personal and social life, but religious teachers, oven of the young, have not 
worthily recognized that habits may be formed in connection with the religious life, 
and that direct instruction and guidance in relation to them is imperatively needed. 
Our Lord had settled habits of prayer and worship, and no Christian life can be hope- 
fully maintained without them. 

IL How HABITS GET SETTLED. By simply doing things again and again with 
regularity. The philosophical and the practical explanations of the formation of habits 
may be given ; and it may be well to show how the very muscles, nerves, and senses 
get fixed by continuing to act in the same direction. But the point to dwell on is that 
habits may be settled by intelligent intention and effort. They may be a product of 
win, and the formation of good habits is a proper exercise of the regenerate will. It 
may be further shown that relations of dependence bring on all parents, masters, or 
teachers, the responsibility of inciting to the formation of good habits and the due 
nourishment and strengthening of them. 

III. How FAR DOBS THE SETTLING OF HABITS DEPEND ON DISPOSITION? In all 

questions of moral culture or religious duty the natural dispositions of men have to be 
taken into account. To some habits come easily, and they can be as easily changed. 
Others only form habits after much self-mastery and conflict. But these are the 
persons who are best helped by habits when once they get them fixed. Such an 
impulsive man as St. Paul might even find it necessary to restrain himself by forcing 
himself into the orderliness of settled habits. Illustrate how differently different 
persons stand related to the great Christian duties — prayer, reading Qod's Word, 
worship, almsgiving, etc. 

IV. How MAT SETTLED HABITS HELP THE MAN WHO HAS FORMED THEM? Ulustr^^ 

especially in relation to the religious life, two points. L They help Mm to master hia 
Mm — ^n. • 



82 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xvn. 1— 34- 

own varying feeling. A man is not always disposed for private prayer or public 
worship, but the habit keeps him related to these things, and it is often found that, 
while engaged in them, the needed mood of feeling will come. Custom only may take 
us to worship, but eye and heart may be opened when we are there. 2. They help 
him to overcome adverse circumstances. Hindrances of family or business life seriously 
affect the man who has no religious habits. They fail to hurt the man who has Lis life 
well ordered, and his regular times and ways. I'he habits soon get recognized, and the 
incidents of life take siiape so as to fit in with them. — B. T. 

Ver. 3. — The three points of Pauline preaching. In ver. 18 the point of St. Paul's 
teaching to the Geutiles is briefly given, and it is seen that he had but one message, 
which he endeavoured to adapt to his varying audiences. To the Gentiles he pi cached 
" Jesus and the resurrection ; " to the Jews lie preached that " Christ must needs have 
suffered, and risen again from the dead; and that Jesus is the Christ." It may b« 
noticed that to a Jewish audience St. Paul could make a twofold appeal : (1) to Old 
Testament Scripture ; and (li) to the established facts connected witli the life, death, 
and resurrection of our Lord. To the Gentiles he could make no appeals to Scripture 
testimony, seeing that they had no written revelation ; but even to them St. Paul could 
make a twofold appeal : (1) to the natural sense of religion, of which their idolatries 
gave witness ; and (2) to the circle of recognized facts connected with the manifestation 
of Christ in the flesh. Still our appeal to men is based on (1) the religious nature ; 

(2) the older revelation ; (3) the historical facts of Christ's life. St. Paul " preached 
the gospel as a herald. Yes, but he preached it also by long arguments, intended and 
constructed to produce faith or persuasion concerning Christ. Indeed, the Greek word 
originally means to carry on an argument by way of dialogue ; question by the hearer, 
answer by the preacher, according to his li^ht. That was the real apostolic method of 
serving Christ — a very eager, earnest, inevitable method. To preach Christ is to 
' reason out of the Scriptures ' and, in a secondary degree, out of the great book 
of human life and experience, and also out of the great book of material nature ; but in 
any case it is to 'reason,' to lay out, the mntter as it seems to ourselves — to press it 
home upon all whom it concerns ; to remonstrate, expostulate, entreat, and then to leave 
the issue with God." Fix attention on St. Paul's three points. 

I. Messiah must suffer. Compare our Lord's teacliiiig to the two disciples on the 
way to Emmaus (Luke xxiv. 25, 26). This suffering of their expected Messiah was 
the point of Old Testament teaching which the Jews missed or resisted. It is in the 
old Scriptures, in psalm and prophecy, plainly enough ; but the conception of the 
Messiah as a national Deliverer aud conquering King had so possessed the minds of 
the people that the prophetic figures of suffering were willingly turned aside, referred 
to some other individual, or assumed to have been exhausted in the troubles of the 
writers. Yet the flrst promise made to men after the B^all gives hint of redemption by 
suffering (see especially Ps. xxii. ; Isa. liii. ; and the Book of Lamentations). Explain 
the influence which the writings of Daniel aud the conflicts of the iMaccabean princes 
had upon the national sentiment. And yet in this necessity for Messiah's sufferings is 
declared the distinction between a temporal and a spiritual Saviour. Christ's weapons 
are not carnal. Of moral weapons none are miglitier than suffering, and few can be 
used without involving suffering. The necessity for Christ's suffering may be shown 
(1) in his humiliation to man's nature; (2) in bis sympathy with man's disabilities; 

(3) in his bearing of man's burden. There was both suffering oi feeling and suffering 
of circumstances. 

II. Messiah must eisb. Of this the older Scriptures give witness. The kind oi 
passages which the apostles took to prove this position are found in St. Peter's first 
sermons ; and the necessity may be shown (1) in that the acceptance by God of his life 
and work on earth must in some way be attested, and (2) in that we must have good 
ground of persuasion that Christ is alive and able to continue the good work which he 
has begun on earth. A Saviour for men who was held fast in the death-grip plainly 
could not deliver man from death, the worst of his foes. Such a seeming Saviour could 
not win our confidence, for it would appear to us that he was defeated at last. And, 
besides, we cannot trust a thing, a ivork ; we must trust a, person who has worked and 
can work, and therefore Messiah must rise from the dead and be alive for everm«». 



OH, xvn. 1— 34.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 83 

III. Messiah is Jesus of Nazabeth. The things found to be necessary are met in 
him, and in him alone. Show the correspondence between the facts of the Christian 
teaching and the requirements of Scripture prophecy, and impress the personal demand 
which St. Paul makes to follow on his argument; then your loyalty, your trust, your 
love, your life, are demanded for Jesus Messiah. — li, T, 

Ver. 11. — Tke nobility of the inquiring spirit. The people of Beroea are commended 
for their disposition to inquire and searcli into the truth of Christianity as it was tau2;ht 
to them by the apostolic missionaries. They were not the slaves of prejudice. " With 
a quick and clear intelligence they searched the Scriptures daily to see whether they 
really did speak of a Christ who should suffer and rise again. The Beroean converts have 
naturally been regarded, especially among those who urge the duty or claim the right 
of private judgment, as a represeutative instance of the right relations of reason and 
faith, occupying a middle position between credulity and scepticism." The attitudes 
of men towards truth, as freshly revealed, or as revealed in fresh forms, are threi-fold : 
(1) some are wilfully antagonistic ; (2) some are weakly receptive ; (3) some are intel- 
ligently sceptical. The word " scepticism " may be used in a good as well as in a bad 
sense. It properly stands for that disposition to question and doubt which is one of the 
features of the thoughtful and inquiring mind. 

I. Scepticism as dependent on natural disposition. There are, in respect of this 
spirit, marked diversities in nations and in races. And there are answering differences 
in families and in individuals. Usually the sceptical spirit is found in men rather than 
in women, who are as remarkable for their receptivity as men for their tendency to 
criticism. The beginnings of what will alterwaids appear as scepticism are found in 
children. Some will question the why and wherefore of everything that is lold them, 
while others will open wide eyes, and take in as real, the strangest fairy tales that can 
be told them. A ^reat part of the responsibility of parents and teachers lies in the need 
for culturing — cultivating or restraining — the early signs of the sceptical spirit. Where 
the sceptical spirit is unduly developed the corrective spirit of faith must be nourished ; 
and where credulity is excessive, the mind must be quickened to doubt. Mmisters 
need to remember that both classes are found in their congregations, and that both 
classes have to be wisely led to intelligent faith. 

II. Scepticism as fostebed by intellectual pbidk. This is one of the gravest 
difficulties of our age, in which remarkable advances in knowledge have been made. 
Those advances have chiefly burne relation to the sphere of the physical sciences, and 
in that sphere pride is readily nourished, because, apparently," all depends on men's 
own observation and research. It becomes easy for men to say — What we observe and 
know is the truth ; and there is no other truth than " truth of fact." So we find all 
around us much scepticism in relation to the moral, spiritual, revelational spheres : a 
disposition to unreasonable doubt; to doubting for doubting's sake. This needs to be 
wisely but firmly rebuked, and its real source, in mere piide of intellect, should 
be pointed out. The physical is not the only sphere through which God has revealed 
himself to his creatures ; and it never can be a sign of human wisdom that the best 
three parts of God's revelation are set aside as the dreams of dreamers. 

III. Scepticism as a result of associations. As a disposition of mind, scepticism 
takes a place among infectious mental diseases, communicated very readily by association. 
A sceptical workman will infect his fellows. A sceptical student will change the tone 
of his college. A sceptical member of a family will destroy the recipiency of a whole 
family. So we, who have any kind of trust of others, need to be watchful over the 
mfluence of such persons. A minister's influence in a congregation may be seriously 
resisted by the power among the people of one unreasonably critical and sceptical mem- 
ber. He will look with high hope on every sign of the Beroean spirit, the spirit of 
intelligent inquiry and researcn, but he has fewer things that call for his watchful care 
than the infection of the sceptical spirit, which will at once impair his influence as a 
Christian teacher. And the association of looks of a prevailing critical and unbeliev- 
ing character will be found quite as dangerous as that of sceptical persons, 

IV. Scepticism as an impulse to inquiey. This is its good gide ; and in thii 
the example of the Beroeans is commended to us. It is the spirit that seeks for twc 
'.hings : (1) comprehension, or the distinct, clear, »nd intelligent understanding of any 



84 THE ACTS Off THE APOSTLES. [oh. xto. 1— 34 

teachings ; and (2) verification, or adequate and reasonable grounds for belief. But it 
is characteristic of intelligent inquiry that it seeks its proofs within the spheres of ita 
subjects. If it inquires concerning physical principles, it seeks for proof and illustra- 
tion in physical facts. If its sphere be moral or spiritual, it asks for moral oi spiritual 
reason and proof. So the Beroeans did not confuse the spheres and domains of inquiry. 
The matter was one of prophetic revelation and of answering historical fact, and there- 
fore their inquiries concerned (1) the actual contents of the revelation, and (2) the 
credibility of the witnesses to the historical facts. 

Conclude by showing the relations of scepticism to faith. The noble man, the 
intelligent believer, must have won faith out of scepticism — in the sense of humble 
and earnest inquiry. Those who are simply receptive have their mission in the world, 
and we desire to institute no unworthy, no discouraging comparisons ; but for the active 
forms of Christian work, and for the emergencies of the Christian conflict, those are 
needed who have won faith out of fight. The Beroeans are commended because they 
doubted and inquired ; and yet this is the very thing which many nowadays would 
have feared. But one thing made their inquiries so safe — they led them to the Scrip- 
tures, and to tha searching of God's revealed Word. — B, T. 

I 

Vers. 19 — 21. — The passion fen" something new. Demosthenes said, in one of hia 
speeches, " Tell me, is it all you care for, to go about up and down the market, asking 
each otlier, ' Is there any news ? ' " The restless inquisitiveness of the Athenian 
character had all along been proverbial. It did not alone distinguish the Athenians, 
though it gained a peculiar prominence in their case. It has returned upon man in 
such power, now that telegraphs and newspapers bind the nations together, that it may 
profitably be made the subject of Christian meditation. 

I. It 80UETIME3 COMES TO BE) A DISEASE. A mental disease. A restlessness that 
we see illustrated in some children, who tire at once of their toys and crave for 
something new. We see it in the world of fashion, in which garments are speedily set 
aside, and the last new colour, or shape, or material is eagerly sought. It is equally 
shown in the passion for the newest books, the 'last newspaper, the freshest opinion, 
the present excitement. It even afflicts Christian people, who in a crowd run after the 
newest revivalist, and cry for the latest novelty in doctrine or in Church method. It 
is a kind of feverish delirium, which palls the appetite, vitiates the taste, and makes 
patient continuance in well-doing impossible. It needs to be treated as a disease, and 
Its influence in a family, in social life, and in the Church needs to be carefully checked. 
It is not progress that is usually sought, because true progress ever goes slowly ; it is 
mere novelty that is sought. We may generally say that " the old is better." 

II. It 18 ONE OF THE SIGNS OF ovEBDONE CIVILIZATION. It is a marked feature 
of a nation that is struggling up into civilization, that all its members must be workers, 
and none can be kept in idleness. To such a nation mere news is the amusement of its 
resting leisure hours ; it cannot be the sober business of its days. But when nations 
have long reached the high levels of civilization, wealth has increased, multitudes can 
live in idleness, and, having nothing better to do, they may run after the latest stranger 
in art, or science, or music, or politics, or religion, and gathering round him say, 
" May we know what this new doctrine is, whereof thou speakest?" This is well illus- 
trated in the case of the Athenians, who were surfeited with art and philosophy and 
superstitious religion. A city full of wealthy idlers, no doubt of good taste and cul- 
tured minds, who had nothing better to do than to run after the last new thing. The 
antidote for this evil is the preaching of the responsibility resting on every man to be 
a worker, and a worker for the general welfare. Nobody has any right to food and life 
save as they work, in some good way, for it. Workers soon get interest enough to stop 
their yearning for " something new." Illustrate how these things may be applied to 
Church life. Chwdi work is the great remedy for the hindering passion for novelty. 

III. Yet rr is an indioation of the universal aspibation fob immobtalitt 
There is good in it ; the evil of it lies (1) in the forms it takes, and (2) in the excessive 
degrees of its exercise. That something in us all which cannot rest, which must seek 
fer something more ; which rises up above all bondages and limitations ; which ii m 

■An infant crying in the night, 
An infant crying for the light;* 



m. xvn. 1— 34.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES, 86 



is but the aspiration of souls made in the image of God, who cry for permanence, fof 
holiness, for rest, for God, and " can find no rest until they find rest in him." We 
must seek after something new, on and on, until we find God. And Scripture inspires 
MS to such seeking ; for it assures us that " Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither 
hath the heart of man conceived, the things which God hath prepared for them that 
love him." And though, in measure, these have heen revealed unto us by the Spirit, 
yet again we are led on by the Word ; for " it doth not yet appear what we shall be : 
but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him ; for we shall see him 
as he iB."— R. T. 

Ver. 23. — " The unknown Ood." For description of the statues and altars to various 
divinities with which Athens was crowded, see Conybeare and Howson, ' Life and 
Epistles of St. Paul,' vol. i. pp. 415—417. " Roman satirists say, ' It was easier to find 
a god in Athens than a man.' Athenian religion ministered to art and amuse- 
ment, and was entirely destitute of moral power. Taste and excitement alone were 
gratified. A religion which addresses itself only to the taste is as weak as one that 
appeals only to the intellect." In illustration of the altar to which St. Paul here 
alludes, Aulius Gellius says, " The ancient Komans, when alarmed by an earthquake, 
were accustomed to pray, not to a specified divinity, but to a god expressed in vague 
language, as avowedly unknown." For further illustration, see the Expository portion 
of this work ; and ' Commentary for English Readers,' in loc. We now fix attention on — 

L The confusions of polytheism. Its worshippers can never be quite sure that 
they have propitiated the right god, seeing that gods are supposed to be related to par- 
ticular places, nations, events, sins, etc. This confusion tends to create a more and more 
elaborate ritual, and a wearisome round of ceremonies. All gods who may possibly 
be related to the matter iu hand must be propitiated, and then the right one may be 
missed. 

II. The bestfulness of monotheism. One God stands related to all nature, to all 
events, to all ages, to all sins ; and if we can know him and secure right relations 
with him, there is no one else to fear, no one else to come on us with claims. Behind 
God there is nobody and nothing. Rest in him is rest for ever. 

III. Thb full satisfaction of the onb God knowu in Chbist. " Manifest in 
the flesh." Show how men in seeking after God want some form under which they 
may present him to their minds. This necessity is the secret cause of all idol-making. 
And God has graciously met it, and fully satisfied it, by presenting to us himself, 
apprehended as the " Man Christ Jesus." And this incarnation of the one and only God 
St. Paul preached to the Athenians. The name of the " imknown Qod " is Jesus, 
the Christ.— R. T. 

Ver. 23. — Athenian religion. " Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare 
I nnto you." The materials for an introduction are found in the following suggestive 
passage from F. D. Maurice : — " This language assumed that the Athenians were in 
search of God ; that they were ignorantly worshipping him ; that they had a sense of 
his being a Father ; that they wanted some one living human image of him, to sup- 
plant those images of him which they had made for themselves. . . . This teaching 
was adapted to all that was true and sound in the Greek mind. The Greek asked for 
one who should exhibit humanity in its perfection ; and he was told of the Son ol 
man. He fslt that whoever did so exhibit humanity must be Divine. The Son of man 
was declared to be ths Son of God. He had dreamed of one from whom the highest 
glory man could conceive must have proceeded. He was told of the Father. He had 
thought of a Divine presence in every tree and flower. He heard of a presence 
nearer still to himself." We may learn from St. Paul's speech how we ought to 
think of the Gentile nations of the earth, and what it lies upon us to do on their 
behalf. He shows us what " gospel " — what " good news of God " — ^has to be taken to 
the nations ; and, by his example, he indicates in what spirit the message should be 
taken. Speaking amidst the surroundings of idol altars, statues, and temples, St. Paul — 

L Beooskizes the BELiaionsNESs OF THE Atheniakb. He was placed in a position 
of exceeding difSculty. To have attacked those pagan divinities in the very midst ol 
their lanctuariei and altars, and before the very court which guarded the uationa' 



88 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xvii. 1— 34 

religion, would have closed the ears of his audience to any message which he migh< 
deliver, and might have put him in some personal danger. In his speech he heartily 
recognizes the worshipping instinct ; he sees the dissatisfaction with all existing forms 
of worship which indicates an aching and yearning of soul to linow the full truth of 
God. To the unrest which the strangely inscribed altar revealed, he made his appeal. 
He does not attempt to break down their confidence in Zens, Athene, or their com- 
panion divinities. He appeals to the want which no mere deification of human attri- 
butes or powers of nature could possibly satisfy. St. Paul admits a real worship iti 
paganism. He admits that the incompleteness and imperfectness of the worship 
followed from their ignorance. He attempts to guide the worshipping faculty aright, by 
instructing their understandings, and by declaring positive truths of Divine revelation. 

II. The apostle plainly marks ^hh erbors op the Athenians. He does not 
hesitate to say, " ignorantly worship," even to those who prided themselves on their 
learning. He accepts their own confession that they did not know the God to whom 
they raised their altar. They were wrong in their cherished conceptions of God, and 
wrong in the worship they offered to him. They lowered the very idea of God, by 
likening him to mere man-made images of gold and silver. They offered things to one 
who, being a Father, cared for hearts, and for things only as they carried messages of 
love and trust. The sacrifices of the true God are a " broken and a contrite, heart," 
and they who " worship the Father must worship him in spirit and in truth." Three 
conceptions of God are essential as the foundations of true doctrine and true worship. 
1. Eis unity. " There is no God but God." 2. His sidrituality. " God is a Spirit." 
3. His righteousness. He has been called, and the name has in it good guggestion, 
" The Eternal who makes for righteousness." 

III. The apostle declares the truth which the Athenians missed. " Him 
declare I unto you." We may briefly summarize his presentation of the gospel 
revelation, as adapted to the Athenians. 1. He announces God to be a personal Being: 
no mere force, like the sunlight or the evening breeze. No mere quality or virtue, 
such as they deified, raising altars to fame, to modesty, to energy, to persuasion, and 
to pity. God is living. He is one. He is the Source of all life, all breath, all being. 
You cannot imprison God in a statue, even though you may mould it of priceless gold. 
You cannot enshrine God in a temple, however gorgeous it may be. 2. Then St. Paul 
explains God's seeming indifference to men through the long ages. It was a mystery, 
but only the mystery of patient, forbearing love, which waited until the children put 
all their souls into the cry for him. 3. And, finally, he tells them that the waiting- 
time is quite past, and the great Father has come to the childi'en now, asking their 
trust and their love. And the Father's nearness is to be apprehended through the 
human manifestation of his Son. " He preached unto them Jesus." — R. T. 

Vers. 28, 29. — Qod^s offspring. "For we are also his offspring." The source 
whence St. Paul derived this quotation is given in the Exogetical portion of this Com- 
mentary. It may be well to point out how such a classical quotation would secure 
the sustained attention of bis audience. Dean Plumptre suggestively remarks, 
" The method of St. Paul's teaching is one from which modem preachers might well 
learn a lesson. He does not begin by telling men that they have thought too highly 
of themselves, that they are vile worms, creatures of the dust, children of the devil. 
The fault which he finds in them is that they have taken too low an estimate of theii 
position. They too had forgotten that they were God's offspring, and had counted 
themselves, even as the unbelieving Jews had done (ch. xiii. 4ti), ' unworthy of eternal 
life.'" The truth set before us in the text is that of the fatherly relation of God to all 
men, and the answering child-relation of all men to God. 

I. Thk fact seen in its univbrralitt. It is commonly assumed that St. Paul 
meant no more than to remind his audience that there was only one Creator, and that 
all men were made in his image. But he must have farther designed (1) to reveal 
God to them ; (2) to give them the best of names for him; (3) and to awaken in them 
the sense of his universal claims to love and trust. 

II. Thk relations of Son and Father thus involved. These cannot be mad* 
by Christ ; they belong to us, and are the very conditions of our being. 1. Christ does 
tfasHt iu to recognize the relation. 2. Ue does restore it as a broken relation. 3. 



en. ivm. 1—28.] 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



8^ 



He does show the glory of the relation in his own human life. 4. He does help us, hy 
his grace and Spirit, to meet and fulfil the claims of the relation. " Because we are 
sons, God hath sent forth the spirit of his Son into our hearts." 

III. The abqument fob the spieitualitt of God thus indicated. Work out 
and illustrate : 1. That a thing can never be superior to its maker. If God made us, he 
must be better than we are, and we are manifestly better than speechless statues. 2. 
Man, the son, is a spiritual being ; then God, the Father, must be spiritual too. 

IV. The claims op God on men thus enforced. Fatherhood means authority. 
What God commands we must heed. He commands two things. 1. That we should 
repent. 2. That we should receive his gift of eternal life in Christ. " God hath givea 
unto ua eternal life, and this life is in his Son." — B. T. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XVm. 



Ver. 1.— He for Paul, A.V. and T.R. 
After these things, etc. No hint is given 
by St. Luke as to the length of Paul's 
Bojoum at Athens. But as the double 
journey of the Beroeans, who accompanied 
him to Athens, back to Beroaa, and ot 
Timothy from Bercea to Athens, amounted 
to above five hundred miles (Lewin, p. 268), 
we cannot suppose it to have been less than 
a month ; and it may have been a good deal 
nBore. His reasonings in the synagogue 
with the Jews and devout Greeks, apparently 
on successive sabbaths, his daily disputations 
in the Agora, apparently not begun till 
after he had " waited " some time for Silas 
and Timothy, the knowledge he had 
acquired of the numerous temples and 
altars at Athens, and the phrase with which 
this chapter begins, all indicate a stay of 
some length. Came to Corinth. If by land, 
a forty miles' or two days' journey, through 
Elensis and Megara ; if by sea, a day's saU. 
Lewin thinks he came by sea, and that it 
was in winter, and that possibly one of the 
shipwrecks mentioned in 2 Cor. xi. 25 may 
have occurred at this time. Corinth, at this 
time a Roman colony, the capital of the 
province of Achaia, and the residence of 
the proconsul. It was a great commercial 
city, the centre of the trade of the Levant, 
and conaeijuently a great resort of the Jews. 
It had a very large Greek population. 
Ancient Corinth had been destroyed by 
Mummius, surnamed Achaicus, b.o. 146, 
and remainsd waste (ip^fi/ni) many years. 
Julius Csesar founded a Roman colony on 
the old site (Howson), "consisting princi- 
pally of freedmen, among whom were great 
numbers of the Jewish race." Corinth, as 
a Roman colony, had its duumviri, as appears 
by coins of the reign of Claudius (Lewin, p. 
271). 

Ver. 2. — He found for found, A.V. ; 
a man of Pontus by race for born in Pontu*, 
A.V. ; because for because that, A.V.; the 
Jtum for Jevn, A.V. ; he eamt tat eame, A.V. 



Aquila. A Roman name, Grocized ioto 
'AkvKus. Knights and tribunes and othera 
of the name occur in Roman history. 
Whether the Jewish family residing in 
Pontus took the name of Aquila from any 
of these Romans is not known. Aquila, 
the translator of the Old Testament into 
Greek about a.d. 130, was also a Jew of 
Pontus, the old kingdom of Mithridates. 
That there was a considerable colony of 
Jews in Pontus appears also from 1 Pet. i. 1 
and ch. ii. 9. PrisoiUa. Also called Prisca 
(2 Tim, iv. 19). So in classical authors, 
Livia and Livilla, Drusa and Drusilla, are 
used of the same persons (Howson, p. 415). 
Prisca is a not uncommon name for Roman 
women. The masculine Prisons occurs 
very frequently. Aquila and PrisoiUa were 
among the most active Christians, and the 
most devoted friends of St. Paul (vers. 18, 
26 ; Rom. xvi. 3, 4, 5 ; 1 Cor. xvi. 1& ; 2 Tim. 
iv. 19); and were evidently persons of 
culture as well as piety. lately ; ■!rpo(T(pi.Tai 
{i.q. TTpSaiparov, Pindar, etc.), only found here 
in the New Testament. But it occurs in 
the LXX. of Dent. xxiv. 5 and Ezek. xi. 3, 
and in the apocryphal books repeatedly, 
and in Polybius. The adjective ■itp6tr(paTos, 
which is also used by the LXX. and the 
Apocrypha and in classical Greek for " new," 
is used only once in the New Testament, 
in Heb. x. 20. It means properly "newly 
killed," hence anything "recent," "fresh, 
or "new." Both the adjective and the 
adverb are very common in medical writings. 
Claudins had commanded all the Jews to 
depart from Borne. Suetonius mentions the 
fact, but unfortunately does not say in what 
year of Claudius's reign it took place. His 
account is that, in consequence of frequent 
disturbances and riots among the Jews at 
the instigation of Chrestus, Claudius drove 
them from Rome. It seems almost certain, 
as Renan says, especially combining Tacitus's 
account (' Annal.,' xv. 44) of the spread of 
Christianity in the city of Rome before the 
time of Nero, that Clvrestut (Greek XpTjcrrciv) 
is only • corruption of the name Christ, 



88 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xvm. 1—21 



similaT to that found on three or four in- 
scriptions before the time of Oonstantine, 
where Christians are called XpTiariavoi, and 
to tlie formation of the French word Chretien 
— in old French Chrestien ; and that the true 
account of these riots is that they were 
attacks of the unbelieving Jews upon 
Christian Jews, similar to those at Jeru- 
salem (ch. viii.), at Antioch in Fisidia 
(ch. xiii. 50), at Iconium and Lystra (ch. 
xiv.), and at Thessalonioa and Beroea (ch. 
xvii.). The Bomans did not discriminate 
between Jews and ChriBtian Jews, and 
thought that those who called Christ their 
King were fighting nnder his leadership 
(conip. ch. xvii. 7 ; Luke xxiii. 2 ; see 
Renan, ' St. Paul,' p. 101). Tertullian and 
Lactantius (quoted by Lewin, p. 274) both 
Bpeak of the vulgar pronunciation, Chres- 
tianua and Chrestua. Howson also adopts 
the above explanation. But Meyer thinks 
that ChrestuB was, as Suetonius says, a 
Jewish leader of insurrection at Rome. 
The question bears on the passage before 
us chiefly as the solution does or does not 
prove the existence of Christians at Bome 
at this time, and affects the probability of 
AquUa and Friscilla being already Christians 
when they came to Corinth, before they 
made St. Paul's acquaintance. 

Ver. 3. — Trade for craft, A.V. ; they 
wrought for (he) vrrougM, A.V. and T.K. ; 
trade for occupation, A.V. (jix^v)- Of the 
same trade ; dixSrexvoy. This word occurs 
here only in the New Testament, but is of 
frequent use in Hippocrates, Dioscorides, 
and Galen (Hobart, as before). Tent- 
makers; iTKrivoiroiot, which is paraphrased 
by rrKrii>o^l>d<pot, tent-stitehers or tailors, by 
Chrysostom and Theodoret. Hug and 
others erroneously interpret it "makers of 
tent-cloth," from the fact that a certain 
kind of cloth made of goats' hair, called 
KiXiKiav, was manufactured in Paul's native 
country of Cilicia. But the fact of such 
manufacture would equally lead persons 
who were living in Cilicia to exercise the 
trade of making tents of the cloth so manu- 
factured. St. Paul alludes to his manual 
labour in oli. ix. 33-35; 1 Cor. iv. 12; 
1 Thess. ii. 9 ; 2 Thess. iii. 8, 9. 

Ver. 4. — Jews and Greeki for the Jewi and 
the Oreeks, A.V. Observe again the in- 
fluence of the synagogue upon the Greek 
population. BeaBoued (see oh. xvii. 2, 
17, note). 

Ver. 5. — But for and, A.V. ; Timothy for 
Timntheug, A.V. ; eame down for were come 
down, A.V. ; constrained by the Word for 
pressed in spirit, A.V. and T.B. ; testifying 
for and testified, A.V. ; (he Christ for Christ, 
A.V. When Silas and Timothy, etc. It in 
probable that Silas had returned by St. 
Paul's directious to Beroea, and Timothy to 



Thessalpnlca from Athens. If there were 
extant a letter of Paul to the Beroeans, it 
would probably mention his sending back 
Silas to them, just as the Epistle to the 
Thessalonians mentions his sending Timothy 
to them. Now they both come to Corinth 
from Macedonia, which includes Beroea and 
Thessalonioa, If they came by sea, they 
would probably sail together from Dium to 
CenchresB (see ch. xvii. 14, ncte)> Was 
constrained by the Word. As an English 
phrase, this is almost destitute of meaning. 
If the B.T. is right, and it has very strong 
manuscript authority, the words uvyeixero 
T^ \6y(p mean that he was seized, taken pos- 
session of, and as it were bound by the 
necessity of preaching the Word, constrained 
as it were to preach more earnestly than 
ever. In St. Luke <rvv€xe(r6M is a medical 
term : in Luke iv. 28, E.T., " Holden with 
a great fever; " Luke viii. 37, "Holden with 
a great fear;" ch. xxviii. 8, "Sick of fever 
and dysentery ; " and so frequently in 
medical writers ('Meilical Language of St. 
Luke,' Hobart). But it is worth considering 
whether (rwelxeTo is not in the middle voice, 
with the sense belonging to avvixh^, '•«• 
"continuous," " unbroken," and so that the 
phrase means that, after the arrival of Silas 
and Timothy, St. Paul gave himself up to 
continuous preaching. St. Luke has not 
unfrequently a use of words peculiar to him- 
self. The Vulgate rendering, instabat verba, 
seems so to understand it. It was probably 
soon after the arrival of Silas and Timothy 
that St. Paul wrote his First Epistle to the 
Thessalonians (1 Thess. i. \ ■ iii. 1, 2, 6). 
The Second Epistle followed some time be- 
fore St. Paul left Corinth. If the T.E., rif 
irvti/iaTi, is right, it must be construed, 
"constrained by the Spirit," in accordance 
with Greek usage. Testif^g, etc Note 
how different St. Paul's preaching in the 
synagogue was from his preaching in tha 
Areopagus. 

Ver. 6. — Shook out for shook, A.V. For 
this action of shaking his raiment, comp. 
oh. xiii. 51. It was in accordance with our 
Lord's direction in Matt. x. 14, where the 
same word (^/tTii/offo-eu') is used. It is "much 
employed in medical language" (Hobart, 
' Medical Language of St. Luke,' p. 240). The 
idea seems to be having nothing henceforth 
in common with them. Your blood, etc. (see 
Bzek. xxxiii. 4—9). St. Paul's keen sense 
of the perverseness of the Jews breaks out 
in his First Epistle to the Thessalonians (ii. 
14 — 16), written about this time. See nota 
to ver. 5. 

Ver. l.—Went for entered, A.V. ; thehouss 
of a certain man for a certain man's house 
A.V. ; Titus Justus for Justus, A.V. and T.B 
Thence Clearly from the synagogue, when 
he had been preaching to the Jews, not 



BH. ma. 1 — 28.} 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



89 



ttom Aqnila'i honse, as Alford and otliers. 
It does not appear to be a question here of 
where Paul lodged, but where he preached. 
Justus had probably a large room, which he 
gave Paxil the use of for his sabbath and other 
meetings. As Howsoq truly says, he con- 
tinued to " lodge" (/icVeic) with Aquila and 
Prisoilla. It is only said that he " came" 
(^\ee») to the house of Justus from the 
synagogue. So Kenan, " II enseigna desor- 
mais dans la maison de Titius Justus" 
(p. 216). One that worshipped God (o-e/So/ue- 
rov rhv ee6v) ; i.e. a Greek proselyte of the 
gate (see ch. xiii. 43, 50 ; xri. 14 ; xvii. 
4, 17, etc.)- Cornelius is called eixreiS^js 
Kal (poPoi/ievos rhv @e6v. Whose house, etc. 
Either his proximity to the synagogue had 
led to his attending there, or, being already 
a proselyte, he had taken a house hard by 
for the convenience of attending. Joined 
hard ; ^v trvvoixopovaa, found only here either 
in the New Testament or elsewhere. 'O/iope'ai 
occurs in Plutarch; tTui>6/iopos is also a 
word(Steph., 'Thesaur.'). 

Ver. 8. — Buler for chief ruler, A.V. 
(Jipxtffvvdytcyos, as in ch. xiii. 15) ; in for 
on, A.V. Crispus (a common Eoman name) 
was one of the very few whom St. Paul 
himself baptized, probably on account of his 
important position as ruler of the syna- 
gogue, as we learn from 1 Cor. i. 14. 
With all his house (comp. oh. xvi. 33, 34). 
Many of the Corinthians ; i.e. of the Greeks 
and Romans, who composed the population 
of the city. It is seldom that we have the 
names of so many converts preserved as we 
have of this Achaiau mission. Besides 
Crispus and Gains, we know of Epsenetus 
and Stephanas, who would seem to have 
been converted together (Kom. xvi. 5 ; 1 Cor. 
xvi. 15); and probably also Fortunatus 
and Achaicni (1 Cor. xvi. 17). Gaius, from 
his name (Cains) and his salutation to 
the Church at Eome, was probably a 
Boman. Fortunatus and Achaicus also be- 
belonged, perhaps, to the Roman colony. 
Here too were many heathen conveits (1 
Cor. lii. 2), though mostly of the lower 
rank (1 Cor. i. 26—29). 

Ver. 9. — And the Lord said unto for then 
spake the Lord to, A.V. A vision (_opana) ; 
literally, a thing teen, but always used of a 
wonderful "sight:" Matt. xvii. 9 of the 
Transfiguration, ch. vii. 31 of the burning 
bush. But more commonly of a " vision," 
as in ch. ix. 10, 12 ; x. 3, 17, 19 ; xi. 5 ; xii. 
9 ; xvi. 9. So in the LXX. (Gen. xlvi. 2, etc.). 
St. Paul received a similar gracious token of 
the Lord's watchful care of him soon after 
Ws conversion (oh. xxii. 17 — 21). He tells 
us that then he was in an " ecstasy," or 
trance. The eK(rra<rts describes the mental 
condition of the person who sees an Spaita, 

Ver. IQ,—Barm for lliiM-t, A.V. I hav* 



much people, etc. We may infer from this 
intimntion from him who " knoweth them 
that are his," which led to St. Paul staying 
on at Corinth upwards of a year and six 
months (ver. 11), that the shortness of his 
stay at Athens was because the Lord had 
not much people there. For the encourag- 
ing promise of protection in the midst of 
danger given to St. Paul by Christ in this 
vision, comp. Jer. i. 17 — 19. 

Ver. 11. — Dwelt for continued, A.V, 
Dwelt ; literally, eat down, as ch. xiii. 14, 
etc., and hence to " remain quietly " (Luke 
xxiv. 49). A year and six months. It is not 
clear whether these eighteen months are to 
be measured to the end of St. Paul's stay 
at Corinth, or only to the rising up of the 
Jews related in vers. 12 — 17. Eenan is 
doubtful. Howson does not go into the 
question. But Lewin rightly measures the 
eighteen months down to Gallio's arrival. 
And so does Meyer, who also notices the 
force of eKaBia-e, as indicating a quiet, un- 
disturbed abode, and calls special attention 
to the €Ti of ver. 18, as showing that the 
"many days" there mentioned were ad- 
ditional to the year and a half of ver. 11. 
The only longer residence we know of was 
that of three years at Ephesus (ch. xx. 31). 

Ver. 12. — But for and, A.V. ; proconsul 
for tlie deputy, A.V. ; with one accord rose 
up for made insurrection with one accord, 
A.V. ; he/ore for to, A.V. Gallic. Marcus 
AnnsBus Novatus took the name of Lucius 
Junius Annseus Gallic, on account of his 
adoption by L. Junius Gallic. He was the 
elder brother of Seneca, and a man of 
ability, and of a most amiable temper and 
disposition. His brother Seneca said that 
he had not a fault, and that everybody 
loved him. He was called " Dulcis Gallic " 
by Statins. It is unfortunately not known 
exactly in what year Gallic became either 
Consul or Proconsul of Achaia. Had it 
been known, it would have been invaluable 
for fixing the chronology of St. Paul's life. 
Lewin puts it (his proconsulate) in the year 
A.D. 53, and so does Reiian ; Howson, 
between a.d. 52 and A.D. 54. The cir- 
cumstantial evidence from secular writers 
corroborating St. Luke's account is ex- 
ceedingly curious. There is no account 
extant either of his consulate or of his 
proconsulate of Achaia. But Pliny, speak- 
ing of the medicinal effect of a sea-voyage 
on persons in consumption, gives aa an 
example, "as I remember was the case 
with AnnsBUB Gallic after his consulate," 
and seems to imply that he went to Egypt 
for the sake of the long se«-voyage ; which 
would suit very well Us ^oing there from 
his government in Achaia (Pliny, 'Nat. 
Hist.,' xxxL cap. vL 83). And that his pro- 
consulate was in Aolutia is ooirohontej 



90 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES 



[oh. xvrD. 1 — 28 



by a chance quotation in Seneca's Epiatle 
104, of a saying of "my lord (iallio, 
when he had a fever in Achaia and im- 
mediately went on board ship," where the 
phrase "domini mei," applied to his own 
brother, seems also to indicate his high 
rank. Profane history also shuts up the 
probable date of Gallio's proconsulate 
between the year a.d. 49 and the jear 
A.r. 65 or 66, in which he died. There is 
a diversity of accounts as to his death. 
Ernesti, in hia note on Tacitus, 'Annal.,' 
XV. Ixziii., where Tacitus spealrs of him as 
frightened at the death of his brother 
Seneca, and a suppliant for his own life, 
says, "quem Nero post interfecit," and refers 
to Dion Cassius, 5S, 18, and Eusebius. But 
Dion is there speaking of Junius Gallio in 
tiie reign of Tiberius, not of our Gallio at 
all ; though afterwards, speaking of the 
death of Seneca, he says, " and his brothers 
also were killed after him " (62, 25).' As for 
Eusebius, the passage quoted '' is not found 
in the Greek or Armenian copies of the 
' Chronicon,' but only in the Latin of Jerome. 
But, as Scaliger points out, tliere is a mani- 
fest blunder here, because the ' Chronicon ' 
places the death of Gallio two years before 
that of Seneca, whereas we iniow from 
Tacitus that Gallio was alive after his 
brother's death. Moreover, the description 
" egregius declamator " clearly applies to 
Junius Gallio the rhetorician, and not to 
Gallio his adopted son. Though, tlierefore, 
Eenau says, " Comme son frfere il eut 
rhonneur sous Neron d'expier par, la mort 
sa distinction et son honnetete " (' St. 
Paul,' p. 222), if we give due weight to 
the silence of Tacitus, it is very doubtful 
whether he died a violent death at all. 
St. Luke, as usual, is most accurate in 
calling him proeonsul. Achaia had been 
recently made a senatorial province by 
Claudius. For aMiraTos, see ch. xiii. 
7, 8, 12 ; xix. 38. The verb occurs only 
here in the New Testament. The term 
deputy was adopted in the A.V. doubtless 
from that being the title of the Viceroy 
of Ireland, and other ofiScera who exercise 
a deputed authority, just as the proconsul 
was in the place of the consul. Bose up 
against; /tctTeTreVxTurai'iOneof Luke's peculiar 
words, found neither in the New Testament 

' This is corroborated by Tacitus as far 
u one brother, Annseus Mella, the father of 
the poet Liican, is concerned, but not as 
regards Gallio. 

' " Junius AnnsBus Gallio, frater SenectB, 
egregius declamator, propria se manu inter- 
fecit, mortem ejusNerone in snam presentiam 
differente" ('Eusebii Pamp. Chronic Lib. 
Posterior luterpr. Hieronymo,' p. 161 of 
Bcaliger's edJtion,underthe number mmlxxx.) 



nor in the LXX., nor in classical writeri 
(Steph., 'Thesaur.'). The judgment-seat 
(see note to ver. 12). 

Ver. li.—Man for feUow, A.V. The A.V. 
was intended to express the contemptuous 
feeling often implied in oZtos (Luke xxiii. 
2; Matt. xii. 24; ch. t. 28, etc.). Con- 
trary to the Law ; meaning, as it naturally 
would in the mouth of a Jew, the Law of 
Moses. Hence Gallio's answer in yer. 15, 
" If it be a question ... of your Law, look 
ye to it." The very phrase, to " worship 
God," had a technical sense (see above, 
ver. 7). Paul, they said, professed to make 
proselytes, and encouraged them to break the 
Law. 

Ver. 14, — But for and, A.V. ; about tot 
now about. A.V. ; if indeed tat if, A.V. ; of 
wicked villainy for wicked lewdness, A.V. 
The Greek liaStoipyriiJ.a occurs only here in 
the New Testament or elsewhere ; ^aSioupyia, 
which is not uncommon in Greek writers, 
occurs in ch. xiii. 10. 

Ver. 15. — They are questions about for 
it be a question of, A.V. and T.E. ; your own 
for of your, A.V., an unnecessary change ; 
look to it yourselves for look ye to it, A.V. ; 
I am not minded to be u, for for I will be 
no, A. V. and T.E. ; these for such, A. V. 

Ver. 16. — ^And he drave them; aniiXaaev, 
found only here in the New Testament or 
LXX. But it is used by Demosthenes and 
Plutarch in exactly the same connection : 
airh Tov (TvveSpiou : ajrh rod $7]fiaTos (Demo- 
sthenes, 1373,12; Plutarch, 'Marcell.,'p.410, 
in Schleusner). It implies the ignominious 
dismissal of the case, without its being 
even tried. The judgment-seat {Prj/ui) ; the 
proconsular place of judgment. The $rjfut 
(here and ver. 12) was properly the "raised 
space," or " tribune," on which, in the case 
of a consul, proconsul, or prtetor, the leUa 
curulis was placed on which he sat and gave 
judgment. It was usually a kind of apse 
to the basilica. In Matt, xxvii. 19 ; 
John xix. 13, and, indeed, here and else- 
where, it seems to be used, generally, for the 
judgment-seat itself (see oh. xxv. 10). 

Ver. 17. — And they all laid hold on for then 
all the Greeks took, A.V. aud T.B. ; ruler for 
chief ruUr, A. V. , as ver. 8. The B.T. has far 
more manuscript support than either the 
T.B. or another reading, which has "Jews" 
instead of "Greeks." All means all the 
crowd of bystanders and lookers-on, mostly, 
no doubt, Greeks. The Jews, always 
unpopular, would be sure to have the 
Corinthian rabble against them as soon as 
the proconsul drove them from the judgment- 
leat. Sosthenes. There is no probability 
whatever that he is the same person as th« 
Sosthenes of 1 Cor. i. 1. The name was very 
common. He appears to have succeeded 
Crispus as ruler of the synagogue, Knd 



tm i.'/m. 1— 28j 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



»1 



would be hlcely, therefore, to be especially 
hostile to Paul. 

Ver. 18. — Having tarried after this yet 
many days for after this tarried there yet 
a good white, and then, A. V. ; for for into, 
A.V. ; CenchresB for Cenchrea, A.V. Took 
Ms leave ; aTroTa^d/ifvos, here and a2;ain in 
ver. 21. This is a somewliat peouliamseof 
the word, which occurs also iu Luke ix. 61 
and 2 Cor. il. 13 (see too Mark vi. 4G). 
It is used in the same sense in Josephug 
(' Ant. Jud.,' xi. viii. 6). In a metaphorical 
sense it means" to renounce," "to bid adieu 
to" (Luke xiv. 23). Of the six times it occurs 
m the New Testament, four are iu Ht. Luke's 
writings and one in St. Paul's. With him 
Frisoilla and Aquila, having shorn his head 
iu CenchresB, etc. There is great diversity 
of opinion as to whether it was St. Paul or 
Aquila who had the vow.' iVIoyer thinks 
that the mention of Prisoilla before Aquila, 
contrary to the order in ver. 2 and in ver. 
26 (where, however, the R.T. reads "Priscilla 
and Aquila "), is a clear indication that Luke 
meant the words Ketpd/ievos, k.t.x., to refer 
to Aquila, not to St. Paul, and Howson 
takes the same view. But this is a very 
weak argument, refuted at once by Rom. 
xvi. 3 and 2 Tim. iv. 19, as well as by the 
whole run of the passage, in which Paul is 
throughout the person spoken of ; or, as Al- 
ford puts it, in the consecutive narrative from 
ver. 18 to ver. 25, there are nine aorist parti- 
ciples, of which eight apply to Paul, as the 
subject of the section, making it scarcely 
doubtful that the ninth applies to him like- 
wise. Moreover, there is no ooncuivnble reason 
why the vow should be mentioned if it was 
taken by Aquila, and, what is still more con- 
clusive, the person who went to Jerusalem, 
i.e. Paul, must be the one who had the vow, 
not the person who stayed behind, i.e. Aquila. 
In fact, nobody would ever have thought of 
making Aquila the subject if it were not for 
the thought that there is an incongruity with 
Paul's character in his making a vow of that 
kind. But we must take what we find in 
Scripture, and not force it to speak our own 
thoughts. As regards the nature of the vow, 
it is not quite clear what it was. It was 
not the simple Nazaritio vow described in 
Numb. vi. 18 — 21 ; nor is the word here used 
by St. Luke {Keipd/ievos) the one which is 
there and elsewhere employed by the LXX., 
and by St. Luke himself in ch. xxi. 24, of that 
final shaving of the hair of the Nazarite for 
the purpose of offering it at the door of 

' Augustine, Bede, Erasmus, Luther, Beza, 
Calvin, Ben gel, Rosenmiiller, Olshauseu, 
Lange, Ewald, Bleek, Alford, Wordsworth, 
Farrar, Lewin, etc., refer it to St. Paul; 
the Vulgate, Hammond, GrotiuH, Valokenaer, 
Wieseler, Meyer, Howson, etc., to Aquila. 



the tabernacle Qupim). It seems rather to 
have been of the nature of that vow which 
Josephus speaks of as customary for persona 
in any affliction, viz. to make a vow that, 
for thirty days previous to that on which they 
i:iteud to oifer sacrifice, they will abstain 
from wine and will shave off Qvp'fia-airBm) 
their hair, adding that Bernice was now at 
Jerusalem in order to perform such a vow 
('Bell. Jud.,' ii. xv. 1). But it further 
appears, from certain passages in the Mishna, 
that, if any one had a Nazarite vow upon him 
outside the limits of the Holy Land, he 
could not fulfil such vow till he was come 
to the Holy Land, to Jerusalem ; but it was 
allowable in such case to cut his hair short 
(jce'ipeifQai T^v Ke(/)aA^v), and as some say to 
take it with liim to Jerusalem, and there offer 
it at the same time that he ofl'ered his sacrifice 
and shaved his head Qup-ficraa-dai).^ It would 
seem, therefore, that either in a severe illness 
or under some great danger Qavdyicri) St. 
Paul had made such a vow; that he had 
been unwilling to cuthis hair short at Corinth, 
where he was thrown so much into the society 
of Greeks, and therefore did so at CenchresB 
just before he embarked for Syria ; and that 
he made all haste to reach Jerusalem in time 
for the Passover, that he might there 
accomplish his vow (see Bishop Words- 
worth's note on ch. xviii. 18 ; and Farrar's 
' Life of St. Paul,' ii. p. 2). His motives for 
the vow may have been partly those de- 
scribed on another occasion (ch. xxi. 24), and 
partly his own Jewish feelings of piety 
showing themselves in the accustomed way. 
Cenchrex. The eastern port of Corinth ; a 
considerable place. There was a Church 
there, doubtless founded by St. Paul during 
his stay at Corinth (Rom. xvi. 1). 

Ver. 19. — They came for he came, A.V. and 
T.R. ; he left for left, A.V. They came to 
Ephesua. " No voyage across the iEgean 
was more frequently made than that between 
Corinth and Ephesus. They were the 
capitals of the two flourishing and peaceful 
provinces of Achaia and Asia, and the twc 
great mercantile towns on opposite sides 
of the sea" (Howson, vol. i. 454). The 
voyage would take from ten to fifteen days. 
Reasoned; Sie\ex6ii, as in ch. xvii. 2, 17; 
ver. 4 ; xix. 8, 9 ; xx. 7, 9 ; xxi v. 25. As 
regards the expression, left them there, it 
probably arises from some actual detail 
which made it the natural one to use. It', 
for example, the syriSigogue was just outside 
the city, and Paul, parting with Aquila and 
Priscilla in the city, had gone otf imme- 
diately to the synagogue, the phrase used 
would be the natural one; or the words, " he 
left them there," may be spoken with 

I For the difference between ueipialm 
and ^vpiiirairSai, see 1 Cor. xi. 6. 



92 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xvm. 1—28 



refeience to the main narrative, which i8 
momentarily interrupted by the mention 
of St. Paul's visit to the synagogue. Note 
the extreme importance of this brief visit to 
Ephesua, where the foundation of a vigorous 
and flourishing Church seems to have been 
laid. He vrho knows " the times and the 
seasons" sent St. Paul there now, though 
two years before he had furbidden him to go 
to Asia. 

Yer. 20. — And when Otey asked for when 
they desired, A.V. ; abide a for tarry, A.V. ; 
time for time with them, A.V. He consented 
not ; ovK iirevevaev, only here in the New 
Testament, but found in Prov. xxvi. 20 ; 
2 Mace. iv. 10, etc., and frequently in 
medical writers; literally, to tend the head 
forward by the proper muscles (Hobart). 

Ver. 21. — Taking his leave of them, and 
saying for hade them farewell, saying, A.V. ; I 
will return for I must hy all means keep this 
feast that cometh in Jerusalem; iut I will 
return, A.V. and T.B. ; he set sail for and he 
sailed, A.V. and T.K. Taking his leave j as 
in ver. 18, note. I must by aU means, etc. 
This clause is not found in .«, A, B, E, and 
several versions, and is omitted in the E.T. 
But Alford, Meyer, Wordsworth, and others 
consider it to be genuine. It is certainly 
difficult to account for such words being 
inserted in the text if they were not genuine ; 
wheieas it is easy to account for their 
omission, either by accident or from the 
fact that the brevity of the allusion to his 
visit to Jerusalem in ver. 22 might easily 
mislead a copyist into thinking that St. 
Paul did not go to Jerusalem at this time, 
and therefore that the words were misplaced. 
Observe how St. Paul's fixed purpose to 
reach Jerusalem as soon as possible tallies 
with the account of his vow. This feast 
(A.V.). It is not clear what feast is meant. 
Alford, Wordsworth, 'Speaker's Commen- 
tary,' and otliers, following Wieseler, think 
it.was the Feast of Pentecost, being influenced 
by the consideration that sailing was dan- 
gerous and very unusual so early as before 
ihe Passover. But Meyer thinks it uncertain. 
But the expression, " I must by all means," 
would cover tlie risk of a voyage in the 
stormy season. I wUl return again. The 
fulfilment of this promise is related in oh. 
xix. 1, elo. If God will (see Jas. iv. 13 
—15). 

Ver. 22. — He went up for and gone up, 
A. V. ; and went for he went, A.V. When 
he had landed at Csesarea; i.e. CsBsarea 
Stratonis, or Sebaste, or napa\t6s, as it 
was variously called, to distinguish it from 
Ctesarea Philippi (see oh. viii. 40 ; ix. 30 ; 
X. 1, etc., and frequently elsewhere in 
the Acts). " Csesarea, whither probably 
the vessel was bound, was the military 
ea{)ital of the Boman province of Judaa, 



of which Felix was at this time procu- 
rator. It was also the harbour by which 
bU travellers from the West approached 
it, and from whence roada led to Egypt 
on the south, to Tyre and Sidon and 
Antioch on the north, and eastward to 
Nablous and Jerusalem and the Jordan " 
(Howson, i. 455). He went up and saluted 
the Ghuroh ; meaning, without any doubt, he 
went up to Jerusalem, as both the word 
ivafias, and the object of his going up, " to 
salute the Church," conclusively show. 
For ava&aivm, whether coupled with e<j 
'Upotrif^v/m as in Matt. xx. 17, 18, or stand- 
ing alone as in John vii. 8, 10, and xii. 20, is 
the regular word for going up to Jerusalem 
(see ch. xi. 2 ; xv. 2 ; xxi. 12, 15 ; xxiv. 
11 ; XXV. 1, 9) ; and ^ iKKXriaia, the Church, 
which Paul went to salute, can mean nothing 
but the mother Church of Jerusalem. No 
doubt he was received officially by the 
apostles, represented by James and the 
elders and the Church, as in ch. xv. 4; 
and gave a formal account of the result of 
his second missionary journey, and of the 
great event of the introduction of the gospel 
into Macedonia and Achaia. It is a re- 
markable example of St. Luke's great brevity 
at times that this is the only notice of his 
arrival at Jerusalem, where his vow waa to 
be fulfilled. Went down to Antioch ; from 
whence he had started with Silas, after his 
separation from Barnabas, some three years 
before, "being recommended by the brethren 
to the grace of God " (ch. xvi. 40 ; comp. 
ch. xiv. 26,27; xv. 30). 

Ver. 23. — Having for after he had, A.V. ; 
through the region for over all the country, 
A.V. ; stahlishing for strengthening, A.V. 
Having spent some time there (ch. xv. 33, 
note). How long we have no means of 
knowing; probably under six months; 
"quelquesmois"(Renan, pp. 329,330); "four 
months" (Lewin, i. .S70, note; comp. 1 Cor. 
xvi. 6, 7 ; ch. xix. 22). According to Eenan, 
Lewin, ' Speaker's Commentary,' and many 
others, it was at this time that the meeting 
with St. Peter occurred to which St. Paul 
refers in Gal. ii. 11, etc. And Benau 
ingeniously connects that perversion of the 
faith of the Galatians which led to St. 
Paul's Epistle being addressed to them, witli 
the visit to Antioch of James's emissaries. 
Lewin also identifies the journey of St. 
Paul to Jerusalem mentioned in QaL ii. 1 
with that recorded in onr ver. 22. Bnt 
neither of these theories is borne out by any 
known facts, nor is in itself probable. 
There is no appearance of Barnabas or 
Titus being with St. Paul at this time, and 
it is very unlikely that any should have 
come from James to Antioch so immediately 
after St. Paul's salutation of the Church, at 
Jerusalem and the fulfilment of his vow 



OH. ivm. 1—28.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



93 



there. The time preceding the visit of 
Paul and Barnabas to Jerusalem, as related 
in ch. XV., is far the most likely for the 
encounter of the two apostles (see oh. xiv. 
28; IV. 1, and note). Went through; 
Siepx^fievos, as in ch. viii. 4, 40 ; x. 38 ; xiii. 
6; xvi. 6; xvii. 23, etc. The region of 
Galatia and Phrygia. In oh. xvi. 6 the 
order is inverted, "the region of Phrygia 
and Galatia," E.V., or "Phrygia and the 
region of Galatia," A.V. The natural 
inference from this la, as Lewin says, with 
whom Farrar agrees, that on this occasion 
St. Paul went straight from Antloch to 
Galatia, passing through the Cilician Gates 
and by Mazaca, or Csesarea, as it was called 
by Tiberius Otesar, in Cappadocia, and not 
visiting the Churches of Lyoaonia.' He 
proceeded from Galatia through Phrygia to 
EphesuB. The distance from Antiooli to 
Tarsus was one hundred and forty-one 
miles, from whence to Tavium in Galatia 
was two hundred and seventy-one miles, 
making the whole distance from Antioch to 
Tavium in Galatia four hundred and twelve 
miles, 01 about a three weeks' journey 
including rest on the sabbath days. From 
Galatia to Ephesus would be between six 
hundred and seven hundred miles. The 
entire journey would thus be considerably 
more than a thousand miles, a journey of 
forty days exclusive of all stoppages. Six 
months probably must have elapsed between 
his departure from Antioch and his arrival 
at Ephesus ; Lewin says " several months " 
(p. 330, note). In order ; in the same order, 
though inverted, in which he had first 
visited them, leaving out none. Stablish- 
ing, etc QiruTTTipliaiy); see above, ch. xiv. 
22; XV. 32, 41. 

Ver. 24. — Now for and, A. V. ; an Alexan- 
drian by race for born at Alexandria, A. Y. ; 
learned for eloquent, A.V, i\6yi.os) ; eame to 
UpheetU; and he was mighty, etc., for and 
mighty in the Scriptures, came, etc., A.Y. 
From ver. 24 to ver. 28 is a distinct episode, 
and an important one, as containing the 
first mention of a very remarkable man, 
Apollos (a short form of Apolhnius, like 
Epaphras for Epaphroditus') of Alexandria, 
a city destined to play a conspicuous part 
in Church history, as the traditional Church 
and see of St. Mark, the school of the 
Neoplatonists, the scene of the labours of 
Origan, Clement, and many other men of 
note, and the birthplace of the Gnostic 
leaders Cerinthus, Basilldes, and Valentinus. 
The notices of Apollos in the Kew Testa- 
ment are ch. xix. 1 ; 1 Cor. i. 12 ; iii. 4, 5, 
6, 22; iv. 6; xvi. 12; Titus iii. 13; and all 
show St. Paul's high esteem for him. It 

> Benan and Howson think he certainly 
did visit Lycaonuk. 



was no more his fault than St. Peter's and 
St. Paul's that the factious Corinthians 
elevated him, or rather degraded him, into 
the leader of a party. Eloquent seems to 
be a better translation of x6ytos here than 
learned. The Greek word, which only occurs 
here in the New Testament, haa boUi 
meanings. 

Vers. 25, 26. — Bad been for was, A.V. ; 
spirit for the spirit, A.V. ; carefully for 
diligently, A.V. ; things concerning Jesus for 
things of the Lord, A.V. and T.B. ; but when 
Priscilla and Aquila heard him for whom 
when Aquila and Priscilla had heard, A.V. 
and T.B. ; carefully for perfectly, A.V. 
Knowing only the baptism of John. It is 
difficult at first sight to conceive how at 
this time any one could know the baptism 
of John without knowing further that of 
Christ. But a possible account of it is that 
Apollos living at Alexandria, where as yet 
there was no Christian Church, had met 
some Jews who had been in Judsea at the 
time of John's ministry, and had heard from 
them of John's baptism and preaching, and 
of his testimony to Jesus as the Messiah, 
but had had no further opportunity of care- 
ful instruction in the faith of Jesus Christ 
till he happened to come to Ephesus and 
make the acquaintance of his compatriots, 
Aquila and Priscilla. They hearing him 
speak with fervour and eloquence, but 
perceiving that his knowledge was im- 
perfect, immediately invited him to their 
house, and instructed him in the fulness of 
the truth of the gospel. This necessarily 
included the doctrine of Christian baptism, 
which we cannot doubt was administered 
to him (John i. 33 ; ch. i. 5 ; ii. 38). 

Ver. 27. — Minded for disposed, A.V. ; pcus 
over for pass, A.V. ; encouraged him, and 
wrote to for wrote exhorting, A.V. ; and . . . 
he helped for who . . . helped, A.V. To pass 
over into Aohaia, Nothing can be more 
natural than the course of events here 
described. In his intimate intercourse with 
Priscilla and Aquila, Apollos had necessarily 
heard much of the great work at Corinth, 
and the flourishing Church there; and so he 
longed to see for himself and to exercise his 
powers in watering what St. Paul had so well 
planted (1 Cor. iii. 6). Priscilla and Aquila 
having heard his eloquent sermons at 
Ephesus, and being interested in the 
Corinthian Church, seem to have encouraged 
him, and to have joined with the other 
disciples at Ephesus in giving him com- 
mendatory letters to the Church of Corinth. 
Enooniaged him; Trporpe^d/ievoi, a word found 
nowhere else in the New Testament, but used 
in classical Greek and in the Apooi^^pha, 
in the sense of "exhorting," "urging.'* 
IlpoTpiiTTMol Kdyai are hortatory words. In 
medical writers a "stimulant" ia w/irrff 



94 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. xvm. 1— 28, 



iTTtK6v. There is a difftrence of opinion 
Bmong commentators wlitther the exhortn- 
tioQ wua aadreesed to ApoUos, as the "R.V. 
takts it, or to the brethren at Coiinth, as 
the A.V. understands it. It seems rather 
more consonant to the structure of tlie 
sentence and to the piobability of the case 
I hat the exhortation was addressed to the 
Corinthian Church, and not to Apnllos, who 
needed no such encourai^eraent. nporpe- 
\l/a.fi.evoi i-ypa\liav is equivaient to " wrote and 
exhorted." 

Ver. 28. — Powerfully confuted for mightily 
convinced, A.V. ; tlie Clirist for Christ, A.V. 
Powerfully confuted ; SiaKarriAeyxfTo, one of 
St. Luke's peculiar compounds, found no- 
wliere else; eurSvas here anid Luke xxiii. 10 
(veliemently), but nowhere else in the New 
Testament. The adjective eBroyor, meaning 
"nervous," "Tehement," and the adverb 



euT(fi'o)j,meaning "vigorously," "with force," 
are very frequent in medical writers; evToyat 
is also found in the LXX. of Josh. vi. 7, 
^Tj^aLveTcacrai' evrSvws, '* Let them blow a 
loud blast." Showing by the Scriptures, etc. 
The same line of preaching as St. Peter 
and St. Paul always adopted when addrfes- 
iug Jews (see oh. ii. ; xiii. ; xvii. 3; xviii. 5, 
etc.). It is remarkable that the success oi 
Apollos at Corinth seems to have been 
chieily amons the Jews, who had opposed 
themselves so vehenjently to St. Paul (ver. 
6). It is one of the many proofs of the 
siiigleupss of eye and simplicity of purpose 
of the great apostle, that the success of this 
novice where he himself had failed did not 
excite the least jealousy (1 Cor. xvi. 12). 
St. Luke, too, Paul's friend and biographer, 
here speaks of the powers and work oi 
Apollos with no stinted measure of praisa 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 3. — Christian friendship. T^nselfish friendship, the union of human souls 
in the bands of a close, unworldly, self-sacriflciag love, has always been a spectacle that 
has fascioated men, one on which they have dwelt with peculiar fondness. Among the 
Greeks, Pylades and Oresles, Dainon and Pythias ; in the Old Testament David and 
Jonathan, and in the New Testament Peter and John, are examples of such friend- 
ships, and of the admiration which men cannot help having for them. But there is 
not any more beautiful and touching picture of human friendship to be found any- 
where than that which rises up before us in the case of Paul, Aquila, and Priscilla. 
We first find the group in a humble workman's dwelling at Corinth. Drawn together 
by being Sij.6Texi'oi, men of the same trade, they are lodging in the same house. They 
were brought there indeed from different causes, and from different parts of the world. 
Paul from Antioch, urged westward by his ardent desire to add new realms to the 
kingdom of Christ ; Aquila and Priscilla driven eastward by the cruel edict of a despot 
forcing them from their home and all its interests in Italy. They met in Corinth, 
and dwelt under one roof. There we see the men busy at their trade of tent-makincr, 
while the wife, the woman of the house, added that comfort and cheerfulness to the 
home which tlie presence of a bright, energetic, intelligent woman is so well fitted to 
afford. A common trade, a common race, and the common interests arising from both, 
would soon cement a friendship between two virtuous men thus thrown together in a 
foreign land. But a much closer bond of union soon knit the two men together. 
Whether Aquila and Priscilla brought with them from Rome the rudiments of the 
Christian faith, or whether they first learnt that Jesus is the Christ from the lips of 
Paul, wa have no means of deciding. What is certain is that many words concernin" 
the kingdom of God passed between them in their hours of work. While Paul's 
industrious hands were travailing and stitching night and day to earn his bread, his 
eloquent tongue was discoursing of Jesus Christ and his great salvation. Aquila, 
doubtless well read in the Scriptures, like his later namesake and fellow-citizen in 
Pontus, was not slow to take in his words ; while Priscilla, taking perhaps the woman's 
part in cutting out and preparing the materials for their work, listened with intense 
interest to the words of eternal life uttered by the apostle. The friendship begun in 
earthly relations was soon perfected in the bonds of the love of Christ. We can"^ fancy 
the hours of united prayer when those two or three were gathered together in the 
name of Jesus. We can fancy the close fellowship induced by the common enmity of 
their unbelieving and blaspheming fellow-coimtrymen. We can fancy their common 
joy when first one and then another of their Jewish brethren was brought to the Sheii- 
hcrd and Bishop of souls. We seem to feel their common anxiety when Paul wat 



OH. xvm. 1— as.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 96 

la-ought before the hema of Gallic, and to hear their common praises when the con- 
spiracy was defeated and the apostle was set free. We no longer wonder to read that 
when Paul set sail for Syria, Aquila and Priscilla went too (ch. xviii. 18), and all that 
follows follows so naturally. Their labour at Ephesus as the apostle's delegates ; their 
faithful instruction of ApoUos ; their patient continuance at Ephesus after St. Paul's 
return (1 Cor. xvi. 19) ; the Church in their house, both at Ephesus and at Rome 
(1 Cor. xvi. 9 ; Bom. xvi. 3) ; their unbroken attachment to the very latest moment 
to which our knowledge extends (2 Tim. iv. 19); — ^all is of a piece with that first holy 
friendship which was born in the workshop at Corinth, and nourished in the fellowship 
of faith. The picture leaves a deep impression upon the mind that human friendship, 
like all else that is good or beautiful in human life, attains its perfect growth, and pro- 
duces its fairest fruits, when it is laid in a common fellowship with God, and is fostered 
by a constant partnership in loving labours for the glory of Christ and for the increase 
of his Church. 

Vers. 4 — 17. — Hie testimony. The kernel of the gospel is the truth that Jesui was 
the Christ. He was the Person spoken of by all the prophets as to come. Jesus of 
Nazareth, the son of Mary, bom in the reign of Augustus Caesar, and crucified in that 
of Tiberius ; known to his contemporaries iu Judaia and Galilee as a Teacher and a 
Prophet ; known to later ages by the Gospels which record his life and death and resur- 
rection from the dead ; is God's Christ. He came into the world, in accordance with the 
eternal purpose of God, to be the Teacher, the Saviour, the Judge, the Lord, the King of 
the whole earth, the Head of the human race. He fulfilled in his own person all the 
predictions of the prophets ; he accomplished by his work all that God had in store for 
the redemption of the sons of men. Whatever the Holy Ghost spoke of the Godhead, 
of the priesthood, of the sacrifice, of the reign, of the glorious kingdom of Messiah, has its 
fulfilment in the Lord Jesus. The truth, therefore, that Jesus was the Christ is the 
kernel of the whole gospel. But further, this is either a fact or it is not a fact. There 
is no cloudland of uncertain existence, no matter of doubtful disputation or of fluctuating 
opinion. Those who have told us these things are witnesses of what they knew, not 
disputers about what they thought. What they have delivered to us is their testimony. 
We must either accept it as true or reject it as false. It has met with both treatments 
in the world, and, whether believed or disbelieved, has been a potent factor in men's 
behaviour. When believed, it has made the kind of man that Paul was, the kind nf 
men and women that Aquila and Priscilla weie. It has made men pure, holy, upright, 
patient, meek, kind, unselfish, self-denying, labouring for the good of others rather than 
for their own gain ; with affections set on heavenly more than on earthly things ; con- 
scientious, true, faithful to their word ; to be trusted and relied upon ; great benefac- 
tors to their race, full of love to mankind. When disbelieved, it has not simply been 
set aside as a thing unworthy of credit, but it has set in action the most malignant 
passions In the human breast. Envy and jealousy, hatred and malice, have blazed up 
in all their fury against the authors and abettors of this testimony. You would think, 
judging by the fierce rage of the opponents, that there could not be a greater crime 
against humanity than to teach men to love God, to abstain from all evil, and to live in 
peace and good will towards one another. Judging by the rage of the opponents, you 
would think that a greater wrong could not be done to men than to tell them of life 
and rest and happiness in the eternal reach beyond the grave, as encouragements 
to patient well-doing on this side the grave. Jews and heathens, so unlike one 
another in everything else, were exactly alike in their reception of this testimony. 
The Jews blasphemed and cursed and persecuted, and brought for puni^shment before 
the Roman tribunals those who gave testimony for Christ ; the heathen, tolerant of 
every form of idolatry, let loose fire and sword and wild beast against the harmless 
disciples of the Lord Jesus. The accomplished philosopher, Marcus Aurelius, gave 
Justin Martyr to the executioner and Polycarp to the flames, with as little scruple as 
Nero tortured his Christian subjects at Rome. The scornful hatred of Tacitus for the 
jiestilential superstition of the Christian was as bitter as the scurrilous wit of Lucian. 
In our own day many tongues are let loose against the testimony. New philosophers, 
new exponents of the physical laws by which the world consists, new pretenders to 
iiuperipr wisdom and wider intelligence in the various departments of human know- 



96 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [ch. xvm. 1— 2a 

Jedge, however differing among themselves in the fundamental principles of their 
several schemes, agree in the scornful rejection of " the testimony of Jesus Christ." 
The Church meanwhile pursues her unwavering course. She holds in her hand tha 
lamp of that truth which she did not invent, but which she received from Grod. That 
lamp sheds forth its heavenly light, whether men receive it or whether they shut it 
out from their hearts and walk on in darkness. For that truth the Church is ready 
now, as she ever was, to endure the scorn and hatred of mankind or to suffer imprison- 
ment and death. Her office is to testify that Jesus is the Christ. By the grace of God 
she will continue that testimony until the Lord comes, and her witness to the abseat 
is swallowed up in her adoration of the present, in visible power and glory. 

Vers. 18 — 23. — Tht concise narrative. The grain of mustard seed becomes a great 
tree, and the fowls of the air lodge in its branches. Could we unfold all that is covered 
under these few words, whole volumes of surpassing interest might be evolved. The 
occasion and motives of Paul's vow ; the first visit to the capital of Proconsular Asia, 
to be afterwards the scene of such great events ; Pentecost at Jerusalem ; the interview 
with James and the elders of Jerusalem ; his thoughts in the metropolis of Christianity, 
in the stronghold of Judaism, about the aspects of the Church, and the relations of 
his Corinthians converts to the believing priests and Pharisees at Jerusalem ; the 
execution of his vow, and the state of his feeling towards the temple and its services ; 
his return to Antioch, the metropolis of Gentile Christianity, the new Borne, as it 
were, of the Christian world ; his meeting with old disciples ; his narratives of God's 
work in the new world of Europe, just conquered for the God of Israel ; his possible 
meeting again with Barnabas there, and their tearful reconciliation, and the binding up 
of the old wound so painful to two good and loving hearts ; and then the long and 
wearisome journey, full of labour and peril, through Phrygia and Galatia ; the aspect 
of old friends and old enemies ; the new conquests for Christ, the new triumphs of the 
gospel, perhaps fresh disappointments from the fickleness of the Gaulish character ; — 
were all this told, and the skeleton verses before us filled in with all this life and action, 
what volumes we should have 1 But it has pleased God to seal up all these books, and 
hide them from our eyes. It is our part to be thankful for what we have, and to draw 
the lesson that the silence of Scripture is as surely ordered as its revelations are, and 
that we must read, not to satisfy our curiosity, but to edify our souls. 

Vers. 24 — 28. — The episode. The five verses which make up this section are unique 
in this respect, that the historian, leaving his hero engaged in unknown labours in 
Phrygia and Galatia, gives us in them a view of what was going on meanwhile at 
Ephesus. And a most curious narrative it is. It introduces to us one of the most 
remarkable men of his age, the Alexandrian Apollos, a Jew of great learning, great 
ability, and great eloquence ; and relates his accession to the Church and to the ranks 
of the Christian ministry, under most singular circumstances. It further gives us 
a very striking instance of the devotion of Aquila and Priscilla to the work of Christ, 
and of their eminent services in the infant Church. Of the after career of Apollos we 
know next to nothing. Wo see him for a moment, like a blazing comet in the ecclesi- 
astical heavens, striking down opposition and unbelief with the onslaught of his feivid 
and logical eloquence ; we see the reflex of his great influence at Corinth, i^ji the 
repeated mention of him in St. Paul's Epistle to the Corinthians (1 Cor. i. 12 ; iii. 
4 — 6 ; iv. 5), written from Ephesus ; but the only evidence we have of his continuance 
in the work which he so brilliantly began, is to be found in St. Paul's brief order to 
Titus, " Bring Zenas the lawyer and Apollos on their journey diligently, that nothing 
be wanting unto them " (Titus iii. 13). Yet how manifold, in all probability, were the 
evangelic laboxu-s of Apollos in that interval 1 How many must have been convinced by 
him that Jesus is the Christ, and found eternal life in his Name 1 And if the conjec- 
ture of Luther, followed by many since, and recently supported at length by Dr. 
Farrar (' Early Days of Christianity,' vol. i. oh. ivii., xviii.), that he was the author of the 
Epistle to the Hebrews, be true, what a wide extension is given, in time and space, tc 
the Christian influence of this man " mighty in the Scriptures ; " and yet for nearly 
eighteen centuries has all this labour of love, this precious fruit of devoted zeal and 
spiritual power, been unknown to the Church of God. Surely the reward of the too- 



OH. xnn. 1— 28.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 97 

oessM evangelist and pastor is not to be looked for In fame and worldly reputation, or 
the applause of men. And as surely every word spoken for Christ, and every labour 
endured for the Master's sake, will not be forgotten, but will be found unto praise and 
honour and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ. Then perhaps the last will be first, 
and the first last. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 11. — ZV«tt 'hetort the citadel. When the a^stle of Jesus Christ confronted 
the heathenism of Corinth, we may say that, in his person. Divine truth was opening 
its attack on the very citadel of sin ; such was its " abysmal profligacy," its intemijer^ 
ance, its dishonesty, its superstition. In the brief account we have of Paul's work in 
this city we are reminded— 

I. That Christian blamelessness SHonLD answbe to the dbpbavitt it 
ENCOUNTEBS. (Ver. 3.) At such a city as Corinth it was eminently desirable that 
the apostle of truth and righteousuess should be, in all respects, above reproach. 
There must not be the shadow of suspicion of self-seeking upon him ; he must show 
himself, and be seen to be, the disinterested, missionary he was. Therefore he worked 
away with his own hands, laboriously maintaining himself all the while that he was 
labouring in spiritual fields (see 1 Cor. ix. 15 — 18). This is the spirit in which it 
becomes all earnest men to act. We should give ourselves trouble, we should deny our- 
selves pleasure, according to the necessities of the case before us. Though "free from 
all," we should become "the servants of all, that we may gain the more" (1 Cor. ix. 
19). There are circumstances in which we are perfectly justified in using our liberty ; 
there are others in which we are cmistraiiied to forego our freedom, and impose hard- 
ships on ourselves, that we may gam those whom, otherwise, we should not win. 

IL That when men peesistentlt reject the best we can bring them, we 
MUST PASS ON TO OTHERS. (Vers. 5, 6.) When Silas and Timotheus rejoined Paul at 
Corinth, they found him "earnestly occupied in discoursing;" "he was being constrained 
by the Word ; " he was striving with his whole strength to convince the Jews that 
Jesus was the Christ. But his most zealous efforts were all unavailing. His opponents 
resisted his arguments ; they opposed him and blasphemed his Lord. Then he turned, 
sorrowfully and indignantly, away from them, and gave himself to the work of Ood 
among the Gentiles (ver. 6). This was not more sensible and obligatory then than 
it is now. If we have been labouring devotedly, prayerfully, patiently, among certain 
men, and they determinately reject our message, it is both foolish and wrong of us to 
waste our resources there ; we must pass on to others who may welcome our word as the 
truth of God. 

III. That Christ will not leave his faithful bbbvants withodt Divisa 
encouragement. He granted Paul (1) the joy of spiritual success (ver. 8) ; also 
(2) the assurance of his protecting care (vers. 9, 10). The exact measure of his success 
we do not know, but it was probably considerable ; the Church at Corinth became of 
such importance that Paul paid it great attention, and spent on it much strength in 
after years. The vision which the Saviour granted was supernatural, and of a kind 
"vhioh we do not expect him to repeat continually. But we may confidently reckon 
that, if we are found faithful by our Master, we shall have : 1. A good measure of suc- 
cess in our work. Earnest Christian effort rarely, if ever, fails. We may, indeed, be ill 
adapted to the special work we have undertalien, and then we must pass on to other 
fields ; but if we are in our right place, we shall assuredly have some increase for our 
toil : " In due season we shall reap." 2. The inspiration which comes direct from God. 
Christ will come to us, not in such vision as that he granted Paul, but he will visit us ; 
he will vouchsafe to us those renewing influences of his Holy Spirit, which will make 
ns (1) willing to endure what we may have to suffer ; (2) willing to wait his time for 
sending the harvest; (3) strong to speak his truth in his Name and in his Spirit.— O. 

Vers. 12 — 17. — Fanaticism, pride, calmness, short-sightedness. L Jewish fanaticism. 

(Vers. 12, 13.) The Jews could not or would not understand that Paul was not against 

the Law, but only against their interpretation ot it ; that Christianity was not so much 

the abrogation as the fulfilment of the Law, its reinstitution in another and a better 

acts — n. «* 



»» THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xvm, 1— lia 

form, tte one and only thing which could perpetuate »nd immortalize it. They 
regarded the apostle as • renegade, as an iconoclast, as a traitor ; their opposition 
hecame hatred; their hatred grew into murderous passion ; their passion seized on the 
earliest opportunity to compass his imprisonment or death. We see in every act the 
attitude, we hear in every word the tone, of bitter and even furious fanaticism, as they 
hale Paul before the proconsul and exclaim, " This fellow persuadeth men to worship God 
contrary to the Law." This fierceness on their part was characteristic of them ; it was 
of a piece with the rest of their national behaviour before and after that time. It 
was not unlike the fanaticism of other nations, though it was more violent than that 
which is commonly displayed. All companies of men are liable to be carried away 
with passion which they are unable to control at the moment, but which they after- 
wards regret. Far better than this is — 

II. Christian calmness. " Paul was . . . about to open his mouth " (ver. 14). We 
are not told by the historian what was his demeanour. There was no need to tell us. 

. It may be assumed, without the smallest shade of uncertainty, that the " prisoner at 
the bar " was unmoved by the violence of the mob, and untroubled by the power of 
the magistrate. His quietness of soul did not proceed from his consciousness of strength, 
his assurance that he could make out his case against hia accusers ; it arose entirely 
from a sense that he stood at that bar as " the prisoner of the Lord," there for conscience' 
sake ; and also from the sense that One stood by him who would not fail him, who 
would certainly redeem his word (ver. 10), beneath the shelter of whose care he was 
safe from Jewish spite and Boman power. " The Name of the Lord is a strong tower : 
the righteous runneth into it, and is safe" (Prov. xviii. 10). What time we have 
reason to be afraid, we will trust in him (Ps. Ivi. 3). 

III. Roman superciliousness. (Vers. 14 — 17.) We can feel an intense Boman 
pride breathing in every line of this passage. Gallic considered any contention respecting 
Jewish laws or customs a matter of utter unimportance. Anything outside the circle of 
Boman citizenship was beneath the regard of such men as he was. And what if certain 
Greeks vented their wrath on a despicable Jew 1 Was that to trouble him? We see 
a haughty disdain on that Boman brow ; we hear a contemptuous scorn in those 
magisterial tones ; we perceive a lofty derision in that swift dismissal, in that absolute 
imconcem. This was the pride that was born of power and of authority. But, 
however it may have resulted, here, in impartiality and justice, it is not a lovely nor 
a worthy feature of human character. We are all of us too near one another in 
proneness to error and liability to overthrow and disaster, to make it right or wise to 
take such a tone. Human pride is (1) always based, in part, on error ; it is (2) always 
on the way to ruin. 

IV. Human short-sightedness. How little did the actors in this scene imagine 
that they were playing a part on which posterity would always look with interest ! 
How little did Gallic suppose that he would be known to the end of time by reason of 
his association with that Jewish prisoner whom he contemptuously ^smissed from his 
presence (see Farrar's ' Life of St. Paul,' vol. i. pp. 572, 57*3) I How imperfectly we 
measure the importance of the scenes through which we pass, of the actions we perform, 
of the men with whom we have to do ! i^et us act rightly, kindly, graciously at all times 
and toward all people. Who can tell whether we may not be rendering a service to lome 
chosen ambassador of Christ, or lending a helpful hand in some incident on which the 
gravest issues may hang, or supplying the one link that is wanted in a chain which 
connects earth with heaven? They who are conscientious and kind in humblest 
matters will be surprised one day to find (1) what excellent things they have done- 
(2) what valuable commendation they have earned j (3) what large rewards await them 
(Matt. XXV. 21, 37— 40).— 0. 

Vers. 18 — 23. — The strength which U cf man. The most suggestive sentence in 
these verses is that with which they conclude ; but we may gather lessons from others 
also. We may learn— 

L That the Divinb Spirit lbatkb ub to learn some troths bt thk TEAOHnia 
or EVENTS. (Ver. 18.) We are a little surprised that Paul should think it necessary to 
trouble himself with ceremonies which, in Christ Jesus, have become obsolete. But thig 
tS'one of those things which, among many others in our New Testament, show that 



SH. xvm. 1— 28.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 99 

God does not directly lead his people into the whole truth ; he wishes us to learn his 
mind by the teaching of events, as the early Christians came gradually, and through 
the lessons of Providence, to understand that they were emancipated I'rom the injunc- 
tions and prohibitions of that which was " positive " in the Mosaic Law. 

II. That opportunities of usefulness should be eagerly embraced. There 
was time for a hasty visit to Ephesus, and Paul did not fail to avail himself of it 
(ver. 19). 

III. That every man must be allowed to judge himself in mattbes of 
CONSCIENCE. (Vers. 20, 21.) Those Ephesian Jews may have thought — and we may 
be disposed to agree with them — that it was of greater conseijuence that they should 
have the truth preached to them than that Paul should go on to visit an unsympathizing 
Church. But it was a matter of conscience to him that he should go, and he therefore 
resisted their entreaties. We must form our judgments respecting the decision of 
others; we may offer our opinion and even urge our request; but we are hound to 
remember that it is every man's duty to decide for himself, in the last resort, what he 
should do and whither he should go. Our urgency should never be pushed so fer as 
to disregard this individual obligation. 

IV. That the Christian courtesies should be studiously observed. (Ver. 22.) 
It became Paul to salute the Church at Jerusalem. It was the mother Church, with 
which the other apostles were bo intimately connected ; it would have been ungraceful 
on his part not to have maintained friendly, or, at any rate, courteous, relations with it 
from time to time. It is very jirobable that there was no cordiality existing between 
its leaders and himself. Nevertheless, it was better to pay it an amicable visit, as he 
now did. Cordiality is vastly better than courtesy ; but courtesy is decidedly better 
than disrespect or impropriety, and the irritation which proceeds therefrom. If possible, 
let unaffected, warm-hearted love prevail and abound ; if -that be hopeless, then let 
there be a studious observance of that which is courteous and becoming. 

V. That the busiest life should include bomb seasons of refeeshino best 
and communion. Even the energetic and anxious apostle, with all his cares and 
projects, found it well to " go down to Antioch and spend some time there " 
(vers. 22, 23). 

VL That the wise teacher will oabb to strengthen his disciples as well 
as to make converts (ver. 23). Paul was always solicitous to " strengthen his disciples." 
He was the last man in the world to forget that God was the ultimate Source of all 
spiritual strength. But he knew that there was much that he, as a Christian teacher, 
had to do to make his disciples strong. He had (1) to impart a fuller knowledge of the 
truth ; (2) to warn against those doctrines and those habits which would bring 
spiritual weakness ; (3) to incite to holy earnestness by his own spirit of devotion ; 
(4) to counsel his converts to maintain close intercourse with Jesus Christ ; (6) to see 
that they were at their post in the Church and in the field of holy usefulness. — C. 

Vers. 24 — ^28. — Variety in Christian service. We learn — 

L That God endows- his servants with various gifts. We have been following 
the course and rejoicing in the good work of Paul ; now we come to another Christian 
workman of different make, — ApoUos. God furnished him with opportunities and 
faculties that fitted him for service other than that which the great apostle of the 
Gentiles rendered. Apollos : 1. Had an acquaintance with Greek thought, gained at 
Alexandria, superior to that which Paul would obtain at Tarsus. 2. Had the great 
advantage of readiness and force of language ; he was " an eloquent man " (ver. 24). 
He shared with his more illustrious co-worker (1) a large knowledge of iicripture, and 
(2) great fervotir of spirit (ver. 25). It is certain that Paul could do what Apollos would 
never have accomplished ; it is equally certain that Apollos could effect some things 
which were not within the compass of the apostle. Like faithful Christian men, they 
rejoiced in one another. Instead of underestimating and disparaging one another 
because they differed in gifts and methods, they valued one another's special work and 
heartily co-operated in the mission field. Few things are more unworthy and discreuit- 
able than petty jealousies and disputations between Christian workmen of different 
types of excellence ; few things are more admirable than the hearty appreciation by oua 
man of lUu work rendered by another which is beyond his own powers of accompliahnaent, 



100 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLEa [oh. xvm. 1— 38 

n. That humbler disciples can bender valuable bebtioe to thoss who abb 
DISTINGUISHED. (Vers. 26, 27.) 1. The service of enlightenment. This was rendered 
to ApoUos by Aquila and Priscilla (ver. 26). They had learnt " the way of God " from 
Paul, and they conld and did teach it to ApoUos, so that he understood it more perfectly. 
The little child in a Christian home could teach the profoundest philosopher who was 
ignorant of revealed truth things which, in spiritual worth, would weigh down all the 
speculations of his life. Two simple Christian disciples at Ephesus could and did 
inform the mind of the cultured and eloquent Apollos so that, instructed by them, he 
would become a great power for truth and Christ in the whole neighbourhood. It is 
within the power of the simplest and humblest to breathe those words of truth and 
grace which may make a man a fountain of blessing to his kind. 2. The service of 
introduction (ver. 27). Unknown brethren wrote a letter, and this, reaching the right 
bauds, introduced a valuable exponent of Christian truth to a large and important 
sphere. If the act of introduction be regarded as it surely should be, not merely as 
a means of obliging a friend, but as something in which the Master himself and his 
Church may be importantly served, then, by the conscientious writing of " a letter of 
eommendation," one who is of humble rank may do excellent work for his kind — he 
touches a spring whence healing and refreshing waters flow. 

III. That one Christian teacher mat follow another with the greatest 
ADVANTAGE. (Ver. 28.) " Apollos mightily convinced the Jews ; " perhaps more 
successfully than Paul would have done. When one Christian workman goes and 
another comes, the latter supplements tlie former in two ways. 1. Ho deepens the 
impression which the former has made. By bearing the same testimony he constrains 
the people to feel more convinced of the truth and value of that which they have 
heard. 2. He brings additional light. He puts the same truth in other forms and 
phases ; he presents it as it has shaped itself to bis own mind and has been coloured by 
his own experience. Thus he meets the need of some whose necessity had not been 
met, and wins soiLe that would have remained unwon. 

IV. That the coming or a strong servant of Christ should be but a 
reinforcement to those already in active service. The Church at Corinth 
was not in a state of inactivity and unaggressiveness when Apollos arrived. What he 
did there was, not to originate a mission, but to help those already in the field (vers. 27, 
28). He helped them by ably sustaining their endeavours to advance the cause ot 
Christ. The Churches of the Saviour should always and everywhere be in a state 
of evangelistic activity ; then they will be prepared to welcome as a timely reinforce- 
ment the coming of a specially powerful advocate who will master and secure those 
whom he encountersc — 0. 

Vers. 1—17. — Paul at Corinth. I. His work at Corinth. 1. Its humble and $el/- 
denying leginning. (Vers. 1 — 4.) (1) He came to Corinth, a city notorious for its 
pleasures and its vices. Often is the gospel more gladly received in such places than 
in the haunts of learning and the strongholds of philosophy. The rejected of Athens 
finds a welcome at Corinth. To the Corinthians the apostle will write by-and-by 
" Y« were thieves, robbers," etc. ; " but ye are washed, ye are sanctified," etc. ket to 
conquer these hearts, danger and self-denial must be undergone. (2) Paul works tc 
earn his bread while he is teaching. It was a wholesome custom practised and taught 
by eminent rabbis ; probably enough by Gamaliel, at whose feet Paul had sat. Christ 
was the " carpenter's Son," and the apostles fishers. Happy he who can afford to prove 
his entire disinterestedness as a teacher of the truth, and so silence that gainsaying ol 
the ungrateful and the miserly, who object to the gospel and its preaching solely on 
account of its cost. If his example cannot be exactly followed in the present day at 
least it may be taken as a rebuke to the pride of ofBce in the teacher ; and to unspiritual 
luxury and idleness in general. Also as an encouragement to the honest craltt- 
man ; every honourable calling is well-pleasing to God. " Act well your part • there all 
the honour lies." Again, willingness to work is one of the best passports everywhere. 
" Waiters on Providence " do not see most of the ways of Providence. Had not Paul 
been a worker at his craft, good Aquila had not fallen in his way. Driven out of 
gome, those pious Jews came to Corinth, to afford shelter and food to the apostle. God 
" seldom smites with both hands." He is " a good Worker, but he loves to be helped • " 



CH. xym. 1—28.] THE ACTS OF THE APOoTLES. 101 



so old proverbs say, (3) His sabbath employment. " Every sabbath." Unwearied 
zeal characterizes him. Faithful in that which is least, he is faithful in that which 
is much. The week-day work and the sabbath consecration help one another. Work 
makes the sacred rest sweet ; and the sacred rest gives new energy for work. 2. 
Courageout progress. (Vers. 5 — 8.) When Timothy and Silas came, Paul, instead ol 
throwing the work upon their shoulders, only redoubles his activity. How useful and 
how happy " the tie that binds " men's hearts in Christian love and work (Phil. ii. 22) I 
He continues to witness to the Jews that Jesus is the Messiah. The previous work in 
the synagogue had probably been preparatory. But the love of Christ constrains him, 
and he cannot keep back the main matter of his message, certain as it is to awaken 
violent opposition. Opposition and blasphemy break out; but the constancy of the 
servant of Christ is the more illustrated. There is no paltering, no drawing back, no 
compromise. "Your blood be on your heads!" Thus he clears himself from com- 
plicity in the guilt of their spiritual suicide. But before any can venture to imitate 
Paul's example in this, let them see whether they have done all in their power to raise 
and save, like the apostle. Driven from the public place of meeting, he goes into the 
private house of Justus ; rejected by Jews, he turns to the heathen. The conversion 
of Crispus rewards his efforts. Not " many " wise are called (1 Cor. i. 26). At the 
same time, there are exceptions. Paul goes out by the front door of the synagogue, so 
to speak, to find his way in again by the back. 3. 2'he blessed result. (Vers. 9 — 11.) 
The Divine voice came, saying, " Fear not 1 speak, and be not silent 1 " Times of weak- 
ness and discouragement and self-conflict are for all. The mightiest spirits know the 
deepest dejection. Becall Abraham before Abimeleoh, Moses in the desert, psalmists of 
the Captivity, and prophets, Elijah under the juniper, John in prison, Jesus in Geth- 
semane, Luther and his violent crises. The latter said, " Many think because I am 
so cheerful in my outward walk that I tread on roses, but God knows how it stands 
with me." But saith the voice : "I am with thee ; none shall set upon thee to hurt 
thee ; much people have I in this city." " I am with thee : " a word of might, that each 
and all in every humble or important path of duty may lay to heart, and go forward 
with his work, clear in speech and strong in action. '* I have much people in this 
city : " the seed and the leaven of the Word works with secret might when we observe 
it not ; sleeping echoes waiting to be roused ; seven thousand hidden ones who have 
not bowed the knee to Baal. 

IL Opposition to the wobk. A year and six months passed in prayer, patience, 
confidence in God, diligent toil. These are the means by which the work of God is fur- 
thered. But the incidents that followed teach that men must suffer for their work, and 
that all true work involves its cross. The world is the world still ; and offences must 
come. 1. The charge tigainst Paid. " He persuades the people to worship God contrary 
to the Law." How easily do men persuade themselves that what is against their own 
pleasures is contrary to God's Law 1 It is nothing new that those who are most given 
to error in religion are most ready to accuse others of heresy. 2. The conduct of 
OalUo. He referred disputes about the Jewish Law to the Jews themselves. It is wise 
that magistrates should not pass judgment in matters of religion which they do not 
understand. But it is not well, if magistrates are indifferent to religion, its genuine 
reality, and fail to protect sincere believers in the enjoyment of their religious belief. 
Gallic is a fine example of moderation, putting to shame the bloodthirsty spirit which 
has so often prevailed in the Christian Church. But it is an abuse if the examjjle be 
used as a plea for indifferentism. Gallic, who was cold to religious sympathy, would 
consent to see a man's civil rights injured. Gallio, on the whole, is a mixed 
example. Let us say that the duty of a Christian judge is (1) to have a cons ience 
and a religion of his own ; (2) not to intermeddle in the affairs of conscience of others ; 
(3) to protect men against violence, of whatever faith they may be. — J. 

Vers. 18 — 22. — Tteturn of Paul to Antioch. We do not know the exact nature of 
the vow he was under. But the following lessons may be drawn from his conduct : — 

L Wobk while it is dat. Where God opens the door, let the ready servant enter. 
The voice of the Almighty saith, " Upward and onward evermore 1 " Work, not foi 
glory and gain, but for the kingdom of God and the salvation of men. 

II. Tabby not to confbb with flesh and blood. Foes might have deterred him 



Ida THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ch. xvm. 1— 2& 



in the front; loving friends might have held him back; difficulties might have mad« 
him quail ; but he hears but one voice, sees but one hand, and goes forward. He who 
proceeds in this spirit, " unhasting, unresting," is always setting out, always arriving ; 
and, passing unhurt through perils which, if dwelt upon in the imagination, would 
appear insurmountable, can with thankfulness exclaim, at the end of every step of the 
life-journey, " Hitherto hath the Lord lielped us 1 " — J. 

Vers. 24 — 28. — The eloquent Apollos. J. Paul and Afoliob: a contrast. "I 
planted, Apollos watered." Difierent Divine instruments, shaped out of different 
material, prepared in different ways, destined for different objects. The unity in 
variety in Christian character is one of the chief beauties in the garden of God. 

II. Apollo ab an example of the use of consecrated learning in the cause of 
Christ. Here learning is kindled by sacred enthusiasm ; it is rooted in faith ; it is 
united with docility ; it is applied in the right place and way. 

III. As AN EXAMPLE OF GROWTH IN GRACE. It is the need of all. It is attainable 
by all who seek it in the right way. It becomes blessed and fruitful in new activity 
in the kingdom of God. 

IV. As AN ILLUSTRATION OF THE VARIED BCHOOLB OF LIFE-EXPERIENCE. In the 

great school of Alexandria Apollos is among the aristocracy of intellect; at Ephesus 
he is in the company of tent-makers. It is good to know life on all sides ; good to find 
virtue and grace in the most diverse society ; and, above all, to detect in each scene the 
leading hand and educating wisdom of God. — J. 

Vers. 1 — 4. — A glimpse into apostolic life. Corinth. Change of method. In Athens 
a public challenge offered both to the philosophers and to the citizens generally in the 
market-y)lace, as well as reasonings with the Jews in the synagogue. In Corinth, a 
more mercantile and less intellectual city, the preaching was more private and more 
decidedly on the foundation of the Old Testament, until Paul's separation from the 
synagogue. Notice — 

I. The apostolic simplicity and singleness of motive. The Jew who had learned 
Christ at Rome was at once associated with Paul. There was no attempt to isolate 
himself from those who may have learned the truth in a somewhat different manner. 

II. The selp-sacrificb of the apostle's daily life. The tent-making supplied 
temporal wants. Jewish education on the right principle. The cultivation of inde- 
pendence. If not possible in exact repetition, the spirit of such a method should 
be ours. 

III. Brotherly love the support of zealous service. The messenger of Christ should 
be full of sympathy. Fellowship with congenial minds is absolutely necessary to refresh 
and enlarge the feelings. 

IV. Guidance op circumstances in Christian labour. Corinth did not require the 
same method as Athens. A longer stay seemed advisable. Worldly indifference is 
more hard to meet and overcome than intellectual opposition. Corinth was pleasure- 
loving and sensual. The synagogue was made the centre of work, that time might be 
given to lay hold of popular interest. Patience and prudence necessary. — R. 

Veri. 5 — 11 (or vers. 9, 10). — Faithful ministry. L The Spirit of GfoD in th« 

MESSENGER. 1. Testify by a special access of zeal in preaching the Word. Times when 
we should make unusual efforts to persuade men. We need to guard against monotony. 
The presence of sympathetic fellow-workers is a great encouragement and incitement. 
2. Called out by the blaspheming opposition of unbelievers. If Christians knew what 
is said against Christ, they would not be so quiet as they are. 3. By Divine intima- 
tions encouraging and stimulating. Many of the greatest preachers, Luther, Wesley, 
Savonarola, have had such visions. In our intercourse with God in prayer we receiva 
such gifts of preparation for our work. Every public man should have his seasons of 
approach to the throne, that his strength may be fed with the invisible gtream of grace. 
II. The ministry op Paul at Corinth in its relation to the Christian Church 
AND THE WORLD. (Compare the Epistles.) The commercial influence of Corinth would 
help the diffusion of the truth. While the people were luxurious they were highly 
cultured. Greek thought was ther«. and the close intercourse with Athuna would gir* 



OH. xvm. 1—28.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 103 

the gospel the opportunity to lay hold of Greece as a whole. " The Lord had much 
people in that city." The two elements of difficulty evinced in the Epistles were the 
Greek contentiousness, especially developed at Corinth, and the sensual tendencies of 
a voluptuous, wealthy people. Hence the importance of the Jewish portion of the 
Corinthian Church. Crispus the ruler of the synagogue, and Titus Justus the prose- 
lyte, would hoth heoome important fellow-workers with Paul. Notice, therefore : 1. The 
union of the Jewish and Greek elements in the early Church and in the development 
of Christian life ; seen in the union of fact and doctrine, of the practical and theoretic, 
especially in Paul and his teaching (cf. the Epistles throughout). 2. The remarkable 
guidance or Providence. The opposition of the synagogue leading to a more decided 
ministry among the Gentiles ; and hence to the rapid spread of truth among Greeks, 
and so through Europe. A merely Jewish religion would never have laid hold of the 
Greek and Latin minds; Christianity did. We may compare the influence of France 
during the Middle Ages and since the Reformation, in diffusing ideas amono; surrounding 
nations. So we are taught that it is not by human agencies alone that the victims of 
the gospel are won, but by innumerable instrumentalities and influences working with 
God's ministers. The conversion of the world may be much nearer than we suppose. 
Under the surface are hidden operations of God. — E. 

Vers. 12 — 17. — Contrasts in the attitude of men towards the gospel, i. Legalism. 
The whole idea of the opponents of Paul was his inconsistency with the Law. 1. It was 
not reverence for God's Law, but for men's traditions. 2. It was a form of self-worship. 
" He foUoweth not with vis." 3. It was moral pedantry, a common sin; questions about 
words, names, and law, hiding realities. 

II. Secdlarity. Gallio an amiable and wise man, but doubtless influenced by the 
prevaiUng Roman spirit, which was indifference to all religion. "Reason" was his 
guide. But, while he refused to be a party to religious persecution, he did not put forth 
his power, as he might have done, to maintain liberty of speech. 

III. Heathenish ignorance and disobdbb. The gospel best prospers in the calm 
atmosphere of peace and reasonable thought. When we excite men's passions against 
one another, we hinder the cause of truth. Sosthenes, doubtless, was ringleader of the 
Jews, but the Greeks did no service to the gospel by beating him. Gallio's indifference 
to the gospel was probably increased by seeing it identified with disorder. The men 
of the world are not to be won by fanaticism. — E. 

Vers, 18 — 23. — Retrospect. An interval in Paul's labours; how long cannot be 
known. Probably a needed rest; possibly connected with a vow. Employed in 
visiting Ephesus, sailing to Caesarea, his long fellowship with the Church there, 
repairing to Antioch and recounting his successes, for some time ; and then revisiting 
the scene of his labours in Galatia and Phrygia. Thus it was a time of comparative 
bodily rest, of reflection and preparation for the future, and of confirmed intercourse 
and fellowship with brethren. Notice, therefore — 

I. The example of wise method in Christian work. 1. Mingle pauses of rest and 
thought with activity. 2. Revisit places where seed of truth has been scattered, both 
to watch the doctrine and strengthen the confidence of new converts. 3. Maintain 
brotherly sympathy with those labouring for the same Master, but in different ways and 
places. We should avoid mere individualism in Church life and evangelistic efforts. 
Paul constantly referred himself to Antioch, and never forgot that he had been recom- 
mended to the grace of God by his brethren. 

IL A» illustration of providential appointment in the lives of God's 
P30PLB. 1. The absences of Paul from his converts the occasions of his letters, so of 
his instruction to the universal Church. 2. ApoUos made way for at Ephesus. His 
mission important. Possible necessity among the Ephesians of other elements besides 
ihe Pauline ; hence both Apollos and, subsequently, ttie Apostle John. 3. The immense 
influence of Paul's personal narration of his successes at Antioch, and of his con- 
firmation of the disciples in the infant Churches of Asia Minor. " Man proposes, God 
disposes," wonderfully illustrated in the early history of Christianity. — E, 

Yers. 24 — ^28. — Apollos. Alexandria's mission. Its broader view of Judaism. l\» 



104 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xvm. 1— 28 

intermediate position between Palestine and tlie Cliristian Church. Variety of human 
talent and acquirement all serviceable to Christ. Humility of the truly good man, 
who, though himself learned, is willing to be taught by those who have more of the 
grace of God. Ministers may get help from their people. ApoUos in the footsteps of 
Paul. He was no rival, but a fellow-labourer. Hence willingly forwarded in his 
proposal to visit Corinth, and carry on there the good beginning made by the apostle. 
An example of: 1. Consecrated learning. 2. Rapid growth in grace, because the spirit 
of the man was humble. 3. Brotherly co-operation. What a rebul^e to later times I 4. 
The blessing of God on a pure and active Christianity. — B. 

Ver. 26. — Zeal without knowledge. " And he be?;an to speak," etc. The true know- 
ledge is not learning, not even knowledge of the Scriptures as a written Word, but 
knowledge of the way of Ood. Priscilla and Aquila may know more, in this sense of 
knowledge, than Apollos. Spiritual things are spiritually discerned. 

I. Those who pbbaoh and teach should be prepared fob it. 1. Much harm is 
done by zeal without true knowledge. 2. Progress cannot be rapid where knowledge 
is imperfect. 3. No amount of fervour in the spirit should be allowed to supersede a 
careful knowledge of the truth. 

II. The WAT OF God is not the way of John the Baptist, but the way or 
Christ. 1. Many things about Jesus may be known, and still the saving truth of 
spiritual life in him may be unknown. 2. Repentance preparatory to faith, not instead 
of it. 3. The way of God in Christ is not a reformed Judaism, but an entirely new 
method of religion ; spiritual, not formal ; by the law of love, not by the law of works. 
New wine in new bottles. Defective views of the gospel still prevalent. Morality 
substituted for faith, ritualism for spiritual religion. The way of Ck)d is the way of a 
new creation. — R. 

Vers. 3, 4. — Tent-making a sermon. Paul has left the mockers, the procrastinators, 
and the believers, each to reap the fruits he has sown, and, departing from Athens, has 
reached Corinth. And here we find liim the centre of so natural a touch of history, that 
it speaks its own fidelity. No " cunningly devised " history would have interpolated such 
an incident as this before us. Nothing but the truth of history could find its niche 
here. So distinctly as it is recorded, it must be charged with some useful suggestions. 

I. Paul puts honour on mere labour with the hands. It were of those matters 
of exceedingly curi'jus interest, not vouchsafed to us, and not necessary to " our learning," 
if we had been told, what Paul earned as wage ; or otherwise how he sold what he made. 
Of one thing we will be sure, he did neither ask nor lake more than was the right price. 

II. Paul puts its real honour ok the apostolic and ministerial office. Be 
does this partly, in one of the most effective of ways, viz. by withdrawing from that 
office its merely superficial honour. He strips it of mere dignity, of ease, and of 
professionalism. 

III. Paul puts honour on independence, even in the apostolic office. True, in 
Christianity as in Judaism, that those who minister at the altar have right to live by 

the altar, and that the exchange of things temporal and " carnal " (1 Cor. ix. 11 14) 

for things spiritual is sure to be to the preponderating gain of those who part with the 
former. Yet there may be times when the day shall be won by one clear proof, and 
that the proof of disinterestedness (1 Cor. ix. 15 — 18). 

IV. Paul puts honour on the freedom op Christianity from any set and 
artificial class distinctions. The man who speaks and who does the right and 
the good is the disciple of Christ. And discijileship is not determined, or rewubted, 
or modified, in any way whatsoever by the kind of work to which it puts its hand. A 
man who prays in all the secrecy of the closet may do more than the man who preaches 
in all the publicity of the Church. A man who gives may haply, on occasion, do more 
than either. And a man who works at the hurr.blest craft may not only be not second 
to an apostle, but may be truest apostle himself. How often have heart and mind died 
away, and nothing been reaped for want of hand and foot 1 The union of the practical 
with the devotional is often just as truly the sine qua nan, as the union of the 
devotional with the teaching and preaching of the highest seraph -tongue. 

V. Paul strikes at the deep-lyinq peinoiple, so wblcc and honoured whes 



BH. xvm. 1— 28.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 104 

EKJHTLT EMBBAOBD, OF THE SBLF-80PPORTINO OHABAOTBB OP OhBISTIANITT. ThiS is itS 

honest pride. It asks air and light. And it asks love and faith, trust and triaL And 
it thereupon asks nothing more, till of it, it comes to be asked, and passionately, what 
devout, grateful, adoring return in its surpassing condescension it is willing to receive. 
Beneath not unfrequent disguises, Christianity has beea a long history of giving and 
not taking, giving and not even receiving, till hand and heart have become one. And 
men, suppliant in loving and overflowing devotion, have begged their Master, Lord, and 
Saviour to accept of themselves and their all.— B. 

Vers. 9— ll.^TOe complement to human uncertainty found in Divine fidelity. It 
must be supposed either that the omniscient eye saw some signs of failing in Paul, or 
else that the greatness of the work and the severity of the trials before him were 
judged by Divine compassion to ask some special help. Notice, therefore, how true it 
is that^ 

I. The best and strongest of human devotion is liable to some unoertaintt. 
No reference is here made to the fickleness that owns to no real devotion, nor ever 
sprang from depth of root. We are to note that the longest human perseverance 
may yet break, the stoutest hum:in heart may have its weaker moments, during which 
irretrievable damage may be done to its cause and discredit to itself, and the warmest 
devotion may under certain circumstances cool. 1. Exceeding weariness of the flesh 
may overcome, some unexpected hour, the truest human devotion, if it get left as it were 
just a moment to itself. 2. An exceedingly b;i ffled state of the mind and of faith may 
throw that determined human devotion. The vicissitude of the world, the Divine 
conduct of its history, and, not the least, the Divine conduct of the grand forces of 
Christianity, when they seem awhile to halt or to be mocked by their own professed 
friends into discredit, — these often offer to baffle each deepest thinker, each most 
observant reflector. 3. The exceeding keetmess of the soul's own peculiar disappoint- 
ment, when the beauty and the persuasiveness and the unchallengeable merit of Christ 
do nevertheless count, to all present appearance, for nothing before the brute force of She 
powers of evil, — this threatens the patience of human devotion. 

II. The unpailino succour op Divine interposition. That interposition resti on 
three very thoughts of mercy. They are : 1. The Divine observingness of " all and 
each," and of the most secret heart and need of each. 2. The Divine sympathy. This 
is one of the great ultimate facts of a risen, ascended, glorified Saviour, who had been 
once with us, and who still shares, high aloft as he, is our nature. 3. The Divine 
practical methods of rescue in the hour of danger a provision against its over-storming 
rage. Among such methods may bo ranked : (1) Divine suggestions. These are angels of 
angels oftentimes to the depressed, the doubting, the darkened, yet the loving and true 
of heart— they are like nothing, more than those rays of light, which are the brighter 
and more exactly defined for the darkness of the clouds past which they travel. (2) 
The triumph of a quickened faith. Surely this is " the gift of Grod." If faith itself be 
so, the brightest flashings forth of the very pride of faith, if it be possible to say so, 
might be yet more inscribed the gifts of God— so opportime, so enlightening, so 
banishing to doubting darkness and to darkest doubting. There is a moment when 
perfection is to the fragrance of blossom, the colour of flower, the ripeness of fruit, the 
light on the landscape, and there are moments when Faith knows and does her very best. 
And it is at such moments that God " restores the soul " of his servant. The miracle of 
vision and dream is nothing more pronounced, more certain, more conclusive, to con- 
viction than these triumphal moments, when faith is in its pride and glory, and 
achieves its best. (3) The direct promise (Ps. xci. 1, 3—6, 11, 12, 14, 15 ; xxiii. 4 ; 
Ixiiii. 23). The promise made to Paul in this vision gathers round the centre that 
had drawn already, then, ages and generations round it ; and how many more by this 
time 1 " I am with thee." And that central promise is good for all bearings of it, 
" Greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world " (1 John iv. 4). It holds 
from such a statement of fact as this, to the immortal Christian charter-promise, " Lo, 
I am with you alway, even to the end of the world ! " The direct promise, in the 
midst of our human uncertainty and unsteadiness of performance, is clear, exact, steady, 
and certain. Eesting on our faith, it feeds hope, and draws closer and closer the bands 
of love. (4) i'he conviction of there being, in spite of all appearances, a large harveat to 



^<^<* THE ACTS 01' THE APOSTLES. [oh. XTin.,!— 28. 

be gathered. The true servant, after all, loves work, and loves his Master's work, and 
must remember that he is neither the Master nor gifted with Master's sight and know- 
ledge. And with what fresh alacrity has he not unfi equently resumed toil, when amid all 
things that look against himself and his toil, he hears, or seems to hear, the authorita- 
tive assurance of the Master, " For I have much people in this city," though at 
present they " wander as sheep having no shepherd"! — B. 

Vers. 12 — 17. — A novel instance of retribution. The common sense of the unlearned 
has much more mercy than the refinement ot the theologian, and the straightforward- 
ness of a heathen will show to more advantage than the crookedness and narrowness of 
a man better known for professing than tor practising religion. We have here a note- 
worthy instance of some who, would-be punisheis of another, succeed in letting them- 
selves only in for punishment. And this just consummation in this case was due 
exclusively to the ready perception and blunt, uncompromising action of one who 
evidently had no inclination to lend himself as the tool of iniquitous bigotry and perse- 
cution. When it is said, indeed (ver. 17J, that " Gallio cared lor none of these things," 
it is possible that, in strict justice, h« ought to have cared for so much of them as con- 
cerned the lynch law, which, in the very presence of the "judgment-seat," the multitude 
of the Greeks Inflicted upon Sosthenes, the ruler of the synagogue. Obviously, however, 
the Greeks were not exceeding the unwritten law or custom of Corinth in their act, 
and the inaction of Gallio may be sufBciently accounted for by this consideration. 
Notice — 

I. A LAEGE NUMBER OF MEN MAKINO COMMON CAUSE AGAINST ONE UNBBPKIENBBD 
MAN, IK A EBLIGIOUS MATTEB AND BEFORE A FOREIGN COURT. If their perverted 

animosity of mind did not see the anomaly, the unperverted, unwarped mind of Gallio 
saw it promptly, and felt it decisively. 

II. A VERT HOLLOW AND INSINCEKE STATEMENT THEREUPON OP THE CASE. 1. The 

facts of the accusers are not true — scarcely to the letter, not at all to the spirit. 2. If 
they had been so, it is not this which was likely to give the Jew cause of complaint. 
The Greek of Corinth might possibly have had some pretence for bringing the matter 
'nto prominence, but not the Jew. And Gallio saw through it at once. 

III. The man of true religion, covered by the Roman judges, exempted from 

THE NECESSITY OP DEFENDING HIMSELF, THOUGH QUITE PREPARED TO DO BO, AND 
remitted TO HIS WORK, FREER AND SAFER TO DO IT THAN EVER. 

IV. The ACCUSERS contemptuously dismissed, and THE UNJUSTIPIABLENESS OP 
THEIR CONTENTION, BEING BROUGHT TO THAT COURT, PROVED OUT OP THEIR OWN MOUTH. 

V. The REPRESENTATIVE OF THE UNJUST ACCUSERS SUMMARILY PUNISHED HIMSELF, 
HIS INIQUITY RETURNING UPON HIS OWN PATE, AND THAT BY THE DEED, NOT OP HIM 
WHOM HE HAD DONE HIS BEST TO INJURE, BUT BY THE SPONTANEOUS CONCERT OP OTHERS. 

And every stage of these events spoke to the retributive observation of One who " is 
angry with the wicked every day," let them be who they may, and their pretences 
what they may. And every step also spoke the observing and sympathizing care ot 
Christ for one to whom he had just made the promise, " No man shall set on thee to 
hurt thee ; I am with thee." How happy are all they who serve him with all their 
might, in that they may trust hio with all their heart 1 — B. 

Vers. 24 — 28. — The opportunities vouchsafed to fitness. The doctrine of man's oppor- 
tunity is the correlative of that of God's providence. A world of opportunity there 
ever is, ever is even /or every man. How much of it mournfully perishes for lack ol 
fitness in those who should be fit I A wonderful quantity and variety of fitness there 
is which waits upon opportunity, hangs precarious on it, but which often pines away 
because the opportunity given is not seen, or seen is not rightly appraised and humbly 
accepted. Pride often stands in the way of fitness accepting opportunity. So the 
whole Jewish nation sinned, and " knew not their King, God's everlasting Son." Whim 
often stands in the way; one kind of opportunity had been preferred and counted 
upon, and that which actually comes, though no doubt much better in piality, looks so 
strange that it is disdained. Impatieipce often stands in the way; for how much ol 
opportunity depends on ripeness, ripeness of time fitted to the exact ripeness of ch*- 
racter, and many will not wait, nor believe, nor trust ! in all such cases, the waate^ 



on. Ivm. 1—28.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSiLES. 101 

the sacrifice, the absolute unqualified loss are what only the omniscient eye can see, and 
are such that the eye of Jesus would "weep" over them. A much happier view o( 
fitness, which courted opportunity, and of opportunity which was divinely vouchsafed 
to fitness, is here before us. Let us observe — 

I. Thj! fitness. It is illustrated in two instances. 1. The instance of ApoUos. 
(1) He was eloquent. It was very ])ossibly a native fiift with him. If it were such, 
it was used — used in a good cause, improved by use. Many a natural advantage is not 
used ; or is so slupigishly used that it wins no improvement and earns no talent beside 
itself; or used, it is used to inferior ends or to really bad purpose. So far from its 
being able to be described as "improved," it both desecrates and is desecrated. (2) He 
had the fitness of one who had acquired knowledge of the Scriptures, and very hearty, 
ihorough knowledge of them. He understood their parts and their harmony. He 
could, no doubt, quote them, compare them, vindicate them against misinterpretation 
or very weak interpretation. And thoroughness of acquaintance with them raised their 
meaning and value and admirableness incomparably for him. A very scanty, meagre 
.icquaintance with Scripture is dishonour offered to it and its high worthiness ; but, 
furthermore, it has no value for the subject of it. He is stricken with famine in the 
presence of rich abundance, and the strickenness is all his own doing. The average 
modern Christian loses, perhaps, beyond all that is supposed, from this one source. 
(3) He had been instructed and had taken the graft of such instruction respecting the 
Messiahship of Jesus. " This word," upon which all turned for the Jew of that day, 
he had " received with meekness." And this word, though at present he had not got 
beyond the " baptism of John," and knew little of the " baptism of the Holy Ghost," 
was bearing already " much fruit." (4) He owned to the great qualification of " fervour 
in the Spirit." It was a fervour assuredly not all bis own, not altogether native in 
gift. The Spirit had condescended to descend and light upon him. (5) He had a 
f ei tain fitness of practical aptitude at speaking. And he did not bury it. He began by 
■' speaking " as if in conversation with one or more. He went on to " teaching," and 
neither his teaching ncr any who heard it rebuked his advance, it would appear, till 
he found himself " preaching boldly " in public in the synagogues. It is just as though 
impulse had been faithfully obeyed, and felt its way, felt it rightly from step to step. 
(6) He had also a certain missionary fitness. No large language boasts it to us, but 
the significant language of his deeds speaks it. He was " disposed " to pass onward. 
This is the disposition of the gospel. It refuses to stagnate. It refuses to be partial. 
It refuses to forget " the ends of the earth." It refuses to stay its course till it sh^U 
" cover the earth, as the waters cover the sea." 2. The instance of Aquila and PrisciUa. 
Behind the all-brief allusion to them, what a background, we may be well assured, lies 1 
What loss of worldly business, what vexation, what fatigue, what wounded hearts and 
painful aspects of human life, and strange estimates of the great Invisible, must have 
been the oft visitants of those banished Jews of Eome 1 Yet (1) they had fallen in 
with Paul, and not been afraid of him, nor of his truth, which was one with him, and 
they had " learned of him." Ay, it was the foundation of all fitness for them. But (2) 
they had admitted Paul to be " partners " with them, or workman for them at wages, 
and had received him as an indoor servant. So they had not only learnt the first out- 
line and elements of Christian flruth, but they had enjoyed the priceless advantage of 
learning ever so much more by question and answer, at many an odd moment, when 
the light burst in on them like a flash of lightning, only with healing instead of 
alarming effect. They had learned in many a nicely disposed frame of mind, when a 
quarter of an hour gave more than a week would have otherwise given. They had 
also been relieved and cheered through long stretches of wearisome toil, yet the time 
sped all too quickly. And many a time they said, in thinlang of it all, "Did not our 
heart bum within us?" They were qualifying for nothing different from this— to 
" expound the way of God more perfectly " to others. (3) They had come to feel 
themselves, if it might at all be so, " inseparable " from Paul. They must go with 
Paul (ver. 18) into Syria and to Ephesus (ver. 19). " There," it is significantly said, 
" he left them " (ver. 19), for it was time their own separate usefdness and ministry 
ahould begin. 

II. The OPPOETtwiTT. 1. For ApoUos. He seemed made for usefulness. (1) Hi 
v^nd begun work right heartily before Aquila and Priscilla had told him the latest and 



108 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xvui. i— ze. 

the best. So he had already found his work out of the various fitnesses which lay in 
him, which he had not neglected, not resisted, not despised. (2) The opportunity ol 
large accessions of knowledge are thrown in his way, and he embraces them and owns 
them. Possibly the tent-making couple, man and wife, did not ordinarily stand very 
high in repute with the learned and polished of Alexandria (ver. 24). But as surely 
aa they recognize the right ring about him, so does he about them. And he is glad of 
the providential opportunity held out to him, to have " the way of God expounded " to 
him more completely and fully. (3) The opportunity is opened to him of passing on 
to other groimd, accredited by " the brethren," till he finds himself the true living 
centre of a people to God's glory. He is the " much helper " of them, who had already 
" believed through grace," and he is the effective, trenchant, and successful couvincer 
of many others, of "the truth as it is in Jesus." What a lesson for young men! 
And how many persons of great gifts not used, misused, or sluggishly used, are sternly 
rebuked by the example of Apollos ! While he is an example of how God will find 
the work and the opportunity and the glorious usefulness for those who have and 
improve and dedicate to him their fitness, of whatever kind, for his work. 2. For 
Aquila arid Priscilla. These had been blessed themselves. Very likely, indeed, they 
had been a real help and comfort in private and in travelling to Paul. We can see 
them, wherever the modest opportunity ofiered, modestly stepping in and using it for 
the glory of Christ and the good of the brethren and others. But they had never 
thought of anything beyond such silent, unknown, unrecorded usefulness. But no, it 
shall not be so. A new opening occurs ; they see it, and use it. They teach the 
teacher. They furnish the armoury of the capable, skillul, valiant warrior. Not a 
victory that Apollos won afterwards, but their share was registered up above ; and not 
a tender plant he watered (1 Cor. iii. 6), but the refreshingness came partly of their 
work, while " God gave the increase." For love, and care, and study, and zeal for him, 
Christ will never long withhold that best present reward, the reward of sufficient 
opportunity. — ^B. 

Ver. 1. — Corinth o» a model sphere of misiumary labour. The service of the apostle 
in no city or district is more fully detailed than his service at Corinth, and there is so 
much of interest connected with that city, that we may consider somewhat fully the work 
that had to be done, and the work that was done there. A general sketch of the 
place, its character, and its history will suggest the directions in which further study 
and research may be hopefully pursued. The most complete and careful note is the 
following, by Dean Plumptre : — " The position of Corinth on the isthmus, with a harbour 
on either shore, Cenchreffi on the east, Lechseum on the west, had naturally made it a 
place of commercial importance at a very early stage of Greek history. With com- 
merce had come luxury and vice, and the verb Gorinthiazein, equal to 'live as the 
Corinthians,' had become proverbial, as early as the time of Aristophanes, for a course of 
profligacy. The harlot priestesses of the temple of Aphrodite gave a kind of conse- 
cration to the deep-dyed impurity of Greek social life, of which we find traces in 1 Cor. 
V. 1 ; vi. 9 — 19. The Isthmian games, which were celebrated every fourth year, drew 
crowds of competitors and spectators from all parts of Greece, and obviously furnished 
the apostle with the agonistic imagery of 1 Cor. ix. 24 — 27. On its conquest by the 
Boman general Mummius (b.c. lid), many of its buildings had been destroyed, and its 
finest statues had been carried off to Rome. A century later, Julius Cassar determined 
to restore it to its former splendour, and thousands of freedmen were employed in the 
work of reconstruction. Such was the scene of the apostle's new labours, less pro- 
mising, at first sight, than Athens, but ultimately far more fruitful in results." 
Taking the point of view indicated in the heading of this homily outline, we notice 
that— 

L COEINTH WAS THE FLACE TO TEST THE ADAPTATION OF THE GOSPEL TO ALL CLABSEB OF 

iOolKTY. The experience of long years and many missionary journeys was epitomized 
at Corinth. Not even Rome presented such an assemblage of all classes and grades, of 
all nationalities and races. It was just the place wherein to show what " almighty 
grace can do." And the great apostle sought it with much the same instinct that leads 
the revivalists of our day to seek London, or Glasgow, or Paris. The population of 
CoriBtb was largely democratic, and its aristocracy was that of wealth rather than of 



BH. XTOL 1— 28.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 109 



birth. CJommerce brought to it sailors and merchants from all parts of the world 
There was a considerable Greek population, and a large number of Roman settlers 
And we may add that the Jewish nation was well represented. St. Paul preached th« 
gospel to them all, and it proved the power of salvation unto all who believed. 

II. COKINTH WAS THE PLACE TO TEST THE POWER OF THE OOSPEL ON MEN UTTBBLY 

DEBASED AND OOBEUPTBD BY SIN. The moral iniquity of Eome, as described in Rom. L, 
may help us to realize the profligacy of Corinth. F. W. Robertson says, "The city 
was the hotbed of the world's evil, in which every noxious plant, indigenous or trans- 
planted, rapidly grew and flourished ; where luxury and sensuality throve rankly, 
stimulated by the gambling spirit of commercial life, till Corinth now in the apostle's 
time, as in previous centuries, became a proverbial name for moral corruption.' Can 
the gospel cleanse the unclean, deliver those enslaved by vice, break the bondage of 
degrading habits, and give men command over their passions ? Can even worse than 
Jerusalem sinners be saved? And is there hope for the most abandoned nations? St. 
Paul's successes at Corinth are the sufBcing answer. 

III. COEINTH WAS THE PLACE TO DEVELOP THE RELATIONS OF ChBISTIAN PBIKOIPLES 

TO SOCIAL AND FAMILY LIFE. Show how the commou everyday life and relations of the 
people had been toned by their idolatrous religion. The practical question comes to 
every man who yields his heart to Christ — What changes will the Christian principles 
make in my conduct ? Illustrate how St. Paul had to decide many details, and illus- 
trate the working of the Christian principles in his letters to the Corinthian Church. 
And he thus has rendered invaluable service to the Church of all the ages. — 'R. T. 

Ver. 6. — Personal religious responsibility. " Tour blood be upon your own heads." 
Introduce by reference to St. Paul's relations with the Jews. Up to this time he had 
been strictly loyal to the Jews, and wherever he went he had taken the gospel first 
to them. No doubt the hindrance of their prejudices, and the violence of their oppo- 
sition, had weaned him from them and prepared the way for the separation of the 
Gentile from the Jewish Christians, which took place at Ephesus (ch. xii. 9). The 
terms that are used to describe the conduct of the Jewish party are very strong ones, 
and help to explain the intense feeling of indignation excited in the apostle. " Opposed 
themselves " is a military term, implying organized and systematic opposition. How 
strong St. Paul's feelings were is indicated in his act of " shaking his raiment." " As 
lone by a Jew to Jews, no words and no act could so well express the apostle's indig- 
nant protest. It was the last resource of one who found appeals to reason and conscience 
powerless, and was met by brute violence and clamour." The phrase which the apostle 
used is evidently a proverbial one; it must not be regarded as a mere passionate 
imprecation ; it is a last solemn warning. With it should be compared such passages as 
1 Kings ii. 32, 33, 37 ; Ezek. iii. 18 ; xxxiii. 4 ; Matt, xxiii. 35. St. Paul did not from 
this time entirely give up preaching to the Jews, but he gave up preaching to those 
who lived at Corinth. The point on which we fix attention is that St. Paul had 
recognized and borne responsibility for them as their teacher ; but that responsibility 
ne refused to bear any longer ; he cast it back altogether on themselves. 

I. The responsibility of the teacher. This is fully dealt with, in relation to the 
ancient prophets, by Ezekiel (iii. 17 — 21 ; xxxiii. 1 — 19). The prophet, or teacher, or 
preacher, is : 1. A man set in relation with others who is one of them ; who can speak 
to, or influence, others. 2. A man with a message to be given to others. He is a 
recipient of Divine truth for the sake of others. He has a sphere and a message. Out 
of these two things comes his responsibility. For the time and occasion, he actually 
takes upon himself the responsibility of the souls of those to whom he is sent, since 
their eternal well-being may be dependent on his faithfulness in the delivery of his 
message. Illustrate that Jonah took upon himself the fate of Nineveh as a nation. So 
every true preacher now, who has a message from God, finds that the secret of his 
power lies in the measure in which he can take the responsibility of his audience upon 
himself, and feel that his testimony will be a savour of " life nntc life," or of " death 
unto death." He can only be cleared of his responsibility before God in two ways. 
(1) By fully delivering his message. (2) By the wilful rejection of his message. 
Impress what a burden on the Christian preacher's heart is the burden of souls ; and 
with what an agony of feeling he sometimes would cast off the burden, saying, " Who 



110 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xvin. 1—28 

is sufficient for these things?" But what is overwhelming responsibility from one 
point of view is holy joy of service from another point of view. Who would not will- 
insly stand with Christ, and feel how " he bare our infirmities and carried our sorrows " t 
" It is enough for the servant that he be as his Lord." 

n. The responsibility of the hearer. It may be said — Is it not better to have 
the people without the knowledge of the truth, if such knowledge increases their 
responsibility and final judgment ? The answer is : (1) We must preach the gospel, 
whatever may prove to be the issues of our work. (2) Bearing responsibilities, and 
lilting ourselves to meet them well, are the conditions of moral growth. No man can 
reach a full manhood save under the pressure of responsibilities. Those of the heater 
are : (1) To listen to the teacher of Divine truth. (2) To recognize the personal relations 
of the truth he hears. (3) To decide for himself the acceptance or rejection of the 
message. (4) To bear all tlie present and future consequences of whatever decision he 
may make. Impress that the most painful thing about the woe of lost souls will be 
the conviction that they were themselves to blame. "Their blood was upon their own 
heads."— R. T. 

Vers. 9, 10. — Ood^s grace in times of depression. The point of this gracious and 
comforting manifestation of God to his servant is that it came at a time of much per- 
I'lexity, anxiety, and depression. It told of the Divine care of the earnest and faithful 
ii|iostle, and gave him the restful assurance that, however men might oppose and 
trouble him, God accepted his service, and would surely guard him from all evil until 
liis work in that city was complete. We may compare the proverbial assurance which 
has often brought comfort to our hearts, " Man is immortal till his work is done." 
1 1 was one of the marked peculiarities of the Divine dealing with St. Paul, that at 
the great crises of his life special visions were granted to him. At the time of hia 
Ciiuversion, he had seen and heard the Lord (ch. ix. 4 — 6). When in a trance at 
Jerusalem, he heard the same voice and saw the same form (ch. xxii. 17). When on 
the ship, during the great storm, an angel form appeared to him with a gracious and 
assuring message (ch. xxvii. 23, 24). When called to appear before his judge, he 
seems to have had an unusual sense of Christ's nearness, for he says, " Notwithstanding 
the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me " (2 Tim. iv. 17). And he givus a full 
account of his remarkable uplifting to see unspeakable things in 2 Cor. xii. 1 — 7. 
But all who are so sensitively toned as to have such seasons of spiritual elevation are 
singularly liable to answering moods of depression. They who can thus rise high can 
also sinli low; and St. Paul did but tell of actual and painful experiences when he 
said, " Without were fightings and within were fears." At Corinth circumstances 
fireatly troubled him. Some measure of success attended his preaching, but he seemed 
to make more and worse enemies than ever ; he separated the Christian disciples from 
the synagogue in the hope of getting some quietness and peace, but the prejudiced 
Jews of the synagogue continued their persecutions, until St. Paul's spirit was well-nigh 
broken, and he had almost made up his mind to leave Corinth, and seek for other and 
more hopeful spheres. And yet he felt that this would be running away from his 
work, and forcing God's providence, seeing that no directions for his removal from 
Corinth had been given to him. It was just at this period of anxiety and depression that 
the comforting message came to him. Illustration of similar moods of feeling, in other 
servants of God, may be found in Elijah (1 Kings xix. 4 — 14) ; in Jeremiah (Jer. i. 
6 — 8 ; XV. 15 — 21) ; and in John the Baptist's sending from his prison to Jesus, asking, 
" Art. thou he that should come, or do we look for another?" Having this incident 
and its surrounding circumstances well before us, we may consider two things: (1) 
what the incident tells us of St. Paul; and (2) what the incident tells us of the Lord 
Jesus Christ. 

I. What the incident tells us of St. Paul. It intimates ; 1. That he suffered 
from bodily frailty. A burden of physical weakness constantly oppressed him and 
affected his spirits. Compare Richard Baxter or Robert Hall, men whose holy labours 
were a continual triumph of will and of heart over pain and weakness. Show the 
subtle connections between bodily conditions and apprehensions of Divine truth. It it 
mosi conifurtiiig to be assurts.1 that Gud " knoweth our frame, and remembereth that 
we «re dust." 2. That he was naturally of a mo&t seusitive and nervoui constim. 



OH. xvm. 1— 28.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES, 111 



tion, 80 that he felt everything most keenly. Such natures yearn for love with an 
intense passion, and they feel slights and unkindness, and seemino; failure ami unfaith- 
fulness, in those they trust, with a passion equally intense. They have altogether 
higher joys than most men can know, but they have answering sorrows deeper than 
most men can sound. To such natures alone can spiritual visions come : they gain 
the truth by power of insight ; and, often at the cost of extreme personal suffering and 
distress, they become the great thought-leaders and teachers of the age. Such men are 
amongst us still, and they need the tendere.st consideration and sympathy. They will 
reward us by thoughts and views of Christ and of truth such as never can be won by 
mere study. Their love and faith alone can sound the deep things of God. 

IL What the incident tells us of the Lord Jesus Chbist. 1. The first thing 
is the assurance it gives of Christ's actual presence with his servants. He may not 
always he felt, but he is always present. 2. He is never failing in his gracious and 
tender interest in their doings, and in them. 3. He is ready to make manifestations 
of himself, and of his will, to his servants, in exact adaptation to their needs. 4. 
He may show his nearness, and assure his servants of bis sympathy and help in 
unique ways. The point of all our Lord's manifestations to his people is the need for 
keeping up in their souls the conviction that he is reaUy with them. All comfort, 
strength, and security for Christian workers come with this conviction. So St. Paul 
elsewhere declares, " I can do all things through him that strengtheneth me." 

We may learn : 1. That times of depression are no unusual experience for God's 
people. 2., That they may even come in the very midst of our work. 3. That 
they are under the gracious watching of the Master whom we serve. 4. And that 
they are only the sides of weakness that belong to natures endowed with special 
capacities for special work. — E. T. 

Vers. 12 — Yl.—OalWa indifference. It is a singular thing that altogether unworthy 
ideas should have been associated in Christian minds with this man Gallio. He is 
known to have been the brother of Seneca, and a man of singular amiability of character. 
"Seneca dedicated to him two treatises on Anger and the Blessed Life ; and the kindli- 
ness of his nature made him a general favourite. He was everybody's ' Dulcis Gallic,' 
was praised by his brother for his disinterestedness and calmness of temper, as one 
• who was loved much even by those who had but little capacity for loving.' " F. W. 
Bobertson remarks on the expression, " Gallio cared for none of those things ; " " that is, 
he took no notice of them, he would not interfere. He was, perhaps, even glad that a 
kind of wild, irregular justice was administered to one Sosthenes, who had been fore- 
most in bringing an unjust charge. So that instead of Gallio being, as commentators 
make him, a sort of type of religious lukewarmness, he is really a specimen of an 
Bpright Roman magistrate." But a careful judgment of the incidents which bring 
Gallio before ns leaves the impressiqn that the general idea of his character is in great 
measure the correct one ; his easy-going gentleness was only too likely to lead him to 
oonrdve at wrong-doings, and fail adequately to punish wrong-doers. From the narra- 
tive we may learn such things as these — 

I. SOHE THINGS ABE BEST TREATED WITH CONTEMPT. In life WO often meet With 

difficulties which are made by treating trifling matters seriously. 1, Certain forms of 
opposition to Christian truth are best " left alone." They grow into importance by 
being treated as if they were serious. 2. Officious and intermeddling persons are 
best treated with a quiet scorn ; by making much of them utterly incompetent persons 
are lifted into positions for which they are wholly unfitted. In the practical relations 
of society and of the Church there is a mission for humour, satire, and even scorn ; and 
in the use of such weapons we have the example of St. Paul. Bat it is manifest that 
•uch weapons are dangerous, and may only be used with due caution and reserve. 

IL Religious quabbels mat often wisely be tbbated with contempt. The dis- 
putes and contentions which arise in religious communities seldom bear relation to 
principle; they usually come frompetty misunderstandings, or aroused personal feeling. 
Mischief comes by fostering them, giving them importance, and letting them develop 
their evil influence. There is often needed, in religious associations, the strong firm 
ruler who, like Gallio, will refuse to hear miserable contentions about words and names, 
or to heed the lepoit* of slanderers and backbiters. It is seldom found possible to 



112 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLBa [oh, xvm. 1— 2a 

heal religiotis quarrels, and it is practically wiser to treat them as we treat spreading 
diseases — stamp them out, by the refusal to recognize them. Let them die out ; and 
this they will surely do if we take care not to fan the flame. 

IIL The claims or religious truth and duty mat hbvbb be bet aside with 
CONTEMPT. Whoever may present them, under whatever circumstances they may ba 
presented, they demand our attention, our calm, careful consideration. Nothing of 
truth may we leave alone, whether it be old truth set before us with a new vividness 
and force, or new truth which is apparently opposed to all our prejudices. All truth 
comes to us with a " Thus saith the Lord ; " and, as God's voice to us, we dare not be 
indifferent, much less may we be contemptuous. Show what truths and duties may come 
before us ; apply especially to the gospel offer ; press the demand for immediate attention 
on this ground, " It is not a vain thing for you ; it is your lifa."—R. T. 

Ver. 18. — St. PauVt personal relations with Judaism. " Having shorn his head in 
Cenchreae, for he had a vow." For the various explanations of this allusion which 
have been offered, reference must be made to the Bxegetical portion of this Con'raentary. 
For some reason, which St. Paul regarded as sufScient, he had allowed his ha r to grow 
for a time, and now, the time of the vow being nearly expired, he had his hai.- cut (not 
shaved) before starting on his journey into Syria. The point to which we bend atten- 
tion, as suggesting suitable lessons for us, is that, beiog a born Jew, St. Paul found 
himself bound by rules and ceremonials which he did not feel justified in pressing upon 
his Gentile converts. This may give a seeming inconsistency to St. Paul's conduct, 
but it really reveals the nobility of his spirit, and the self-mastery and self-rule which 
he had won. We should careiully distinguish between the limitations under which a 
good man and wise teacher may please to confine his own personal conduct, and the 
freedom £rom such personal limitations which he may enjoin in his public teachings. 
As an illustration, reference may be made to such matters as card-playing and going to 
theatres. The Christian teacher who feels that no rule on such matters can be laid 
down, is quite consistent with such teaching if he pleases to put himself under rule, 
and will neither play cards nor attend theatres. And this was the position of St. 
Paul. He felt that personally he did not wish to break off the familiar Jewish bonds of 
his lifetime ; but while he personally met all Jewish claims, he resolutely championed 
the freedom of the Gentile Christians from all such restrictions and limitations. 
Impress that the details of a man's conduct are fully within his own management, and 
that in our public relations we can only deal with principles, leaving all direct applica- 
tions to the judgment and conscience of the individual. Still, it should be noticed that 
the apparent diversity between St. Paul's personal conduct and public teachings gave his 
enemies a seemingly fair ground of accusation. We remark that — 

I. A MAil'S PEESONAL LITE MUST BE CONSISTENT WITH HIS PUBLIC TEA0HIN08. TwO 

things we demand of a public teacher : (1) the " accent of conviction ; " and (2) the "note 
of sincerity." The force behind a man must be the force of the man himseljl'. We must 
know him, and have adequate assurance that the things he speaks have a living power 
upon himself. We properly require something more than consistency; we ask for a 
harmony between words and works which will show that each are set to the same key- 
note. If St. Paul's enemies were right, and his Judaical practices were out of harmony 
with his public teachings, then they pluck the life and power from his teaching. 
Impress that still all public teaching is ineffective which is beyond the personal attain- 
ment of the speaker. He can only utter it as intellectual knowledge or as current 
sentiment. A man only speaks with power when he tells what he has himself *• tasted 
and handled and felt of the Word of life." 

II. A man's PBIVATB IiIFB MAT BE BULED BY C0N8IDBBATI0N8 WHICH HE DOES NOT 

EBEL BOUND TO PBBSB ON OTHERS. This is the polnt Suggested by our text, and a simple 
illustration will show us St. Paul's position. A Christian teacher nowadays may be 
personally impressed with the examples of David and Daniel, and may feel that to 
adopt a rule of praying three times a day will be of direct service to his spiritual life 
But he may feel that he has no right to press his rule upon his congregation as a bind- 
ing one for all. He commends the duty of prayer, but he puts himself under limitations 
which are lor himself alone. Many Christian people make intellectual and spiritual 
lulvAnceH, which we might think would give them a large freedom in conduct, and y*t 



OH. XTOL 1— 28.J THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 113 



the fact is that, to the end of their days, they voluntarily keep up their old habits 
and practices, preferring to set themselves within what they find to be well-ordered 
limitations. In such cases it is rather an over-severe consistency than anything like 
inconsistency which we find. Modern evil rather goes in the direction of over-demand 
of personal liberty as new aspects of Divine truth gain prominence. There is too little 
of Pauline self-regulation on the Christian principles. 

III. A man's FERSONAli LIMITATIONB NEED NOT CONPnTB HIS PUBLIC TEAOHDrOB. They 

may be matters of dispute, on which the Church is divided. He need not make his 
decisions, for the ordering of his own private life, keep him from the public utterance 
of the great principles and duties. The readiest illustration of this point may be 
taken fiom the use of fermented drinks. A Christian teacher may decide that it is 
necessary for his well-being that he should use such drinks regularly and moderately. 
Now, such a man is not debarred by his own personal habit from publicly dealing with 
the great social evil of drunkenness. He can in no way be charged with inconsistency, 
since the matter is one of personal limitation, and not one of scriptural principle. St. 
Paul claimed the right to preach as a Gentile, and to limit himself by Jewish rules, if 
it pleased him to do so. — B. T. 

Ver. 23. — Strengthening disciples. St. Paul's method of itinerating involved some- 
thing like a systematic revisitation of the Churches he founded, and the keeping up of a 
connection with them by letter, when he could not give his bodily presence. He seems 
only to have remained long enough in any one place to gain a number of disciples, and 
to start them fairly, with something like Church order, self-government, and adequate 
teaching force, from among themselves. His plan tended to develop the self-dependence 
of the early Christians ; and it made very real St. Paul's doctrine of the actual presence 
and Divine leading of the Holy Ghost. But we can also see that it placed the young 
Churches in grave peril, and there can be no reason for surprise if we find that in 
doctrine they yielded to the influence of bold but imperfect or false teachers ; and in 
practical life felt the contaminating influence of surrounding immoralities. It is plain 
that occasional visits or letters from the older teachers were imperatively necessary, and 
the work done by such visits or letters is variously styled confirming, or strengthening, 
the disciples (ch. xiv. 22 ; xv. 32—41). The word " strengthening " seems, however, 
to suggest that St. Paul found some weakening of faith, and failure of character and 
conduct, which he knew would only too readily develop into doctrinal and practical 
heresies. We may take this term " strengthening " and apply it to some of the forms 
of pastoral and ministerial service in our own times. Something is done in the way of 
visiting and confirming the Churches by our older and honoured chief pastors, but it 
may be urged that here is a sphere of hopeful service which may be much more fully 
occupied. 

I. " StBBNGTHENING " AS APPLIED TO THE EBNEWALS OP MORAL FOBOK IN TIMBS OF 

PEE8E0UTION. Our Lord fairly forewarned his disciples that they must look for perse- 
cution. It came heavily upon the young Churches, not only in those open forms of 
which history has preserved the records, but also in those thousandfold more searching 
forms which belonged to family and social life. Power of resistance and steadfast 
endurance came indeed from the grace of God and the leadings of the Holy Ghost, 
but these ever fit in with, and work through, a due and careful culture of moral 
character. There are principles, considerations, and sentiments which strengthen and 
steady men to endure persecution. And these still form one great theme of pastoral 
treatment, since, in subtler ways, it Is found true to-day that " they who will live godly 
must suffer persecution." 

II. " StEENGTHBNING " AS APPLIED TO ESTABLISHMENT IN CHRISTIAN TRUTHS. Three 

processes are ever going on which need careful watching and wise correction. 1. Men 
who at one time grasp truth strongly, and make it a power on heart and life, gradually 
get to loosen the grasp, and lose the practical influence of the truth on the conduct. 
2. Men who do not at first get a really clear hold of truth soon come, unwittingly, to 
misrepresent it and injure it ; not from an intention of introducing freshness, or from 
any desire to encourage heresy, but simply from feebleness of mental grip and 
inability to apprehend truth clearly. The evils which Christian doctrine has suffered 
from this cause have never been duly estimated. 3. Men who ue of inquisitive and 
ACTS — n. I 



114 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. XIX. 1 — tL 



restless dispositions are too easily attracted by heretical notions. St. Paul had to 
deal with all these forms of evil, and he strove to correct them by establishing more 
firmly than before, in mind and heart, the great Christian foundations ; going over, 
again and again, the " first principles of the doctrine of Christ." 

III. " Strengthening " as applied to pbactical help in Christian living. Many 
practical questions arose in those times out of the relations of Christian principles to 
pagan customs, such as the eating of meat which had been offered in sacrifice to idols. 
And though Christians, under the apostolic guidance, would at first take a decided 
stand in relation even to the details of private and social life, we can well understand 
that daily association would gradually wear down their resistance, and they would fail 
to keep the strictness of moral purity, and the full power of Christian charity, under 
the influence of daily surroundings. It is too seldom duly considered how the worship 
and ministry of each returning sabbath day helps to keep up the moral standard of 
life and conduct among Christian people. 

IV. " Steengthening " AS applied to the quickening of «eal in Christian 
INTBEPRISE. The Christian Church is essentially an aggressive Church. It has its 
mission, and that mission is to the world. It has no right of existence save as it seeks 
to extend and enlarge itself A selfish regard for its own interests is simply ruinous 
to its own best interests. And yet we find that individuals and Churches are ever 
liable to flag in energy and enterprise, and weakly to fall back upon mere self-culture, 
or upon the excuse that they must attend to their self-culture. Apostles, and earnest 
men in all ages, have to arouse the Church to a sense of its duties and responsi- 
bilities, and to strengthen it for duly meeting and fulfilling them. And so we find, 
in St. Paul's letters to the Churches, indications of the various spheres and departments 
in which he found it necessary to " strengthen the disciples." Illustrate by the tender 
scene in the life of David, when his friend Jonathan found him out, in his time of 
depression and seemingly hopeless failure, and " strengthened his hand in God."— K, T. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XIX. 



Ver. 1. — Country for coaste, A.V. ; found 
for finding, A.V. and T.K. The upper 
country (t^ avonepiKa fj.epTj'); the inland 
districts of Galatia and Phrygia, through 
which St. Paul journeyed on his way to 
liiphesus, as distinguished from tlie seacoast 
on which Epliesua staod. Disciples. They 
were like ApoUos, believers in the Lord Jesua 
through the preaching of John the Baptist. 
It looks as if they were companions of 
ApoUos, and had come with him from Alex- 
andria, perhaps for some purpose of trade 
or commerce. 

Ver. 2. — And he said for he said, A.V. and 
T.R. ; did ye receive for have ye received, 
AV. ; when for since, A.V. ; nay, we did 
not so much as hear whether the Holy Ghost 
was given for we have not so much as heard 
whether there he any Holy Ghost, A.V. Did 
ye receive, etc. ? The E.V. gives the sense 
much more accurately than the A.V., which 
is, " Did ye receive the Holy Ghost at the 
time of your baptism, when ye first believed?" 
Something led the apostle to suspect that 
they had not received the seal of the Spirit 
(oomp. Eph. i. \d,Tn(mvaavTes i<r<pi>ayla6riTi'), 
and BO he asked the question. The answer. 
Slay, we did not so much as hear whether 



the Holy Ghost was given, at In the R.V., 

is justified by John vii. 39, where the exactly 
similar phrase, OSirco ^c Ui/ev/xa 'Ajiov, is 
rendered in the A.V., " The Holy Spirit waa 
not yet given." " Esse pro adesse " (Bengel). 
The sense given in the A.V. does not seem 
probable. The answer means, "Not only 
have we not received the Holy Spirit, but 
we had not even heard that the dispensation 
of the Spirit was come." 

Ver. S.—He said for he mid unto them, 
A.V. and T.E. ; into for unto (twice), A.V. 
Into what then were ye baptized ? Nothing 
can mark more strongly the connection be- 
tween baptism and the reception of the Holy 
Spirit than this question does. For it implies, 
" How could you be ignorant of the giving of 
the Holy Ghost if you were duly baptized ? " 
(comp. ch. ii. 38) The answer explains it, 
" We were baptized with John's baptism, 
to which no promise of the gift of the Holy 
Ghost was attaolied." 

Ver. 4. — And Paul gaid for then said Paul, 
A.V. ; John for John verily, A.V. and T.E. ; 
Jesus for Christ Jesus, A.V. and T.E. The 
baptism of repentance. See Luke lii. 3, etc. 
and for the difference between John's 
baptism and that of Christ, Luke iii. 16 
Him which should come after him (Luke 
iii. 16 ; John iii. 28 ; Mark L 7). 



OH. xrs. 1 — 41.] 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 



115 



Ver. S. — And when for vjhen, A.V. ; into 
for in, A.y. Into the Name of the Lord Jesaa 
(see ch. viii. 16). So too ch. x. 48 of Cornelius 
and his company, " He commanded them to be 
baptized in the Name ( iv T<f ovofiari) of Jesus 
Christ " (B.V.). The formula of baptism, as 
commanded by the Lord Jesus himself, was, 
" In [or, 'into'] the Name(6ij rh dvo/xa.) of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy 
Ghost" (Matt, xxviii. 20). But the candi- 
date always first made a profession of his 
faith in Jesus Christ, as m the A.V. of 
oh. viii. 37 ; and the effect of baptism was 
sn incorporation into Christ so as to partake 
of his death unto sin and his life unto 
righteousness. It was, therefore, a true and 
compendious description of baptism, to speak 
of it as a baptism in {or into) the Name of 
JesuB Christ. (See the Baptismal Service 
in the Book of Common Prayer.) There 
does not seem to be any difference of meaning 
between iv Te5 ov6fxa.Ti and e(s rd ijvofia. 

Ver. 6. — Had laid his hands, etc. (see ch. 
viii. 17 and note). We have here a distinct 
mark of Paul's true apostleship (see ch. 
viii. 17, 18). For the manifestation of the 
Spirit, see ch. x 46. 

Ver. 7. — They were in all about twelve men 
for aU the men were about twelve, A.V. 

Ver. 8. — Entered for went, A.V. ; reasoning 
for disputing, A.V. {5iaXey6ii.evos, as ver. 9 
and ch. xvii. 2, 17 ; xviii. 4, 19, etc.) ; <m to 
the things for the things, A.V. This last is 
a needless change, since irelBsiv properly 
governs an accusative of the things per- 
suaded or taught, and it is a right English 
use of " to persuade " to apply it to the thing 
inculcated. For the use of the phrase "the 
kingdom of God " as a compendious descrip- 
tion of Christian doctrine, see ch. i. 3 ; viii. 
12; XX. 25; xxviii. 23. St. Luke uses the 
phrase very fiequently (Luke vi. 20 ; viii. 
10 ; ix. 27, 60, 62 ; x. 11 ; xi. 20 ; xiii. 20, 28 ; 
Tvi. 16; xvii. 20 ; xxi. 31, etc.). 

Ver. 9. — Some for divert, A.V. ; disobedi- 
ent for believed not, A.V. (riireiSovv, as ch. 
xiv. 2 ; xvii. 5, T.R.) ; speaking for but spake, 
A.V. ; the Way fox tliat way, A.V. ; reasoning 
(oi disputing, A.V.; Tyrannus for one Tyran- 
nus, A.V. Were hardened; or, hardened 
themselves. Whether considered as active 
or middle, the hardening their minds against 
the reception of the truth was just as volun- 
tary an action as that of one who shuts his 
eyes that he may not see the light. For the 
use of <rK\Tipivetv (Hebrew na'pn, applied to 
the heart or the neck), see Bom. ix. 18 ; Heb. 
iii. 8, 15 ; iv. 7 — passages all founded upon 
the LXX. of Ps. xciv. 8. See also Exod. 
vii. 22 ; viii. 19 ; and Ecclus. xxx. 11, where, 
as here, disobedience is the consequence of 
being hardened. M^ttotc aKKTjpvi/dels aiTei6i}ffri 
(Toi, " Lest heinghardened lie disobey thee." 
The B.V., by leaving out " were" before " dis- 



obedient," and translating as if " hardened " 
and "disobedient" were two adjectives, 
destroys this consequence. Speaking evil 
of; KaKoKoyovvTis (see Matt. xv. 4; Mark 
ix. 39), frequent in the LXX. as the ren- 
dering of "j^.p. (Exod. xxi. 17 ; 1 Sam. iii 13), 
which is otherwise rendered by Kaxas rfrei!'," 
as in Lev. xx. 9. It is nearly synonymous wit li 
0\a(r(prifi.e!v. The Way (as ver. 23 ; see ch. 
ix. 2, note). They would speak evil of the 
gospel by describing it aa a blasphemy 
against God and against Moses, as contrary 
to tlie Law, as subveraive of all the customs 
and traditions of the Jews, and so on. Ha 
departed. 'Airoffrds is more than simply 
" departing ;" it implies a withdrawal and 
separation from fellowship with them, as in 
1 Tim. vi. 5 (A.V.), "From such withdraw 
thyself;" Eccles. vii. 2, "Depart from the 
unjust " (eomp. Luke xiii. 27). Separated 
the disciples. Hitherto the converted Jews 
at Ephesus had continued to join their 
unconverted brethren in the worship of the 
synagogue ; now Paul withdrew them and 
Separated them (aipdpiae, Gal. ii. 10). Tha 
school of Tyrannus; (TxoK'h, leisure; then, 
" the employment of leisure," as esppci- 
ally in philosophic discussions and the like ; 
thirdly, the " place " were such discussions 
were held, a school. It is uncertain whether 
Tyrannus was a Gentile well known at the 
time (without the tikos), who kept a lecture- 
room for philosophic discussions or lectures 
on rhetoric,or whether he was a Jew who held 
a private school or meeting in his house — a 
beth-midrash — as was not uncommon in large 
towns where many Jews were (Lightfoot, vol. 
iii. p. 236). " Beth-midrash — The Jewish 
divinity school, where their doctors disputed 
of the more high and difBouU matters of the 
Law " (Index to Lightfoot's Works). It was 
commonly the upper room in the house of 
a rabbi (Lightfoot, on oh. ii. 13, vol. viii. 
363), whence " house of rabbis " was synony- 
mous with beth-midrash, house of discussion. 
The name Tyrannus occurs in 2 Maec. iv. 40; 
Josephus, 'Ant. Jud.,' xvi. x. 4 ; ' Bell Jud.,' 
i. xxvi. 6, of an officer in Herod's body- 
guard, who might be a Jew or a Greek ; and 
a certain Tyrannug is described by Suidas 
as a sophist and an author, possibly the 
same as is here spoken of. Lightfoot, Meyer, 
Alford, and others think that the Tyrannus 
here spoken of was a Jew ; Lange,01shausen, 
Howson, Farrar, Lewin, etc., think he was 
a Greek philosopher or rhetorician. Some 
think that " the school of Tyrannus " was 
the name of the lecture-room from soma 
former teacher (see Kenan, p. 345). 

Ver. 10.— i^'or for by, A.V. ; Lord for iMrd 
Jesus, A.V. and T.R. Two years (see oh. xx. 
31, note). Both Jews and Greeks. This 
mention of Jews is rather in favoxir of 
Tyrannus being a Jew, but not deaisirc 



116 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. zix. 1—41. 



Ver. 12. — Intmanch for to, A.V. ; unto fh» 
tick were carried away from hit body for 
from hit body mere brought unto the tick, 
A.V. ; went out for went out of them, A.V. 
and T.E. From his body (xpwTtis) ; literally, 
the thin, but used here by St. Luke for the 
body, in accordance with the usage of medical 
writers "from Hippocrates to Galen" 
(Hobart). Handkerchiefs; aovZipiov, the 
Latin word mdarium, properly a cloth for 
wiping off the sweat. It is one of those 
words, like Kovtrradia, KevTvplav, ffi)^iKiv&iov, 
KoSpivTTi)!, etc., which exactly represent the 
political condition of things at tlie time of 
the writers, who were living in a country 
where Greek was the language of common 
intercourse, but where the dominion was 
Boman. It is found in Luke xix. 20 ; John 
xi. 44 ; XX. 7, and here. Aprons ; o-l/jlikMio, 
more properly written arnjuKivSia. It is the 
Latin word temicinctium, a half-giidle ; the 
Greek word is 7)iu^d>viov. According to 
seme, it was a narrow girdle, but according 
to others, and with more probability, an 
apron covering only half, i.e. the front of 
the body. It only occurs here in the New 
Testament or elsewhere. The careful 
mention of these cures of the sick may also 
be connected with St. Luke's medical pro- 
fession. As regards these unusual modes 
of miraculous cure, comp. ch. v. 15. It 
might well be the Divine purpose, in the 
case of both Peter and Paul, to invest with 
such extraordinary power the very persona 
of the apostles who were to stand forth as 
his messengers and preach in his Name. In 
St. Paul this parity of miraculous energy 
stamped his apostleship with an authority 
equal to that of St. Peter. 

Ver. 13. — Bvt certain also for then certain, 
A.V. ; itroUing for vagabond, A.V. ; name for 
eaU, A.V. ; the evil for evil, A.V. ; 1 for me, 
A.V. and T.E. Strolling (irepicpx"/^^'"""") ! 
going their rounds from place to place, like 
strolling players or like pedlars. The 
words should be construed together, 
" strolling Jewish exorcists." That certain 
Jews in our Saviour's time exorcised evil 
spirits appears from Matt. xii. 27 ; Luke ix. 
49. We learn also from Josephus, 'Ant. 
Jud.,' viii. 2, 5, that forms of exorcism, 
said to have been invented by King Solomon, 
go efficacious that the devils cast out by 
them could never come back, were used with 
great effect in his days. He adds that he him- 
self knew of an instance in which one of his 
own countrymen, Eleazar by name, had cast 
out devils in the presence of Vespasian and 
his sons and officers and a number of his 
wldiem. The method used was this : The 
exorcist applied to the nose of the possessed 
the bezil of a ring, under which was a certain 
root prescribed by Solomon, and so drew out 
the evil spirit through the man'i nostrils. 



The possessed then fell to the ground, and 
the exorcist commanded the evil spirit in the 
name of Solomon never to return, and then 
recited one of Solomon's incantations. To 
give full assiuance to the bystanders that 
the evil spirit had really left the man, the 
exorcist placed a vessel full of water at some 
distance oH, and then commanded the ejected 
spirit to overturn it, which he did. Thus 
far Josephus. Lightfoot, on oh. xili (vol. 
iii. 215), quotes the book Juchasin as speak- 
ing of certain Jews as "skilled in miracles," 
and the Jerusalem Talmud as speaking of 
their enchantments and magical tricks and 
charms " in the name of Jesus" (see, further, 
Alford on Matt. xii. 27). 

Ver. 14. — A chief prieit for and chief of 
the priests, A.V. ; this for to, A.V. A chief 
priest (apxi^p^is) ; not, of course, in the sense 
of high priest, but in that wider sense of the 
word which comprised the chiefs of the 
twenty-four courses and the members of 
the Sanhedrim and all who had ever been 
high priests or who were of the kindred of 
the high priest (see Matt. ii. 4 ; xvi. 21 ; xxL 
15 ; xxiii. 45, etc. ; Luke ix. 22 ; xiz. 47, 
etc.; ch. iv. 23; v. 24; ix. 14, 21, etc.). It 
is probable that the Eleazar mentioned in 
the preceding note was a priest, both from 
his name and because Josephus calls him 
one of his bii.o(pi\av, which may mean " fel- 
low-tribesmen." The name Sceva occurs 
nowhere else, nor is its meaning or ety- 
mology at all certain. Some identify it 
with the Latin Scssva (Horace, 'Ep.,' 1. 
xvii. 1), " left-handed," i.q. Sceevola ; or the 
Greek Seeuas, a proper name in Appiau. 
Simonis gives it an Aiamean etymology, 

Ver. 15. — Said unto them for taid, A.V. 
and T.E. 

Ver. 16. — Mastered both of them for o¥er- 
eame them, A.V. and T.E. 

Ver. 17. — Became for was, A. V. ; both Jews 
and Qreeki for the Jews and Oreeki alto, 
A.V. ; that dwelt for dwelling, A.V, ; upon 
fur on, A.y, Fear fell upon tiiem. Comp. 
ch. T. 11 — 14, where the same effects are 
ascribed to the death of Ananias and 
Sapphira and the signs and wonders which 
were wrought by the apostles at that time. 
This fear produced by the putting forth of 
God's power paralyzed for a time the enemies 
of the gospel, and enabled believers, as it 
were, to take possession of their new herit- 
age, just as the miracles at the Eed Sea and 
the destruction of Sihon and Og paralyzed 
the courage of the Ganaanites and enabled 
the Israelites to take possession of their 
land (Josh. ii. 9 — 11). With respect to the 
incident which. caused this feur, it might at 
first seem inconsistent with our Lord's saying 
to the apostles (Luke ix. 49, 50). But the 
casei were very different. He who oast out 
devils in the name of Jesus, in the Gospel, 



OH. XIX. 1 41.] 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES, 



111 



does not leem to hare had any hostility to 
the faith, for our Lord speaka of hina as one 
who "is not against us." But these sons 
of Soeva were among the unbelieving Jews 
who were " hardened and disobedient ; " and 
if their exorcisms had been permitted to 
succeed, they would have had power to 
withstand Paul, as Janues and Jarabres 
withstood Moses, and the very purpose for 
which miraculous power was given to St. 
Paul would have been frustrated. There- 
fore they were discomfited, and the subtle 
design of Satan to destroy, while seeming to 
magnify, the Name of Jesus was signally 
defeated. Comp. the somewhat similar 
incident at Pbilippi (ch. xvi. 16 — 18). 
Justin Martyr, ia his 'Diologue with 
Trypho,' quoted by Alford-on Matt. xii. 27, 
speaks of the Jews as exorcising, sometimes 
in the name of kings (referring, doubtless, 
to Solomon), sometimes of just men, or of 
prophets, or of patriarchs. So these men 
took up tlie name of Jesus. 

Ver. 18. — Many also of (hem that had 
beliered for and many that believed, A.V. ; 
confessing and declaring for and confessed 
and showed, A.Y. Ilany also of them that 
had believed. This and the following verse 
speak of that class of converts who had 
previously been addicted to magic arts. It 
gi^es us a curious view of the extent to 
which magic prevailed among the Jews 
at this time. Nor was it less prevalent in 
heathen Ephesns. The magic formulss of 
Ephcsus were famous under the name 
of 'E^ea-ia ypd/i/MTa (see Eenan, pp. 344, 345, 
note), and the belief in magic seems to have 
been universal. Hesychius gives as the 
names of the oldest Ephesian charms, A ski, 
Kataski, Lix, Petrax, I)amiiameneus,.^sion, 
which he explains as meaning severally 
"Darkness," "Light," "the Earth," "the 
Year," " the Truth " (Lewin, p. 334). 

Ver. 19. — And not a few for many . . . 
also, A.V. ; that practised for which used, 
A.V. ; in the sight of all for before all 
men, A.V. That practised curious arts 
(-^wr TO irepUpya irpa^AvTuy). The adjective 
repUpyos applied to persons means " a busy- 
body " (1 Tim. v. 13), one who does what it 
is not his business to do, and pries into 
matters with which he has no concern 
(comp. 2 Thess. iii. 11); applied to things, it 
means that which it is not anybody's busi- 
ness to attend to, tliat which is vain and 
superfluous ; and then, by a further exten- 
sion of meaning, that wh;ch is forbidden, 
and specially magic arts and occult sciences. 
Fifty thousand pieces of silver. There is a 
difference of opinion as to what coin or 
weight is meant. If Greek coinage, which 
is perhaps natural in a Greek city, fifty 
thousand draohmte of silver would be meant, 
equal to £1875. If Jewish shekels m 



meant, the sum would amount to £7008 
(' Speaker's Commentary '). It is in favour 
of drachmas being meant that, with the ex- 
ception of Josh. vii. 21 and Judg. xvii. 2, 
the LXX. always express the woi-d "shekel" 
or " didrachra " after the numeral and before 
the word " silver." If St. Luke, therefore, 
had meant shekels, he would have written 
SlSpaxiia kpyvpiov. But it was the Greek 
usage to omit the word SpaxfJ-i before apyvplov 
when the reckoning was by drachmat 
(Meyer). 

Ver. 20.— The Lord for God, A.V. If the 
K.T. has the true order of the words, they 
must be construed. To such an extent, accord- 
ing to the might of the Lord, did the word 
grow and prevail, after the analogy of Eph. 
1. 19. KctTa Kparos, however, taken by itself, 
is quite usual, like koto /uxpdv, koS' iirep- 
iSoA^", etc. (Alford), and is rightly rendered 
« mightily." 

Ver. 21. — Now after for after, A.V. Pur- 
posed in the spirit (^QeTO iv r^ Trv^inari) ; 
literally, set, fixed, or arranged it in bis 
spirit, like the Hebrew phrase, a^ja Di&, ia 
1 Sam. 12, etc. Similarly of past things, 
Luke i. 66, edevro irdfTes . , . ev rp KapSia 
ouTMi', " laid them up in their hearts " (comp. 
ch. v. 4). When he had passed through 
Macedonia, etc. Observe the constant soli- 
citude of Paul to revisit the Churches which 
he had founded, so as to confirm the dis- 
ciples in the faith and to consolidate his 
work (oh. xiv. 21 ; iv. 36 ; xvi. 6 ; 1 Thess. 
iii. 1 — 5, etc.). It marks the unrivalled 
tenderness of his heart toward the disciples. 
Observe also the insatiable appetite of the 
apostle for spiritual conquests, and his noble 
contempt for idleness. He has but just won 
Ephesus and Asia, and already he under- 
takes Macedonia and Achaia. Nor does his 
mind stop there, but reaches on to Jerusalem, 
then stretches onwards to Bome, and medi- 
tates the invasion of Spain. Truly neither 
Alexander, nor OtesM, nor any hero of anti- 
quity was a match for this little Benjamite 
(^pauXus) in the magnanimity of his designs 
(Bengel). 

Ver. 22. — And having sent for so he sent, 
A.V. ; Timothy for Timotheus, A.V. ; he for 
but he, A.V. ; while for season, A.V. Two 
of them, etc. Erastus is here mentioned for 
the first time. If he is the same person who 
is mentioned in Rom. xvi. 23 ; ' 2 Tim. iv. 20, 
it is probable that he was one of St. Paul's 
Corinthian converts who had gone with him 
from Corinth to Jerusalem and Antioch, 
and had accompanied him through Phrygia 

• There is no real reason to think " th« 
chamberlain of the city" must be a different 
person from the Erastus of 2 Tim. iv. 20, 
and the one in oai text. 



118 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[CH. XIX. 1 — 41 



nnd Galatia to EphesuB. Silas, who had 
been Timothy'i companion on the former 
visit to Macedonia, eeema to have left St. 
Paul, poshibly at Jerusalem, fmrn whence 
he originally came (ch. xv. 22, 32, 34), and 
to have attached himself to Peter (1 Pet. 
V. 12). Perhaps he was especially connected 
with the mission to Pontus, Galatia, Cappa- 
docia, etc., as it appears from the passage 
just quoted that he was "a faithful brother 
unto them," A.V.; "or our faithful brother," 
K.V. He himself stayed, etc. This phrase 
is in singular harmony with 1 Cor. xvi. 8, 
which seems clearly to have betn written 
after Timothy's departure for Macedonia 
and before his arrival at Corinth, since 
Timothy is not mentioned either in the 
superscription or among the salutations 
(1 Cor. i. 1 ; xvi. 19, 20), and his coming to 
Corinth is spoken of as doubtful, though 
probable, in 1 Cor. xvi. 10. Both passages 
imply a prolongation of Paul's stay at 
Ephesus beyond his original intention. The 
special reason for this prolongation of his 
sojourn at Ephesus, and which is alluded to 
in 1 Cor xvi. 9, is thought to he the Aitemi- 
sinn or Ephesian games, which were cele- 
brated at Ephesus in May — and therefore 
just at this time — and which brought a vast 
concourse of lonians to Ephesus. It was at 
this time, doubtless, that the principal sale 
of " silver shrines of Diana " took place, and 
therefore It was natural that Demetrius and 
Lis fellow-craftsmen should be very angry 
when they found their usual gains were 
cut short by the multitude of converts all 
over Proconsular Asia. We learn from 
1 Cor, xvi. 7 that Stephanas and Fortunatus 
and Achaicus had arrived at Ephesus from 
Corinth. It is likely that their presence, 
tojiether with that of Tychicus and Tro- 
phimus, two Asiatic converts, enabled St. 
Paul to dispense with the services of Timo- 
thy and Erastus for a time. "Eincrx^'', under- 
stand creouTt!;', kept himself back, i.e. stayed; 
Xpvvov, a while, an indefinite phrase, but 
indicating a short time. Herodotus has 
6Tri(TxovTes b\lyas ijfxepas (viii. 113), etrtffxiiy 
oXiyov XP^""" (•" 132), and iirurx^" XP^""" 
(ix. 49). 

Ver. 23. — About that time for the same 
time, A.V. ; concerning the Way for about 
that way, A.V. (see ver. 9). 

Ver. 24. — 0/ for for, A.V. ; little businesi 
for small gain, A.V. Shrines of Diana, or Ar- 
temis. They were silver models of the famous 
temple of Diana at Ephesus, and were 
carried as charms on journeys and placed in 
people's houses to ensure to them the pro- 
tection of the goddess (Meyer). These gold 
or silver shrines contained within them an 
image of Artemis (Lewin, vol. i. p. 408), as 
eimilar ones, which have bisen found made of 
terra-cotta, do of Cjbele (Lewin, p. 414). 



Bepeated mention is made in Diodonu 
Sieulus, Ammianus Marcellinus, and else- 
where, of gold or silver shrines (_va6i), which 
were offered to different gods as propitiatory 
gifts, or carried about by the owners as 
charms. Business ; epjaa-la, here and ver 
25 (see ch. xvi. 16, note). 

Ver. 25. — Gathered for called, A.V. ; hasi- 
nessfoT craft, A.Y., hut "craft" is thebi ttei 
rendering. Workmen ; ipydrat, different from 
the T6X''"'ai skilled labourers or artisans. 
Demetrius called together all who were in 
any way interested in the shrine trade. His 
true reason came out first. 

Ver. 26. — And for moreover, A.V. W« 
have here a wonderful testimony from an 
enemy to the power and efficacy of St. Paul's 
labours. Asia, here and in ver. 22, etc., 
means Proconsular Asia, of which Ephesus 
was the chief city. That they be no gods, etc. 
This is an incidental proof that St. Paul's 
success at Ephesus lay chiefly among the 
heathen, since we know from ch. xiv. 15 — 17 ; 
xvii. 23, 24, etc., that this was exactly his 
style of preaching to Gentiles, quite differ- 
ent from his method with Jews. 

Ver 27. — And not only is there danger that 
this our trade come into disrepute for so that 
not only this our craft is in danger to be set 
at nouyht, A.V. ; be made of no account for 
should be despised, A.V. ; that she should even 
be deposed fromher magnificence (other mag- 
nificence should be destroyed, A.V. and T.E. 
Is there danger. There is no example in 
St. Luke's writings, or in the NewTestament, 
or in the LXX., of KiySwein being taken 
impersonally, as it is sometimes, though 
rarely, in Greek authors. The subject, there- 
fore, of this sentence is rh fitpos (the portion, 
part, or business), and ToCto KivSmeuei tiiuv 
rh fi-ipos, K.T.A.., must be construed together, 
" This trade is in danger for us to come into 
disrepute," or, put into English, " This our 
trade is in danger," etc. Come into disrepute ; 
fls kirtKiyiibv, only found here in the New 
Testament ; literally, into refutation ; hence 
into disrepute, or into reproach, i.e. be a ground 
of reproach to us who practise it. The 
great goddess. An epithet especially applied 
to the Ephesian Diana (comp. the lue^o- 
A.€i(5TT)Ta at the end of the verse, and the 
cry, vers. 28 and 34). Lewin (vol. i. p. 412, 
note) quotes 'Oiivia t^v fityaXriv 'E^ea-lap 
"Apre/ui/ in the Ephesian Xenophon ; T^s 
fi.fyd\-ns @eas "ApTe'juiSos, in an inscription 
at Ephesus ; "Apre/nu ^ iJityiKi) BeSs (AchiU. 
Tat.). AddfromPausania8,4,31,8, "Allmen 
hold the Ephesian Diana in the greatest 
honour." From her magnificence. TheE.T. 
reads t^j /ieyaKewTriros instead of riji' 
IxeyaXeujTiiTa in the T.E. But Meyer, while 
he accepts the E.T., construes it "and some 
oiher magnificence" etc. ; and rightly.because 
the genitive after KaSaifia/ fhould be pre- 



CB. XIX 1 — II.] 



THE ACTS 01" THE APOSTLES. 



119 



ceded by AttJi, as oh. xiii. 29 ; Josh. viii. 29 ; 
X. 27 (LXX.), and the word KaSatpetv is also 
specially used of lowering the honour of any 
one. All Asia and the world. This is scarcely 
an hyperbole, the worship of the Ephesian 
Diana, and of her image reported to have 
fallen down from heaven, was so very widely 
diffused. 

Ver. 28. — ThU for these sayiruja, A.V. ; 
filled wifh wrath for full of wrath, A.V. 
Great is Diana, etc. A notable instance of 
assertion and clamour crying down reason 
and truth. 

Ver. 29. — The eity for the whole city, and 
the eenfimon for confusion, A.V. and T. H. (jris 
for i\ri) ; they rushed, etc., having seized for 
having caught, etc., they rushed, etc., A.V. 
With one accord (JiiioBuiiaShv) ; see oh. i. 14 ; 
U. 1 ; iv. 24, etc., and for &pii.-naav dfioSviiaSbv, 
see oh. vii. 57. Into the theatre. The com- 
mon place of resort for all great meetings. 
So Tacitus, ' Hist.,' ii. 80 (quoted by Alford), 
says that at Antioch the people were wont to 
hold their public debates in the theatre, and 
that a crowded meeting was held there to 
forward the interests of Vespasian, then 
aspiring to the empire. So Josephus speaks 
of the people of Antioch holding a public 
assembly (e'/c/cArjiriafovTos) in the theatre 
(' Bell. Jud.,' vii. iii. 3). The people of the 
Greek city of Tarentum received the am- 
bassadorsfrom Eome in the theatre," accord- 
ing to the Greek custom," Val. Max., ii. 2, 5 
(Kuinoel, on ch. xix. 29). The theatre at 
Bphesus, of which "ruins of immense 
grandeur " still remain, is said to be the 
largest of which we have any account (How- 
son, ii. p. 68). Having seized((rufapir(/(roKTes); a 
favourite word with Luke (ch. vi. 12 ; xxvii. 12 ; 
Luke viii. 29); and found also in the LXX. of 
Prov. vi. 25; 2 Maco. iii. 27; iv. 41 ; but not else- 
where in the New Testament. It is a com- 
mon medical word of sudden seizures. The 
force of the aw-is that th ey hurried Gains and 
Aristarchus along with them to the theatre, 
no doubt intending there to accuse them to 
the people. Gains and Aristarchus. In ch. 
XX. 4 there is mention of a certain Oaius 
who was one of Paul's companions in travel, 
but who is described as " of Derbe." Again 
in 1 Cor. i. 14 a Gains is mentioned as one 
of St. Paul's converts on his first visit to 
Corinth, whom he baptized himself; and 
in Kom. xvi. 23 (written from Corinth) we 
have mention of Gains as St. Paul's host, 
and of the whole Church, likely, therefore, to 
be the same person. Then we Lave the 
Gains to whom St. John's Third Epistle is 
addressed, and whose hospitality to the 
brethren was a conspicuous feature in his 
character, and one tending to identify him 
with the Gains of Rom. xvi. 23. We 
seem, therefore,to have, in immediate connec- 
tion with St. Paul, Gains of Corinth, Gaiiu 



of Macedonia, and Gains of Derbe. But 
Gains (or Caius, as it is written in Latin) 
was such a common name, and the Jews so 
often shifted their residence from one city to 
another, that it is not safe either to infer 
identity from identity of name, or diversity 
from diversity of description. Aristarchus, 
here described as of Macedonia, is more pre- 
cisely spoken of in ch. xx. 4 as a Thessa- 
lonian. In ch. xxvii. 2, where we find him 
accompanying St. Paul from Csesarea to 
Eome, he is described as " a Macedonian of 
Thessalonioa." In Col. iv. 10 he is St. Paul's 
"fellow-prisoner," as voluntarily sharing 
his prison (Alford, on Col. iv. 10), and in 
Philem. 24 he is his fellow-labourer. His 
history, therefore, is that, having been con- 
verted on St Paul's visit to Thessalonioa, he 
attached himself to him as one of his mis- 
sionary staff, and continued with him through 
good report and evil report, through per- 
secution, violence, imprisonment, shipwreck, 
and bonds, to the latest moment on which 
the liglit of Bible history shines. Blessed 
servant of Christ I blessed fellow-servant 
of his chief apostle I 

Ver. 30. — Was minded to enter for would 
have entered, A.V. With the courage of a 
pure conscience, conscious of no wrong, and 
therefore fearing no wrong, Paul would 
have gone straight to the theatre, and cast 
in his lot with Gaius and Aristarchus ; but 
the disciples, knowing the savage temper of 
the multitude, dissuaded him; and when 
their entreaties were backed by the magis- 
trates, Paul thought it his duty to yield. 
To enter in unto the people. Eiss\0e7v, or 
'jrpoa'e\6e7t',ets OT ewl rhv 57}/xo/',or t^ S'fifiqj, are 
phrases implying the intention of pleading 
his cause before them (see Schleusner and 
Kuinoel, on ch. xix. 30). 

Ver. 31. — Certain also for certain, A.V. 
(the more natural order would be, and certain 
of the chief officers of Asia also) ; ehief officers 
for chief, A.V. ; being for which were, A.V. ; 
and besought him not te for desiring him that 
he would not, A.V. Chief officers of Asia. 
The Greek word is Asiarchs QAa-iipxai). 
The Asiarchs, ten in number, were offieerg 
annually chosen from all the cities of Pro- 
consular Asia, to preside over all sacred rites, 
and to provide at their own expense the pub- 
lic games in honour of the gods and of the 
deity of the emperor. This neoessitateil their 
being men of high rank and great wealth, 
and Schleasner adds that they were priests. 
The name Asiarch is formed like iMciarchai, 
Syriarchai, Fhxnicliarchai, etc. We have 
here another striking proof of the enormous 
influence of Paul's preaching in Asia, that 
some of these very officers who were chosen 
to preside over the sacred rites of the gods, 
and to advance their lionoui by public game% 
were now on Paul's side. 



120 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



foH. xrs. 1 — 41 



Ver. 32. — J« eonfueion for cov fused, A.V. 
(ffuyKexujtievT): comp <ru7x<io'€£os,ver.29). The 
more pait, etc. A giaphic picture of an 
excited mob led by interested and deeigning 
agitators. 

Ver. 33. — Brought for drew, A.V. and 
T.E. ; a defence for his defence, A.V. (oiroXo- 
7f iirSai). Alexander. Some think he is the 
same as "Alexander the coppersimith," of 
whose conduct St. Paul complains so bitterly 
(2 Tim. iv. 14, 15; 1 Tim. i. 20), and he 
may or may not be. It seems likely that, as 
St. Paul's offence was speaking against the 
gods and their temples, the Jews, who were 
coniraoiily accused of being atheists, and one 
of whose nation Paul was, came in for their 
share of the popular odium. They were 
anxious, therefore, to excuse themselves 
belbre the people of having had any share 
in St. Paul's work, and put forward Alex- 
ander, no doubt a clever man and a good 
spenker, to make their defence. But as soon 
as the people knew that he was a Jew, they 
refused to listen to him, and drowned his 
voice with incessant shouts of " Great is 
1 liana of the Ephesians." Meyer, however, 
t .inks he was a Christian, because of the 
word i.Tro\oyit(TBai. The people (Stj^uos, as 
ver. 30). It was a true iKxKriala, though an 
ii regular one, and the people who formed it 
were the S^^o;, different from the Sx^"^' ^^ 
mere crowd outside. 

Ver. 84. — Perceived for knew, A.V. (^^171- 
vdaKiiv, to recognize ; see ch. iii. 10; iv. 13). 

Ver. 35. — Quieted (he multitude (jhv Sx^"") 
for appeased the people, A.V. ; saith for said, 
A.V. ; who for that, A.V. ; temple-keeper for 
o worshipper, A.V. ; Diana for goddess 
Diana, A.V. and T.E. The town-clerk (d 
ypafi/iaTibs) ; i.e. the scribe, is the city secre- 
tary. 'O ypafifiarehs T^r voKeas, Thuoyd, 
vii. 19 (Meyer); ToS ypanfiarias tov Sii/iov, 
inscription quoted by Howson (vol. ii, p. 76, 
note). His office, as appears from the pas- 
sage in Thuoydides, was to read public 
documents to the people. According to 
some, it was not a post of much dignity at 
Athens (Becker, on Thucyd., vii. 10); but 
according to Kuinoel it was an office of first- 
rate influence in the senate in the Greek 
cities of Asia, seeing the scribe was the 
chief registrar, had the drafting of the laws, 
and the custody of the archives. As there 
were three orders of scribes, there may have 
been a great difference in the political rank 
of each. Had quieted (KaTatrrefXas, and 
KaretnaKixivovs, ver. 36). KaToa'T6A\(w means 
to " arriinge," " put in order," the hair, the 
dress, or the like ; hence " to restrain," 
"quiet;" found only in these two places 
In the New Testament, but not uncom- 
mon iu the Maccabees and in Josephus. 
In classical Greek, 6 KartaraKiiivos is a man 
of calm, quiet demeanour, as opposed to 



i To\p.Tip6s, one who is bold and Tiolent 
In medical language, KwrcurT^Wa ia to 
soothe, calm, etc., and (papfiaKaicaTaffTaKriKd 
and ayaffToATLKci are medicines which check 
the growth of diseases, ulcers, eruptions, 
and the like. Temple-keeper, in B.V. and 
margin of A.V. (yiwK6pos) ; literally, temple- 
iweeper, from veds, a temple, and xopew, to 
sweep. The word Neoceros was a peculiar 
title, assumed first by persons and then by 
such cities, iu Asia especially, as had the 
special charge of the temple and sacred rites 
of any particular god. It first appears on 
coins of Ephesus, in the reign of Nero, and 
was deemed a title of great honour. One 
inscription speaks of S yeaK6pos {'E(j>e<rlcov) 
Sfj/ios as making a certain dedication. But 
another use of the term sprang up about this 
time. Among the vile flatteries of those 
corrupt times, it became usual with cities to 
dedicate temples and altars to the emperors, 
and they received in return the title, meant 
to be an honour, of veaKopos of the emperor. 
Some extant coins exhibit the city of 
Ephesus as yeanSpos both of Diana and the 
emperor (see Lewin, vol. i. p. 411 ; Howson, 
vol. ii. pp. 75, 76). The image wMoh fell 
down from Jupiter (toS Aiottetoi);, under- 
stand ayd\fiaTos, as in the ' Iphig. in Taur.,' 
947), AioTrerJi KaPetv fiyoA/io; which is de- 
scribed in ver. 88 of the same play as " the 
image (^dyah/io) of the goddess Diana, which 
they say fell down from heaven (oipai/oS 
ireo-f ly o?rii) into her temple in Tauris ; " and 
iu line 1349 it ia called OvpavoS irfo-n/ia, 
Trjs Albs KipT]s iyaXpia, " The image of the 
daughter of Jove which fell from heaven," 
brought away from Tauris by Iphigenia 
and Orestes into Attica. But it does not 
appear that there was any tradition that 
the identical image brought from Tauris 
was carried to Ephesus. There are several 
representations of the Ephesian Diana, or 
Artemis, on coins, of which one or two are 
given by Lewin (vol. i. p. 411) and by 
Howson (vol. ii. p. 66). The image was of 
rude form and execution, mummy-shaped, 
or like an inverted pyramid; iroXviiturr^ 
(rendered by St. Jerome mv,lti-m<mamia, and 
explained as intending to represent her 
as the nourisher of all living things : Pre- 
face to Ephesians) ; made of wood variously 
described as ebony, cedar, and vine wood. 
Pliny says that, though the temple itself 
had been restored seven times, the image 
had never been altered (quoted by Kuinoel). 

Ver. 36. — Gainsaid for ipokea against, 
A.V. ; rash for rashly, A.V. (irpoirerSj is the 
adverb). Quiet (KareoToA/tei'ouj: see above, 
ver. 35, note). 

Ver. 37. — Temples for churehet, A.V. ; »ior 
for nor yet, A.V. ; our for your, A.V. Y» 
have brought, eto. "Ayeiy is especially 
used of "bringing before a magistrate," 



1—41.] 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



121 



"leading to ezeoution," etc. (Luke ixi. 12 j 
zxiii 1 ; oh. vi. 12 ; zyii. 19 ; xviii. 12 ; 
Mark xiii. 11). Bobbers of temples ; lepdirv- 
Aot, found only here in the New Testament 
The verb Upoa-vKui/ occurs in Bom. ii 22 
Blasphemeis of ooi goddess. If the A.Y. 
is right, perhaps we may see in the phrase 
" your goddess " an indication that the town- 
clerk himself was more or less persuaded by 
St. Paul's preaching, that " they are no gods 
which are made with hands," and did not 
care to speak of Diana as his own goddess. 
It appears also that St. Paul had not launched 
out into abuie of the heathen gods in general, 
or Diana in particular, but had preached the 
more excellent way by faith in Jesus Christ, 
to draw them from their idols (1 Thess. i. 9). 
Ver. 38. — If therefore for wherefore if, 
A. V. ; that for which, A.V. ; the court) are 
for the law is, A.y. ; proeonsuh for deputiet, 
A.V. ; accuse for implead, A.V. Against 
any man. Mark the skill with which the 
town-clerk passes from the concrete to the 
abstract, and avoids the mention of Paul's 
name. The oonrts are open; kyopaiot (or 
ay6paioi) dyovrai. Some supply the word 
trivoSot, and make the sense "judicial as- 
semblies," " sessions," coming round at 
proper fixed intervals. But the verb &yovra.i, 
more naturally suggests rj/ispat, as Bengel 
says (Syeiy yevemai ris ri/iepas ttjs aKifvoTrii- 
ylas: '0\inma: ytviBKiov, etc.), and then 
the meaning is, " The regular court-days 
are kept, when the proconsul attends to try 
caoses ; " there is no need to have an irre- 
gular trial So Suidas explains it, 'H/xepa ev 
^ ■h iyopii TEAcirai. There are proconsuls. 
Bengel, with whom Meyer agrees, thinks 
the plural denotes the unbroken succession 
of proconsuls. But Lewin thinks it may 
mark the exact time of these transactions as 
being immediately after the poisoning of 
the Proconsul Junius Silanus by order of 
Agrippina, when the two procurators, Celer 
and ^lins, exercised the proconsular power 
tiU the appointment of another proconsul, 
according to a law of Claudius to that effect 
Others have other explanations. 

Ver. 39. — Seek for inquire, A.V. ; about 
for eoneeming, A.V. ; settled for detei mined, 
A. v.; the regular for a lawful, A.y. If ye 
seek, etc (^TrifijTErTE). 'ETnfTjT eiv means either 
" to make inquiry " or " to desire earnestly." 
The verb in the next clause, imXve-iiaiTai, 
it shall be "settled," or "solved," favours 
the first sense : " If you wish to inquire 
further into the spread of Paul's doctrine, 
and the best way of dealing with it, the 
question should be decided in an assembly 
of the irinos, legally convened." For jrepj 
Mpav, about other matters, some manu- 
scripts read irepaitipai, further. The regular 
assembly. That summoned by a magistrate 
in the constitutional way. The Greek cities 



under the Boman government preserveij 
their rights and liberties, and the privilege 
of popular assemblies. The town-clerk, 
therefore, gave them their choice of either 
having the case tried before the proconsuls 
or having it, laid before the ecelesia of the 
demos, if they wished it to be gone into on 
wider and deeper grounds. 

Ver. 40. — For indeed for for, A.V.; 
accused fnr called in question, A.V. ; concern- 
ing {oi for, A.V. ; riot for uproar, A.V. ; for 
it for whereby, A.V. ; and as touching it we 
shall not be able to for we may, A.V. and T.R. ; 
account for an account, A.V. We are in 
danger (mySweito/iei/ : see ver. 27, note). To 
be accused oonceming this day's riot. The 
Greek cannot well be so construed. The 
margin is right ; iyxaXelirBai. irrdinas is " to 
be charged with sedition ; " irepl Tjjs a-line- 
pov is for T^s ir^/iepov iifi^pas, "this day," 
as in ch. xx. 26, rrj aiiiKpov ri/jiepif : only in 
English we should say, "on account of this 
day," i.e. what has been done this day. The 
B.T. places a stop after /tijSeviis oiViou ivdp- 
XovTos. As touching it. But "it" must 
mean " the riot," which is feminine, whereas 
oS is masculine; so that the B.!". is im- 
possible to construe. It Is much better, 
therefore, to adhere to the T.E., which has 
good manuscript authority, and to construe 
as the A.V. Whereby, equivalent to "on 
the ground of which " (Meyer). 

With regard to tlie great tumult to which 
the foregoing narrative relates, it is certain 
that St. Luke has by no means exaggerated 
its importance. In his Second Epistle to the 
Corinthians, written from Macedonia shortly 
after his departure from Ephesus, St. Paul 
speaks as one still smarting under the 
severity of his sufferings. In the language 
of trust, yet of a trust sorely tried, he speaks 
of the Father of mercies " who comforteth us 
in all our tribulation." He speaks of the 
sufferings of Christ aa abounding in him. 
And then, referring directly to the trouble 
which came upon him in Asia, he says, " We 
were pressed out of measure, above streusth, 
insomuch that we despaired even of life : 
but we had the sentence of death in our- 
selves, that we should not trust in ourselves, 
but in God which raiseth the dead : who de- 
livered US from so great a death " (2 Cor, i. 
4 — 10). And the same tone breaks out again 
in 2 Cor. iv. 7—18 ; vi. 4—10 ; xi. 23—27 ; xii. 
9, 10. It is also very probable that it was 
on this occasion that Prisoilla and Aqnila 
saved St. Paul's life at the risk of their own, 
to which he alludes in Bom. xvi. 3, 4, 
written after he had reached Corinth from 
Macedonia, i.e. before Easter of the year 58 
A.D. So that it is certain that the riot and 
the danger to St. Paul's life were even greater 
than we should have inferred from St. Luke'i 
narrative alone. 



122 



THE ACTS OP THE AP0STLE8. 



foH. xn. 1 — 11 



It should be added, with reference to the 
three years' residence at Ephesus (ch. xx. 
21) which this nineteenth chapter describes, 
that one or two important incidents which 
occurred are not related by St. Luke. The 
first is that encounter with a savage rabble 
to which St. Paul refers in 1 Cor. xv. 32, but 
of which we have no account in the Acts. 
It must have happened in the early part of 
his sojourn at Ephesus. Another is a pro- 
bable visit to Corinth, inferred fiom 2 Cor. 
ii. I ; xii. 14, 21 ; xiii. 1, 2; and thought to 
have been caused by bad accounts of the 
moral state of the Corinthian Church, sent 
to him at Ephesus. It was probably a hasty 
visit, and in contrast with it he says, iu 1 



Cor. xvi. 7, with reference to his then coming 
visit, " I will not see you now by the way ; 
but I trust to tairy a while with you." It 
is also thought that there was another letter 
to the Corinthians, written from Ephesus, 
soon after tliat secund visit, wiiich is now 
lost, but is alluded to in 1 Cor. v. 9. The 
First Epistle to the Corinthians was mani- 
festly written at this time from Ephesus 
(see 1 Cor. xvi. 8, 19). Some think tliat the 
Epistle to the Galatians was also written 
from Ephesus, a little before the First 
Epistle to the Corinthians (see 1 Cor. xvi. 
1; Gal. ii. 10); but Kenan thinks it was 
written from Antioch, before he came to 
Ephesus, 



H0MILETIC3. 

Vers. 1 — 20. — Tlie advance. The founding of a Church at Ephesus, the capital city 
of Proconsular Asia — a great centre of Greek and Asiatic life, civil, religious, and com- 
mercial, the seat of the famous temple of Artemis, the place of concourse of all Ionia 
for its celebrated games — ^is one of those great epochs in the history of Christianity 
which arrest the attention and demand the consideration of the Christian reader. Not 
above two years (if so much) had elapsed since the Holy Ghost had expressly pro- 
hibited the preaching of the Word in Asia, for reasons which we know not ; but now 
that prohibition is removed, and, after a preliminary movement by Apollos, we find 
St. Paul planting his foot firmly on the soil of Asia, and taking possession in the Name 
of the Lord Jesus. The banner which he then set up has never heen taken down to this 
present hour. What the influence of the great success of St. Paul's ministry at Ephesus 
upon other Asiatic cities may have been, we have no means of knowing in detail ; but 
that it was very great and widespread we leavn from the tenth, twentieth, and twenty- 
sixth verses of this chapter. The first, second, and third chapters of the Eevelation 
of St. John supply further important evidence, both as regards Ephesus itself and the 
other Churches of Asia ; and so do the two Epistles of St. Paul to Timothy. From 
hence St. John exercised his jurisdiction over the whole of the Churches of Asia. The 
Epistle of Ignatius to the Church of Ephesus (a.d. 107) carries on the tradition; 
and we learn from later ecclesiastical history how important a position Ephesus held, 
being styled ii irpdrn Kal fieylvrri firiTpSwoMs rrjs Afflas. The third general council was 
held there in a.d. 431. In thus casting a hasty glance at the succeeding history of this 
apostolic Church, we are led to the reflection how little we know what may be the 
consequences of any single forward movement in the kingdom of God. The humblest 
servant of the Lord Jesus Christ, in a meeting; with a few like-minded brethren, may 
be laying the foundation of institutions which will last while the Church lasts, and 
exercise a world-wide influence upon the destinies of mankind. A mission to a race of 
semi-harbarians may be the planting of a Church under whose shadow millions may 
hereafter walk in all the joy of Christian hope, and in all the beauty of Christian holi- 
ness. The simplest word spoken in the kingdom of God, the simplest action taken in 
the Name of the Lord Jesus, may be the instrument used by the power of God foi 
advancing his own purposes of grace and salvation to untold multitudes. When 
Augustine had his first interview with King Ethelbert in the city of the men of Kent 
(Oant-wara-byrig), who could have foreseen the influence upon the Christianity and 
civilization of the world which that interview was destined to exercise ? And so in the 
case of every fresh efibrt to preach Christ where he is not known, there is a glorious 
uncertainty as to the ultimate consequences of such advance. The missionaries' 
Btammering speech telling the story of the cross to a handful of heathen may be the 
first step of a mighty change which shall make the wilderness a pool of water, and the 
dry land springs of water. One Heaven-born thought in the mind of a man of God, 
one prajer in the Holj Ghost, one faithful word of truth, may be the seed of a sacred 



OH. XIX. 1—41.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 123 

history which shall fill, not earth only, but heaven also with enduring fruits of joy and 
galvation. Let St. Paul himself make the application : " Be ye steadfast, unmovable, 
always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labour is 
not in vain in the Lord " (1 Cor. xv. 58). 

Vers. 21 — 41. — The greed of gain. Several instructive lessons crop up from this 
narrative. When two people advancing from opposite directions meet in a narrow 
pathway, one must give way to the other. When the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ 
encounters the greed of gain in a human breast, either the Word, with its promises, its 
hopes, its commands, must stand aside that the love of money may pursue its onward 
course, or the worldly gain must become as dung in the eyes of the hearer of the 
Word. We have noble examples in such men as Moses, Elisha, Daniel, Nehemiah, 
Zacchaeus, Peter and the other apostles, Barnabas, Paul, and many more both in 
ancient and modern times, of that contempt of worldly gains in comparison with the 
treasures of heaven, which marks the true servant of the living God. But we have, 
on the other hand, many sad though instructive instances of the love of gain holding 
its ground and barring the entrance into the heart of love and obedience to God. It 
was so in the instance recorded in this section. Here was the blessed gospel of God's 
redeeming grace preached with extraordinary power by St. Paul, confirmed by signal 
miracles, attested by the conversion of multitudes, glorified by the open confession and 
the voluntary losses of so many professors of curious arts ; it was presented with a 
power and a beauty to the minds of the Bphesians which seemed to be irresistible. 
What sweet lessons of godliness, what glorious promises of immortality, what capti- 
vating revelations of the goodness and love of God, did that gospel contain 1 It could 
set men free from sin ; it could raise them to fellowship with angels ; it could give 
them the victory over the very grave. But when Demetrius heard it he saw in it one 
fatal blot which obliterated all its excellences : it would destroy the trade in silver 
shrines. Let men once be convinced that there is one true and living God, the Lord 
of heaven and earth, and one Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of the Father, 
and that to know him and love and serve him is eternal life, and there would be an 
end of the worship of the great goddess Diana of the Ephesians. The strangers 
who flocked to the pan-Ionian games would no longer crowd to the shop of Deme- 
trius, that they might carry home with them a silver shrine ; silvei- ornaments would 
no more be devoted to beautify the famous temple ; the skill of the craftsmen would 
no longer bring them honour and respect ; the faith of Jesus Christ would be the 
death-blow to the magnificence of Diana and to the gains of her workmen. There- 
fore the faith of Christ must be resisted. It must be kept out of the workmen's 
heart, and it must be crushed that it spread no more. The true cry was — Our gains 
are in danger 1 The pretended cry was — The honour of Diana is at stake! And 
this leads us to the further remark that selfish greed seldom dares show itself without 
disguise. It has an instinctive consciousness of its own unworthiness as a motive of 
action, and even of its repulsiveness in the eyes of others. It must theiefore alviJays 
put on some cloak of hyprocrisy. It must simulate zeal for God or benevolence 
towards man. It must pretend to be seeking some end very different from the true 
one, or at least one to which the true end is quite subordinate. Even if it admit that 
" this our craft is in danger," it puts forward as the supreme danger that "her magnifi- 
cence should be destroyed, whom all Asia and the world worshippeth." And this 
teaches us the importance of a very close scrutiny of our own motives of action, when 
our worldly interests are concerned. It is astonishing how much men's judgment and 
their powers of discrimination are affected by considerations of interest. It is, perhaps, 
less common for men to act deliberately against their conviction of what is just and 
right than to be biassed in their opinion of what is right by the disturbing force of 
self-interest. The man whose real aim through life is to do what is right and accept 
what is true, quite irrespective of any influence which his belief or his action may have 
upon his own temporal gains, should spare no pains to maintain a judgment quite 
independent of selflsh considerations, and to force his conscience alwny to give a true 
verdict upon the evidence before it, unmoved by fear of loss, and unseduced by hopes 
of gain. Once more, the example of the Ephesian silversmiths supplies • caution, 
not unneeded to all Christiana, against supposing that " godliness is a way of gain." 



124 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. loh. xix. 1-41. 

A large part of the corruptions of Christianity, and of the scandalous livsB of worldly 
minded clergy in sU ages, has arisen from the attempt to make religion a source of 
mdividual gain and aggrandizement. Legacies extorted from death-bed terrors, prefer- 
ment gained by unworthy means, the sale of indulgences, paid Masses for the dead, 
the huge treasures accumulated by divers pretences at the shrines of saints, and many 
other infamous devices to make religion lucrative to the professors of it, are examples 
of what I mean. The man of God and the chaste Church of Christ must flee 
these things, and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness. 
These are the Christian's treasures, the results of his craft, the rewards of his labours. 
These are the branches which grow on the stem of heavenly truth, and with these 
alone can he be satisfied. He covets not the wages of unrighteousness ; he cares not 
for the silver shrines ; he frames not his creed either to catch the gifts of the wealthy, 
or to secure the praises of the world. The practical lesson to the Christian tradesman 
is to beware lest the interests of his trade lead him into any antagonism with the 
requirements of the gospel. Certain gains may be incompatible with perfect integrity, 
or with a supreme regardTor the honour of God, or with true love to man. Let the 
Christian tradesman look to it that he is always ready to sacrifice his gains to his 
higher Christian obligations. His willingness to do so is the test of his Christian 
sincerity, and it is a severe test. The voice of a thriving, growing, swelling business 
is a loud voice, and the fear of checking a trade and losing all is a very telling fear. 
The cry of a feeble business, crying for more aliment and a wider field, is a very 
pressing cry. Let the voice of conscience, and duty, and fealty to Christ be louder 
and more pressing still, so that the silver shrines may pale before the claims of the 
supreme Lord of all, and the treasures of the world may become as dung before the 
glory of the righteousness of the children of God. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 7. — Essential hut insufficient ; valuable lut temporary. We have here, in 
connection with the Christian faith and with Christian work — 

I. The essential but the insdfficient. (Vers. 1 — 5.) At Ephesus Paul met with 
disciples who had been baptized " unto John's baptism " (ver. 3), but who had not 
learnt to exercise faith in Jesus Christ, nor even heard that there was a Holy Ghost 
(ver. 2). These men were well on the way to salvation by Jesus Christ, but they were 
far from the goal. Repentance is essential, but it is not sufficient of itself. 1. It it 
essential ; for without it the heart remains estranged from God, the soul unturned from 
self and sin, the life unrelieved of that which is faise and wrong; and without it there is no 
sense of that spiritual need which welcomes a Divine Saviour with humility and trust, 
which rejoices in a Divine Lord to whom full submission may be made. The Christian 
preacher who does not enforce repentance is fatally lacking in his duty ; the Christian 
disciple who has not experienced it is fatally short of fulfilling the condition of accept- 
ance with God. 2. It is not sufficient ; for (1) it leaves the soul without any pledge of 
Divine forgiveness ; (2) it leaves the heart without that personal union with a Divine 
Redeemer in which consists the very essence of spiritual and eternal life ; (3) it leaves 
the spirit of man without the abiding indwelling and quickening influence of the 
Spirit of God. Therefore let the Christian teacher make much of the distinctive 
doctrine of the faith he preaches, and continually testify not only " repentance towards 
God," but " faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ " (ch. xx. 21). 

II. The valuable but the temporary. (Ver. 6.) " When Paul had laid his hands 
upon them, the Holy Ghost came on them ; and they spake with tongues," etc. It was 
desirable, then, that the presence and power of the Divine Spirit should be manifested 
by " signs and wonders." It was, at that stage of the progress of the gospel, a very 
valuable contribution to its triumph ; it gave assurance to those on whom he came, 
and evidence to those who " were without." Experience soon proved (e.g. the Corin- 
thian Church) that this order of evidence and influence was open to abuse, and that it 
was not of the kind that could be permanent in the Church. 1. We can plainly set 
that in these days it would be practically useless : it would be, to ordinary observers, 
indistinguishable from the jugglery and affectations of the impostor. 2. God has 



•H. xn. 1— 41.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 126 

given ns that which is better, with which we may well be content, and for the perfec- 
tion of which we should strive and pray. He ^ves us, as the consequence of our faith 
and as the response to our believing prayer, quickeQing influences in the soul; a Divine 
action upon and within the spirit, of the actual working of which we are not usually 
conscious at the moment of operation, but the effects of which are obvious to ourselves 
and to others. They are these: (1) an assurance of sonship (Rom. viii. 16); (2) a 
desire to bear witness unto Christ, so that without any gift of tongues we shall over- 
come all obstacles, and speak of him and for him ; (3) a holy heart and a beautiful 
life (GaL v. 22 ; Eph. v. 9).— 0. 

Vers. 8 — 17. — The ipirituaj,, the supernatural, and the natural. The faithful labours 
of Paul in the synagogue of the Jews and the room of Tyrannus, the unusually 
extensive employment of the miraculous, and the discomfiture of the exorcists suggest 
to us — 

L That the bupbenatubai. is to be subobdikatbd to the spnirnrAL. (Vers. 
8 — 12.) We remember how our Lord refused to gratify the unworthy craving for signs 
and wonders in his day : " There shall no sign be given to this generation " (Mark viii. 
12) ; repeatedly he discouraged the demand for the miraculous, because it interfered 
with the teaching of truth, and so with the furtherance of his spiritual work. We find 
Paul making comparatively little of these great " gifts ; " his chronicler does not enlarge 
on them, but disposes of them in very few words, no doubt reproducing and reflecting 
thus the mind of the apostle ; he himself does not make a single allusion to them in his 
address to the elders at MUetus (ch. xx.) ; he disparages rather than magnifies their impor- 
tance in his Epistles (2 Cor. xiii., xiv.). We are led to feel that the " special miracles 
wrought by the hands of Paul " are of very secondary value, as compared (ver. 11) 
with his diligence in " persuading the things concerning the kingdom of Q-od " (ver. 8), 
and with his enterprise and zeal in so acting that " all they which dwelt in Asia 
heard the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Greeks" (ver. 10). We need not 
sigh for departed times when the gospel had some sanctions and supports which it has 
not now. All that is of first importance, all that is truly redemptive and Divine, 
abides with the Church of Christ, and will remain for ever. 1. The knowledge of the 
living and saving truth. 2. The love of it, and joy in it. 3. The privilege of making 
it known. 4. The accessibility of those heavenly influences which make it powerful 
and efficacious to our own hearts and to the souls of those whom we address. 

II. That the natubal cannot do the special work or the spirituaii. These 
exorcists (ver. 18) had probably been so far successful that they had induced their 
fellow-citizens to believe that in them resided a strange power over the insane or the 
possessed. But when they used the name of Jesus in order to effect their object, they 
failed signally and disgracefully. In this respect they are types of those who attempt 
to do God's work without Divine weapons. Only the spiritual can do spiritual work. 
It is true that unspiritual men may (1) understand much of the Divine thought ; (2) 
speak what they know with skill and force ; (3) assume a sacred tone and spirit, and 
may afiect men by that assumption; (4) maintain for years a reputation for devotion 
and usefulness. But it is also true that (1) if any spiritual result should follow, it 
will be through the overruling power of God, — it will not be their work, in any true 
sense ; (2) no considerable or permanent results will follow, — such unreal conditions 
will not stand the test of time ; (3) there will come exposure and humiliation, either 
here or hereafter. Wherefore let us honour the spiritual as that which is the one true, 
abiding Divine power. Let us : (1) Welcome to our heart the first teachings and lead- 
ings of the Divine Spirit. (2) Establish our whole life on the basis of the spiritual ; 
live and walk " in the Spirit," as those who realize that outward shows are as nothing 
to the great spiritual realities. (3) Do the work of God with spiritual weapons ; not 
attempting to build up the kingdom of God by bodily benefits, political economies, or 
human philosophies. These have their place and their work, as handmaids and auxili- 
aries, and are by no means to be despised. But the Christian minister must make men 
" hear the words of the Lord Jesus," must speak of those things which distinctively 
" concern the kingdom of God ; " he most utter specially Chriitian doctrine, and look fini 
jjositiTely Divine influence. — 0. 



126 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLEa [oh. xix. 1—41. 

Vers. 18 — ^20, — The sign of sincerity. We are reminded by the text — 

I. That when we accept Jesus Christ we yield ourselves to him. To 
exercise a living faith in him is to take everything from him and to give everything tc 
him ; therefore to give ourselves to him and to his service. It is to recognize and 
respond to his supreme claims on heart and life. 

II. That to give onRSELVES to Christ means to abandon all that is hate- 
FtTli TO HIM. How can we love him and not hate and shun the things which are pain- 
ful and offensive in his sight? 

III. That to abandon what is hateful to Christ is to put aw at ail that 
IS false and impure. To live a life of imposture ; to bo systematically enriching 
ourselves at the expense of the credulity of others (as these Ephesians had been doing) ; 
to be acting falsehoods daily, or even frequently ; to be introducing a large measure of 
vanity or folly into tliat which should be good and pure ; — this is hateful to him who 
is the holy and the true One; this is unendurable by him in one who bears his name 
and professes to be like him and to follow him. 

IV. That to put aside that which is profitable or pleasant for Christ's 
bake 18 A sure sign OF SINCERITY. The burning of these profitable " books " was the 
very best guarantee that could be given of the sincerity of the Ephesian converts. If 
we want to know how deep and true is a man's conviction, we do not ask what strong 
things he can say ui its favour, or how eloquently he can descant upon it, or what 
fervour he shows on one or two occasions respecting it, but how much he is prepared to 
part with on its account. We ask what deep-rooted habits he will cut away, what 
cherished treasures he will put aside, what keen enjoyments he will forego, what money 
he will sacrifice, what prized but hurtful friendships he will surrender. This is the test 
of sincerity. A man that will do one or more of these things, " we know the proof 
of him." 

V. That deliberate sblf-sacrifioe is the most appreciated witness wb can 
BEAR FOR Christ. " So mightily grew the word of God," etc. (ver. 20). There is 
no way by which we can so powerfully affect the judgment and win the sympathy of 
men as by sacrificing for Christ's sake that which all men prize and strive for. When 
the world sees all who " profess and call themselves Christians " not only engaging in 
devotion, and endeavouring to make converts, but also denying themselves pleasures 
they would otherwise enjoy, spending on others the money they would else have spent 
on themselves, foregoing worldly advantages which they cannot conscientiously appro- 
priate, then it will be convinced by arguments which now are without any cogency, 
and will be won by persuasions which now are urged in vain. — C. 

Vers. 21 — 41. — The supreme conflict. Of all the struggles which have occurred or 
are now taking place in the human world, there is not one which deserves to be named in 
comparison with that supreme conflict which is proceeding between Divine truth and 
human error, between lioliness and sin, between Christ and " the world." We are 
reminded here of — 

I. One strong adversary which has to be overcome. The world will never be 
renovated until many strong " interests " have been bravely encountered and utterly 
overthrown. The gospel of Christ cannot be proclaimed in its fulness without giving 
occasion for many to say, here and there, now and again, "This our craft is in danger" 
(ver. 27). It is the inevitable tendency of all purifying truth, not only to eradicate 
evil from the hearts ot- men, but to bring to nought the hurtful institutions of the 
world. But by these men live ; with these their material interests are closely bound 
up. Whether it be " drunkenness, slavery, or war," which have been declared to be 
" the three great evils which have cursed mankind," or whether it be any other harm- 
f il thing which Christ purposes to overthrow, his truth must occasionally and inciden- 
tally assail the temporal interests and prospects of men. And such is our human 
nature that, when it does this, it will call forth the most bitter, vehement, crafty, 
determined opposition. It is in this incidental way tli at Christ comes, "not to send 
peace on earth, but a sword " (Matt. x. 34). And we may learn (1) that it is doubtful 
whether we are declaring the whole counsel of God, if wo are provoking no hostility by 
our utterance ; (2) that we need not wonder that the coming of the kingdom of God 
is delayed when we take this envenomed hostility into accoimt. 



SH.MX, 1— 41.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 127 

n. The buoobsb of Christiait truth, notwithstanding. By the confession of 
Demetrius ; " This Paul hath persuaded and turned away much people," etc. (ver. 26). 
There may have been a note of exaggeration in his speech, but it is a significant 
fact that these " shrines " were in much smaller request in consequence of Paul's 
preaching. Truth will tell, sooner or later. Against all prejudices, material interests, 
SDcial habits, civil laws, military forces, it will ultimately prevail. Imperceptibly at 
first, but in growing numbers and accelerating force, it wins its way until it is 
accepted, honoured, crowned. 

III. The subtlety of sin. When the silversmiths of Ephesus find their craft in 
danger, they say so, plainly enough, while they confer together ; but when they face 
the populace, they disguise their selfishness under the cloak of piety, and cry, " Great 
is Diana of the Ephesians " (ver. 29). Sin sometimes fights without any mask at all ; 
it shows itself in its native hideousness, — the rank, foul, selfish, shameful thing it is. 
But usually it seeks to conceal its ugliness by draping itself in something which is 
elegant and becoming. It affects piety, benevolence, patriotism ; it is concerned for the 
comfort, the temporal necessities, or even the spiritual well-being of the world. God 
strikes through such miserable pretences with his penetrating eye, and it is often open 
to our human intelligence to recognize the hateful features beneath the graceful 
folds. 

IV. The weapons op Divine wisdom. These are three, as suggested here. 1. 
Prudence. This is least in virtue and value ; but it is not unimportant. The town- 
clerk of Ephesus is a model of the politic in behaviour and address (vers. 35 — il) ; 
what he employed so admirably in the discharge of his secular duty, we may use 
advantageously in the fulfilment of our high mission. The disciples of Ephesus 
showed a wise prudence in not sufiering Paul to enter the theatre ; humanly speak- 
ing, they saved his life (ver. 30). He himself prudently left the city after this great 
disturbance. We may be and should be politic and prudent when our caution is not 
cowardice nor faithlessness (John xvi. 8). 2. Courage. Paul was ready to go into the 
midst of the excited, violent, murderous multitude (ver. 30). The same unfaltering 
courage carried him over perilous seas, into dangerous countries, among hostile peoples,— 
everywhere, if only he saw the Master's pointing finger or heard the cry of spiritual 
distress. 3. Faithfulness. It was the preaching of the cross, the telling of the old, old 
story of redeeming love, whatever the Jew might demand or the Gentile crave, which 
was the source and secret of the apostle's power. — C. 

Vera 1 — 7. — Paul and the Baptist's disciples. I. Lessons fbom Paul in this 
relation. His care for souls is comprehensive, zealous, and wise. 1. " Have ye 
received the Holy Ghost?" Is your religion genuine? Is it profound? Is it a 
living consciousness of God within the soul ? Or a dependence on forms, on creeds, on 
ideas merely? How many trained and tavight as Christians must answer, "We know 
not yet the Holy Spirit " I the new birth, the love, " the spirit of adoption, whereby 
we cry, Abba, Father " 1 2. " In whom were ye then baptized ? " A question also 
for us. What means the name " Christian " that you bear ? Is the devil and all his 
works daily renounced ? Baptism reminds us of God the Father, and of childhood to 
him ; of God the Son, and of redemption through his blood ; of God the Holy Spirit, 
and of the temple we ought spiritually to be. Let us ask ourselves the questions Paul 
asked of the disciples of the Baptist. 

II. Lessons from the disciples of John the Baptist. 1. Thoy are typical, as 
we have seen, of many among us ; and those who resemble them among us should be 
treated in like manner. There are those who stand upon a lower step of faith. They 
know that the gospel requires them to give up sin ; perhaps not yet that it calls them 
to the perfect trust and the love that casts out fear. They confess themselves ignorant 
if questioned of this " higher life." 2. The testing question. A living faith, a life in 
conformity with the baptismal profession, a sanctified speech and life, give the only 
satisfactory answer. 3. The unity of all disciples under one Master. " One is your 
Master, and all ye are brethren." Human teachers impart their words, Christ his 
Spirit. Human teachers lay the foundntion, give the elements ; he leads on to perfec- 
tion, guides to the goal. Many are the schools of philosophy, one is the Church oi 
Jesus Chiist— J. 



128 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oH.xn.1— 41 

Vers. 8 — 20. — Work of Paul at Ephesus. Here we have the victory of the Divine 
Word over the power of f:\lseliood and evil in the minds of men. Such episodes show 
on a small scale what the effect of the evangelical leaven is in the world on a large 
scale. 

I. The poweb of the oospel seen in the aotivitt op Paul. It becomes a 
two-edged sword in his hand against all the powers of darkness. Three months' 
continuous preaching of great evangelical truths may lay the foundation of spiritual 
building for the lifetime of many souls. In three relations this influence of the gospel 
is felt : (1) upon the hard and unbelieving hearts (vers. 8 — 10) ; (2) upon forms of 
sickness ; (3) upon the dark works of godli ss magic. 1. With reference to the first, he 
refused to throw pearls before swine. Or, like a faithful shepherd, he separated the 
untainted sheep from the rest of the flock, that they might not be injured. To attempt 
in act or thought to separate or excommunicate individuals from the true Church is 
a usurpation of Divine authority ; a violent plucking of the supposed tares from the 
wheat. It is a different thing to go apart one's self from those believed to be in error. 
This ii an exercise of personal liberty ; the former an encroachment on the rights of 
others. 2. With reference to the second, it appears to have been the vital health of the 
inspired apostle which opposed and conquered bodily sickness. JSfot relics of a dead 
man, but clothes of a living man, were the instruments of the cure. The means are 
of slight importance when the Divine power is present. It was not Peter's shadow at 
Jerusalem (ch. v. 15), nor here at Ephesus Paul's handkerchief, which wrought the 
cures, but the living spiritual force in the will, that is, the faith of the worker. The 
Eoman relic-worsliipper expects life from dead things, solvation from that which in 
the nature of things has no healing power. Nor is the expectation of life and 
spiritual health from rites and ceremonies more reasonable. The service of dead 
works is placed in the room of the inward organ of a living faith. 3. The third mode 
of St. Paul's activity: the people placed in trust of Goii's Word had fallen into the 
practice of the most foolish magic arts. The impostors' mode imitate the apostle's. 
Not in teaching the truth nor in converting souls, but in aping the wondrous deeds 
of the apostle, so seeking to secure a like credit. 'Tis the way of all false teachers 
and spurious imitators; they can mimic the gesture, cannot catch the spirit. The 
counterfeit is all hut the original ; but an immense chasm lies in that all hut 1 " Jesus 
whom Paul preaches." The faith of very many is but a faith in the faith of some one 
else — a dependence on hearsay, like that of these teachers. And this is weakness 
itself. The " seven sons of the high priest " may remind us of the old commonplace 
that external association with sacred things is not always favourable to piety. On the 
contrary, the old proverb says, " The nearer the church, the further from Grud." This 
is an extreme way of stating a patent truth. But the evil spirit defies the feeble 
imitator, will not yield to his spells, knows the difference between the man filled with and 
the man empty of God. If we advance to the combat without a call and without an 
inspiration, we shall incur humiliation. We cannot create an inspiration, nor call 
ourselves. " Paint a fire ; it will not therefore bum." Mock enthusiasm will be found 
out. " Jesus and Paul I know ; but who are ye ? " Try to preach without believing 
your own doctrine, speak of Jesus as a Friend while the heart is averse from him ; 
the mocking voice of the fiend will be heard within, and efforts to convince others 
will be as the blows of one tliat fighteth the air. The lie of the heart will paralyze the 
mightiest eloquence; but the simple truth of the conscience will be a power made 
manifest in weakness. The false teachers are impotent in the presence and before 
the attack of the passionate evil spirit ; they are overpowered, and flee naked and 
wounded out of the house. The devil is a thankless master, and puts to shame his 
most zealous servants. 'Tis a condensed tragedy, this scene. A naked and a wounded 
soul is all tliat we may expect to carry from the service of falsehood, 

IL The power of the gospel in the awakened consoibnck. 1. Fear fdl on 
all. Falsehood bows before the majesty of truth. The devils give witness to Jesus. 
His Name ia glorified by the triumph of his servants and the subjection of his foes. 
8ilenc« was Broken, guilty reserve vanished. Probably both converted and uncon- 
verted had sin to confess. Fear is in the soul what the earthquake and the tempest 
are in the physical world. It breaks up the hard crust of habit, lets the pent-up 
lava-floods break forth, brings purification and health in its train. 2. Gmifesnon it 



ea.jjx.l—a.'i THE A0T8 OP THE APOSTLES. 129 

/redy made. We have no right to force the secrets of the heart. Happy is it when they 
are volunteered, and when the soul brought to itself thus of its owu accord " gives glory 
to God." 3. Practical results. We need not debate the questiou of the " confessional." 
More important is it to recognize that genuine confession is followed by a renounce- 
ment of the sin. Here those who had seen the error of their superstition promptly imdid 
it. They brought their books and burned them in public. It seems a pity that we 
should thus have lost valuable information. They might have renounced the teaching 
of the books and spared the books themselves. The records of human aberration are 
equally useful to us with the records of sound philosophy. Experiments that have 
failed will not readily be tried again. But in the fervour of a first love all is excusable. 
Where great corruption has prevailed, there will be presently a reaction, and extreme 
Puritanism will set in. Where pleasure has run to licence legitimate pleasure will 
presently be looked upon with suspicion. The example of the Ephesians is not to be 
followed literally, but in spirit. Evil, like good, is everywhere present. Burn bad 
books, they will be read the more. Denounce " spiritualism," etc., and people's 
curiosity will be inflamed about it. Sophistry is hydra-headed: directly we seem 
to make little way against it. The best counsel is — Let alone what you know is 
injurious to you. Let the understanding be strengthened and the affections purified, 
and superstition will fall from the mind as an eruption disappears from the skin when 
the body is restored to health: " Thus mightily grew the Word of God." Live for 
the truth ; sow it, plant it out in all minds, and let there be ao room for the ill weeds 
to grow.--J. 

Vers. 21 — 41. — The spirit of relelUon against the gospel. The tumult at Ephesus 
presents a picture of certain aspects of human nature and of the contest between good 
and evil in the world. 

I. Its causes. Most radical of all was the instinct of self-seeking. This Is the 
dark background out of which all manner of fiendish shapes arise to contend against 
the light. Then it was self-seeking under the guise of religious zeal. Demetrius ia 
the type of all those who make great professions of interest for the "truth," the 
" honour of God," the " cause of religion," and the like, while their real motive is 
personal profit, honour, or notoriety. They appear to be aiming at the highest, are 
really driving at the lowest object. At the same time, consistency with self gives an 
appearance of truth, no matter how corrupt and base the self may be. Hence selfish 
men often earn a credit and reputation refused to the more conscientious. For the 
egoist always " knows his own mind," though it be » bad mind ; the conscientious man 
has frequent self-doubts and conflicts, the signs of which cannot be suppressed. 

IL Its means and instruments. The imagination of the multitude must, as usual, 
be acted upon. For good or for evil, great movements among the masses are due 
immediately to influences upon the imagination. The preacher's power lies here, and 
also that of the sophist and the demagogue. The ideas connected with profit and those 
connected with religion have immense governing power over the mass. We remember 
the commotion a few years ago among the match-makers in the east of London when 
it was threatened to tax their industry. So with bread-riots, land-riots, and the like. 
All the instincts of self-preservation rise against those who appear to menace the very 
means of existence. Beligious ideas are only a degree less powerful. Society rests 
upon religion. We can only faintly imagine how the Athenian felt about his guardian 
goddess Athene, or the Ephesian about great Artemis. The Greek city was to each 
native as one large house or home, the very hearth of which was the altar of the god, 
the very foundations of which rested on reverence for that god. Here, then, were two 
of the mightiest instincts of human nature roused up and armed against the gospel — 
the self-seeking and the religious or supeistitious instinct. 

III. The victoby of the truth. 1. The kingdom of sense and of nature is 
represented by the great gods of Greece. Christianity is the kingdom of the 
spirit. The worship of the Greek cities was that of the beautiful ; art and science 
were supreme. Christianity makes the moral ideal supreme. 2. The true temple is the 
spirit of man. And no worthy temple can be built to God unless his Spirit purify 
the heart, and his strength be perfected iu weakness. Without the internal cultus of 
the heart, the external, in buildings and ritual, is vain. 3. The spiritual kingdom alon* 
Aora. — n. jr 



1«0 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ch. xiz. 1— 41 

is abiding. Bphesus and its temple have long been in ruins ; but against the Church 
of Christ the gates of hell cannot prevail. 4 . The security of the faithful amidst the 
storm. They are concealed in a safe place till the hour of danger be overpast (vers. 30, 
31). Help is raised up in unexpected quarters (ver. 35,et seq.). The storms of angry 
passions are subdued (ver. 40). The ark of the Church is guided safely through the 
tempest. 5. Character brought to lig;l]t in troublous scenes. The chancellor at Ephesus 
is an example of undaunted courage, of calm prudence, of impartial justice, and of 
human kindness. — J. 

Vers. 1 — 7. — Practical exemplification of Christian doctrine. The principles involved 
in the case of ApoUos might be lost sight of for lack of examples. He himself was so 
distinguished. The Church needed to be taught by a more prominent and wider illus- 
tration. The distinctions insisted on by Paul essential to Christianity. Hence the 
whole episode of the appearance of Apollos on the scene ordered providentially. Paul's 
journey through Upper Asia to Ephesus possibly hastened by his desire to watch over 
the spiritual work tliere. The gift of the Holy Ghost not a mere endowment, but a seal 
upon the faith as faith in Christ and his spiritual kingdom ; it betokened an entire 
change of position and of life. The twelve disciples, probably converts of Apollos, were 
still occupying a Judaistio position, believing in Jesus, but only as John preached him. 
Their public baptism into the Name of the Lord Jesus was a public renunciation of 
their old standing as Jews and their acceptance of the higher platform of the spiritual 
kingdom. The gifts poured out on them and exercised by them was a glorious testimony 
to Christ in Ephesus. Learn — 

L The suprbmact op the gospel. 1. To Judaism. 2. To reformed Judaism with 
the new hopes revived in it by John. 3. To mere moral change and reformation of life. 

i.L The practical power of a true faith. Those that believed as Paul would 
have then; believe became, not only sp:ritLial men, but preachers. The faith which 
evangelizes is not a cold asfent to truth, not a mere principle of religious reverence and 
order regulating the individual life, not a mere setting of Christ on the throne of the 
intellect as the highest Teacher, but a faith which works by love through the energy of 
the Spirit bestowed. They believe, and therefore speak. The test of true faith is its 
aggressive tendency. That which sits at home is paralyzed. — E. 

Vers. 8 — 20 (or ver. 20). — Triumphs of the gospel at Ephesut, Asiatic character of 
the superstitions prevalent. Dark, degraded, mysterious. Amulets and charms. Magical 
words. Exorcism. Not merely among the lower classes, but throughout the city. A 
dead man said to have spoken from the funeral pile. A wrestler with magic scroll 
round his body always victorious. Magic an elaborate, abstruse, difBcult science, con- 
tained in learned books, studied for many years. Notice, therefore — 

I. The PBCtJLiAE GKACiousNESS of the niiracles wrought at Ephesui, as speaking so 
loudly against the prevalent superstitions. 1. As showing forth a greater power than 
was dreamed of amongst men. 2. As connecting the working of signs with the messages 
of mercy. Paul disclaimed all power of his own, and simply invited faith in the Lord 
Jesus Christ. 3. As rebuking and dishonouring the falsehoods and presumptions of 
those who were enslaving the people. 4. As revealing the benevolence and phi- 
lanthropy of the gospel in distinction from the selfish and sordid practices of those who 
used sorcery for their own profit. 

II. The mabvellodb spiritual poweb put forth. The whole neighbourhood 
ringing with the fame of the miracles and with the story of the gospel. 1. The special 
difiBoulty of effecting a change in such men. Their interests involved. Their pride 
wounded. Their ignorance and self-deception binding them fast. 2. The vastness of 
the change wrought. The burning of the hooks, their very means of livelihood. The 
value great — two thousand pounds sterling. The publicity of the act made it irrevocable. 
3. The widespread influence of such a testimony, more thau wurds, more than personal 
confession. It would preach the gospel to all Asia. 4. The beneficent effect on the 
future of the people in delivering them from the entanglement of magical superstitions, 
and so leaving them open to the preaching of the gospel. " Fear feii upon them all, 
ind thi Name of the Lord Jesus was magnified " (cf. the sirailar event at Florence under 
ihe preaching of Savonarola). — B. 



OK. zo. 1—41.1 THE ACfS OF THE APOSTLES. 181 

Vers. 21, 22. — The purpose of a great heart, L An example of intense devoted- 
NESS. 1. Care of the Churches. Bad news from Corinth. Apostolic supervision required. 
Help for the poor saints at Jerusalem. 2. Love of souls. The message must be preached 
everywhere, even at Home. 3. Self-sacrifice. The labours at Ephesus great. The 
weakness of the apostle a constant temptation to lessen his toil. The prosjiect both at 
Jerusalem and at Rome one of dark suffering, persecution, and probable death. 

IL The purpose op God blending with the purpose of man. 1. No self-assertion, 
but simply absorbing desire to be employed for God. 2. Although the course of events 
unforeseen, yet the issue worked out gave the apostle "the desire of his heart." 
3. The separation from Ephesus, which might have been painful and injurious to the 
Church there, prepared for by the occurrences in the city. It was necessary that Paul 
should go for his own personal safety. The disciples willingly parted with him. — E. 

Vers. 23 — 41. — A popular riot. A glimpse into the darkness of the heathen world. 
Passions pent up let loose. The deep foundation of heathen superstition in the selfish, 
immoral practices of those who ministered to it. The widespreading effects of true 
religion in revolutionizing the habits and customs. Society must be reformed by ihe 
action of spiritual principles from within, not by merely external changes. Ignorance 
is the mother of disorder. The conflicts of the world are the result of the antagonism 
of good and evil. All wars proceed from religious roots. The true and abiding peace is 
the fruit of no other tree than that which God has planted. Notice— 

I. All false rblioion resorts to violence to protect itself. Idolatry was 
afraid of the truth. The corrupt Church has condemned itself by the use of such 
methods. All departure from the peaceful spirit of Christ has wrought evil results. 

II. All business which profits by the ionorancb, superstition, and evil 

PASSIONS OF MEN IS INCONSISTENT WITH THE GROWTH OP CHRISTIANITY. The immoral 

traffic by which men satisfy their greed of wealth cannot be too strenuously denounced. 
True religion remodels society in all respects. The working men should he taught that 
Christianity is their best friend ; not any form of it, but the pure gospel. 

III. Even in the heathen world God had witnesses to himself. In Roman 
law and discipline ; in common sense; in that natural religion, which doubtless prompted 
the more cultivated men of the time to doubt the extravagances of idolatry ; in the 
morai instincts of conscience, which could appreciate the law-abiding and peaceful efforts 
of the new teachers and protect them from mob violence. 

IV. Comparing this scene and its revelations with the Epistle to the Ephesians, we 
learn how the truths of Christ were adapted to lift up mind, heart, and life in 
the heathen world, substituting a better worship, a purer theology, a more stable society, 
a grander future, for all that then held mankind in bondage. "Silver shrines to 
Artemis " being abolished, the handicraft of men is turned to build up the earthly statb, 
that it may bless those who live in it and the God to whose Name it is consecrated. 

V. Face to face with the disorderly violence of the ignorant and misguided, the rule 
of all Christian enterprise is to withdraw as much as possible from contention ; not to 
meet violence with violence, but to trust implicitly to the absolute superiority of 
MORAL OVER FHYSIOAL FORCE. " Force IS no remedy." Let the potsherd strive with 
the potsherd. Religion should regulate politics and social life by indirect means. As 
far as opportunity permits, the regulation of earthly matters should be left in the hands 
of the secular powers. Let the town-clerk dismiss the assembly. Let not Paul mix 
himself up in the strife. " Cast not your pearls before swine." Jesus did not strive, 
nor cry, nor make his voice heard in the streets. — R. 

Vers. 2 — 7. — Baptism in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and its sequel. The exceeding 
economy of Scripture will prevent our supposing that these verses lie on the page of 
Scripture for no end, and will equally prevent our supposing they are present for no 
distinct and important end. Starting from quite the opposite creed, we are led to 
notice— 

I. That the stress of the passage belongs, not to the subject of baptism, but 
TO THE SUBJECT OF THE HoLY SPIRIT. The point of departure of Paul is from the 
question, " Did ye receive the Holy Ghost when ye believed? " His first inquiry is ft«/ 
respecting the baptism of those whom he was addressing;. 



132 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xes. 1— 41 

n. That the dispensation of Christianity is to be EMPHATioAiiT appeaisbd as 
THB DISPENSATION OF THE HoLT SpiEiT. Too little stress is ever laid upon this grand 
fact. Too much stress cannot possibly be laid upon it. And whatever the causes of 
the former of these things, it may be said that the apostle, from the very first, did what 
iu him lay to provide against a defect so disastrous in its certain tendency and work. 

III. That baptism in the Name of the Loed Jesus, whatbvbb beferbkck it 

MAT obviously AND FOB OBVIOUS REASONS CARRY TO HIM, 18 EQUIVALENT TO THB BION 
OF ADMISSION TO ALL THE PRIVILEGES OF THE SPIRIT, AND TO IMPLICIT SUBMISSION ON 
THE PART OP THOSE OP MATURE TEARS TO THE POLL BULB OF THE SPIBIT. 

IV. That to invest this fact with the gbbatbst possible plainness and 

EMPHASIS, EVEN THE SPECIAL GIFTS OF THE HOLT SPIBIT IN APOSTOLIC TIMES WEBB 
bestowed as the SEQUEL OF BAPTISM IN THB NaMB OF THB LOBD JbSUS. B. 

Vers. 9, 10. — The shelter awhile of ymmg converts. We must be conscious, in 
reading this passage, of something approaching a new point of departure on the part of 
Paul. He was not the man hitherto to shrink from either the malice of the synagogue 
or the uproar of the market-hall. But there were reasons why, with so long a stay at 
Ephesus, the company of the disciples should be " separated," and some foreshadowing 
be now given, under the continued supervision of Paul, of what should come to be the 
form of an individual Christian Church. And we have here the nucleus of this. We 
are reminded of the Church of Christ, as existing in any individual place, that it should 
be answerable to find — 

I. A HOME OF SOME SAPETT FOB DISCIPLES. Such a home should be able to show : 
1. Shelter from the " hardened" world; the world that does not believe, and resolutely 
will not believe ; the world that, being thus disposed as to itself, is also manifestly dis- 
posed to disturb the belief and peace of those who do believe, seeking to enter in to 
ravage "the flock" (ch. ix. 29). This it was abundantly easy to do in the synagogue 
by every kind of dishonest quibble and disputatious debate. It should not be by any 
means so possible within the fold of the Church. 2. Teaching of the truth. The truth 
should be certain of being obtained here, and the teacher should be competent. He will 
teach, not by force of authority, but by persuasion of the truth. He will be listened to 
and esteemed because he shall prove his word, and prove it to be a word of power. 
3. Sympathizing companionship. It is needed (1) for prayer and the exercises cA 
religion ; (2) for daily social life ; (3) for the stimulating of religious purpose and work. 

II. An OPEN DOOB OF ENTBANOB AND A WELCOME FOB THE WOBLD. 1. Nothing more 

dishonours the place of the Church of Christ, or disowns all that is most characteristic 
of his Spirit, than exdusiveness. 2. The door of entrance is to be large enough to admit 
not only the honest seekers, not only those who already show the signs of penitence, 
not only those by nature humble and meek, but all who will enter — the worst, the most 
unpromising. These cannot, indeed, enter into the Church itself oi Christ; but even to 
them welcome may be given to the place of the Church, that " haply they may be 
born " again therein. If, indeed, they enter and stay to show themselves the disturbers 
of disciples and the resolutely " hardened," we have here our authority how to proceed. 
But otherwise let them be free to enter within the walls of Zion. Let them there hear 
the Word and, if needs be, debate it. Let them be free to hear the prayers and join the 
songs of disciples ; for " much people " for Christ may be amongst them. This is at 
least one of the ways by which the world is to be gained for Christ. It does not, 
indeed, exempt the Church from missionary and "aggressive" work — work which pro- 
bably, in the more settled ecclesiastical state of our own country, has been lamentably 
overlooked. But it appears that it was the method by which, during " the space of two 
years, all they which dwelt in Asia heard the Word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and 
Greeks." When the world's turbulent streams dash by that river, full and deep and 
peaceful, of the city of God, the very contrast will arrest attention and arouse reflection 
in not a few. — B. 

Vers. 11, 12. — " SpeekU miradet,' Under ordinary circumstances tUi description of 
the miracles wrought by God by the hands of Paul might be liable to the supposition 
of being mere surplusage of words, a miracle in itself being a thing sufficiently " special.^ 
Th^ Rupposition, however, cannot attach to the description as found here, just tecauat U 



aH.xiT.1— 4L] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 133 

Is here that it is found. And when we look a moment beneath the surface we discover 
ample justification for the epithet applied to these miracles. Let us observe — 

I. In what thk specialty op these miracles consists. We are taught the answer 
in one verse. 1. They are wrought without the laying on of the hands of Paul, without 
his presence, without his voice, without (so far as ap[)ears) even any knowledge on his 
part of the persons or the needs of the persons who received healing. These four cir- 
cumstances do incontestably entitle them to the description of " special ; " the nearest 
approach to them being miracles of the kind that were wrought when one touched " the 
hem of the garment " of Jesus. But Jesus did then percBive and know that " virtue 
was gone out of him.*" 2. They are wrought with intervening signs of most unusual 
kind ; the connecting visible links being handkerchiefs and aprons that have been in 
some contact with the body of the apostle, and are now carried to the sick and possessed 
by any one — presumably any one of their friends. The nearest approach to anything 
so "special" as this may, perhaps, be considered to occur in the conduct of those who 
brought their sick on their couches into the streets, that haply the mere " shadow of 
Peter might overshadow some of them " (ch. v. 15). But in these cases there was far 
nearer and closer connection between the miracles wrought (if such were wrought) and 
Peter than the connection of handkerchiefs fitfully carried by any one. 

n. I'hb objects or this specialty of mibaolb. 1. To arrest a lively attention. 

2. To suggest really far deeper thoughtfulness in all those who had thought to think. 

3. To spread far and wide blessings themselves, each one of which had a hundred 
tongues to speak the praise of some one. 4. To attract attention to the miracle itsell 
and the blessing wrapt in it and to the real Worker of it, rather than to suffer atten- 
tion to be distracted by an apparently too close relation of the miracle to Paul per- 
sonally. It is true that many in their blindness might still think and speak of all the 
wonderfulness of Paul, and even of the body of Paul. But yet others would be helped 
to see (what with time all the world would be sure to see) that it was no more due to 
Paul than to the handkerchief, that the miracle was wrought, but all due to God, and 
ail to his praise and glory. 

III. The moeb genebal and permanent lessons of this specialty of miracle. 
For the "special miracle" helps to reveal only the more definitely and distinctly the 
meaning of any miracle. 1. It is for the attainment of a great moral end; to give 
sufficient and just ground, for instance, to believe, to trust, and to act the things which, 
without it, might be only believed and trusted by credulity, or not at all. 2. It is to 
attain this moral end, without overriding the exercise of men's own reason and heart and 
conscience. The just suggestions of a miracle, forcible as they ought to prove, are still 
only moral helps and guides. 3. The miracle is so far forth for darker days and for thu 
more backward stages of humanity. The foundation work for much to be built upon 
as time should travel on ; the time fittest for the miracle is the earlier time, the more 
childish time of the world. Then the besetting snare of the miracle would, at all 
events, count for less harm, and the moral good of it would be enshrined a " possession 
for ever." 4. The miracle is useless if permanent. Evidently the day of miracle was 
drawing near its end when Peter's shadow was waited for. But very near indeed to its 
end was it when even Scripture says, " God wrought special miracles by the hands of 
Paul." If their end hail not been now near, one of two things must have followed. 
Either they must have taken their place as grateful resources for the healing of 
the diseased and the dispossessing of the possessed, or, in order to keep their moral 
virtue and effect, they must have been becoming in long vista yet more and more 
" special" — B. 

Vers. 13 — 17. — The prompt exposure and ptmishment of human iniquity hy an evil 
spirit. Of the character of these exorcists there can be no doubt. Their deceiving and 
iniquitous profession was one for gain, and gain only was in their hearts. With less 
hesitation even than Simon Magus (ch. viii. 18, 19), they propose to themselves to take 
their chance at least in using and abusing the " glorious and fearful Name." And 
they suffer for their blasphemous and profane attempt. Notice — 

L The presumption involved. 1. They dare to try the use of the name of Jesus 
without any authority. No doubt Paul was cognizant of the aprons and handkerchiefs 
taken from his body, and willingly authorized the proceeding. Nothing analogous, how 



134 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xix. 1— 41 

ever, finds place now with the exorcists. 2. They use that Name to supersede and M an 
experimental substitute for the name, or odious deceptive practices, whatever they were, 
which they had been accustomed to use. 3. 'I'hey do this for no high-minded ambitious 
(even if erroneous) adventure, but doubtless for the adventure of money gain alone. 
4. Those who do it are Jews, and they are sons of one who was " chief of the priests," 
and they conapire, seven in number, to do it. 

II. The BxrosuRB. 1. It is the exposure, not of Paul (as in the case of Simon Magus 
it was of Peter), nor of the horror of true disciples, nor cf Heaven's intervention by 
lightning or thunderbolt. 2. A more humiliating exposure is reseiTed for these. Even 
the evil spirit cannot bear the presumptuous and intolerably conceived iniquity. And 
in the keen satire of truth, which perhaps none know better to accentuate than evil 
spirits, this ill spirit resents the puny challenge and scathes the hollow deception by a 
question foUuwing upon an honest enough confession, " Jesus I know, and Paul I know ; 
but who are ye?" 3. The mournfully afflicted man himself joins to make patent the 
exposure. No doubt already by the usurped organs of his speech it was that the ill 
spirit had uttered forth his trenchant rebuff, but now the record gives us to understand 
that the man himself (from whatever source he gained his inspiration) joined hand and 
limb, and suited the action to the word. The exposure surely needed no more to make 
it complete. 

III. The punishment. 1. It was summary. Naked and wounded, the seven fled 
out of that house. 2. It was retributive. The man on whom they had experimented, 
and perhaps nut now for the flist time, had doubtli-ss (like he of the tombs) often been 
" naked and wounded ; " but now it is they who are in this plight. 3. It was 
essentially humiliating. "Seven flee before one" (Deut. xxviii. 7, 25), and him the 
despised or pitied one of long time I 4. It ivas humilialing in its circumstances. 
For it was not only patent at the time, but it became noturious. " It was known to all 
the Jews and Greeks also dwelling at E|)hesus." So sometimes even now iniquity 
reaches its height, the cup is filled to the full, the bold daring face that sin sets to 
heaven is overwhelmed with confusion, and the hour ot judgment is arrived. 

IV. The effects. Whatever may be s-aid too often, too inconsiderately in modem 
days, to the disparagement of faith in miracles and faith in prayer, and among other 
things faith in providence and the veritable nearness of the Divine hand, " strong to 
save " or " swift to smite," there is no doubt that these things were all heartily 
believed in by the early Church. They were also believed in by many who viere not 
" disciples." Nor is this evidence travelling down from those who were on the spot 
in the alleged age and place of miracles unimportant. In the present history, just as 
true as anything else recoided, must this be held, when we read that the great effect 
was that " fear fell on them all, and that the Name of the Lord Jesus was magiufied." 
If we are open to learn, we may receive help in the firm persuasion that there was 
such a thing as the possession by alien and evil spirits of the organs of the human body ; 
that there was such a thing as miracle, special Divine interposition to the suspension 
of tlie ordinary course of things ; and, dread suggestion I that by whomsoever else, evil 
spirits are not to be overmastered by, but rather overmaster, evil men. — B. 

Vers. 18 — 20. — Practical evidence of genuine repentance. The evidence which " many 
of them that believed " now came and gave, of the vitality of their faith and the reality 
of their repentance, was conclusive. And the very thought of it is refreshing as we 
read it. Here follow four grand evidences of a genuine " faith in Jesus " and " repent- 
ance from dead works." 

I. To OOMB VOLUNTABILT AND CONFESS. 

II. To DISCLOSE, AND TO DISCLOSE V0H7NTARILT, UNDER NO PRES8UBK OF TOBTTBB 
OR INDUCEMENT OF FEAR OR BRIBE. 

HI. To EEPUDIATE FORMER WATS, EVEN TH0U8H THEY WERE THE WATB OF LIFE's 
LBNGTE, OF GETTINO A LIVELIHOOD. 

IV. To PUBLICLY RENOUNCE THE VERY INSTRUMENTS BY WHICH THE FORMER LIFH 

AND PROFESSION WERE SUSTAINED. Thls renunciation was particularly satisfactory in 
the present instances, inasmuch as it was: 1. Public. 2. A renunciation of large 
value of capital. 3. A determined putting away from the eyes the things that had 
uften fed temptation. 4. And an effort to put the old evil course, as far as might b< 



ea. XIX. 1—41.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 136 

possible, out of memory itself. To this hardest thing of all God would give his gracioui 
and effectual help, for its very endeavour's sake. — B. 

Vers. 23 — 41,—^ typical exhibition of human nature. This section of the hlstoiy 
marks itself off — an episode which gave apostles anl disciples, albeit in a very modified 
time, to rest, and made them spectators of an ample display of certain aspects of human 
nature. The world, ever ready to arm against the truth, and especially against Christ, 
the first distinct and bright embodiment of truth, is left sometimes to fight out its own 
battles. And the amount of smoke in which they end is sometimes, as in the present 
case, something wonderful. Notice — 

I. The admitted root or gkibvance with the woeidlt man. The illustration 
which Demetrius here affords of what is often deepest down in the heart of the world — 
love of money gain, faith in money gain, the illusion that money gain is the one thing 
needful, and by which alone men live — seems for a moment pleasantly relieved by his 
apparent free admission of it. Any sense of relief, however, arising from this considera- 
tion is speedily largely discounted : 1. By the fact that the ready admission of it but 
speaks the deeper root of the malady, and that it is a fact grown to be viewed as 
venial, perhaps natural, nay, very probably necessary, and therefore true to right 
nature. 2. By the fact that the admission, though apparently free enough, was, when 
it occurred, only of a semi-publio character. Demetrius owns and unfolds the state of 
his own mind, not to the wide vrorld, but to his own " craftsmen," whose sympathies 
would lie very near his own — and he knew it. 

II. The undertakino to enlist a vastly wider oircumfeebnce of peelino, bt 

MIXING THE PERSONAL OB AT MOST CLASS GRIEVANCE UP WITH THE RELIGIOUS SBNSB 

OF " ALL Asia and the world." The opportunity was no doubt a tempting one. And 
though too evident to allow of its inferring any great talent on the part of Demetrius, 
yet he skilfully avails himself of it. Some persons will miss very tempting oppor- 
tunities, which are as evident as they may be tempting. " The children of this world are," 
however, " wiser in their generation," as a rule, " than the children of light ; " and this was 
one instance of it. It took most successfully. 1. It is the speedy outcry of " the whole 
city." And the movement spread so rapidly from the craftsmen class interest, that 
when the whole city is " come together " (ver. 32), " the more part knew not wherefore." 
It made little difference. They had their throats and their limbs with them, and • 
couple of victims, " Qaius and Aristarohus " (ver. 29), travelling " companions of Paul." 
2. Most combustible fuel was forthcoming to add to the fire, in the person of a Jew (ver. 
34), who was probably unpopular with his own people. He was thrust into pro- 
minence by his own people (ver. 33), either that he might be their scapegoat and bear 
the brunt, or possibly because he was judged to be the most competent man. Of this 
view there is some evidence in his i^eady preparedness to address the surging multitude 
and to " make his defence." Anyway, for two hours more did the conflagration bum 
more fiercely for that one move. And it was a move which derived its force from " the 
burning religious question." 3. The success of the scheme of Demetrius is illustrated 
rffost significantly in what it elicited from the lips of the "town-clerk" (vers. 37, 38), 
especially in his huge fallacy of asserting to acclamation (which no doubt rang again 
in that theatre, but to the flat denial of truth and time succeeding and now " of all the 
world"), " Seeing that these things cannot be spoken against." 

III. The collapse. However uninlormed in religion the town-clerk was, it is plain 
that he was a competent man, 1. He defends Gaius and Aristarohus, and presumably 
Paiil, He finds and pronounces it boldly that " these men " have done nothing amiss. 
They are neither sacrilegious " robbers " nor " blasphemers " albeit of an idol 1 2. Ho 
reduces the swelling hazards of Demetrius to their proper proportions. It is a mere 
matter of himself and his friends. And it is a mere matter of whether he can prove any- 
thing that will entitle him to redress. If he can, he must go to the right place to do it, 
and take the right course. Probably Demetrius, having set the fire going, had some time 
ago dropped into the background. But if not, if he and his party had stayed to keep up 
to the full the excitement, they must inevitably have felt now very small. It were not 
to have been wondered at if the multitude had turned upon them, with the threat of 
lynch law. 3. He apprises the whole city that disaster may be the sequel of a whol« 
dty's wasted uproar and undefended concourse. And the people seemed open to bi.' 



IM THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ch. iix. 1— 41, 

wisdom, and wiser by far than Demetrius at all events. So ends in smoke the work oi 
wickedness, the worldliness of the worldly, the self-seeking and avarice of the man who 
has far keener foresight for gain and money than any care, past, present, or to come, for 
truth and religion. The day has been uproar ; the human nature of that day has been 
mere confusion : unseen presences have, however, been in the scene, and still voices at 
last prevail, which pronounce condemnation on the evil-doing ringleader, which reduce 
him to shame and humiliation in the eyes of those whose passion he had needlessly 
excited, and most remarkable of all, which demand and obtain silence. It ifl no dim 
augury of the close of the world's day, when time shall be ripe. — B. 

Ver. 2. — Progression in Divine revelations. " We have not so much as heard whether 
there be any Holy Ghost." This is evidently the simple answer of men who knew 
nothing whatever about the matter concerning which they were asked. They were 
sincerely religious men ; they are called " disciples," and yet — though the thing seems 
almost incredible to us — they had heard nothing about the^ Holy Ghost. Much is 
explained by a careful observation of the facts connected with' the early preaching of 
the gospel at Ephesus. Give some account of the attractive eloquence, but limited 
knowledge, of ApoUos. It was an advance upon Judaism to accept John the Baptist 
as a prophet, but it seems that ApoUos knew only of John's demand of repentance, and 
had not heard of his direct witness to Jesus of Nazareth as the Messiah. ApoUos 
could only teach as much as he knew, and when St. Paul reached Ephesus, he was 
troubled to find the condition of the disciples. "He noticed a lack of spiritual gifts; 
perhaps, also, a want of the peace and joy and brightness that showed itself in others. 
They presented the features of a rigorous asceticism, like that of the TherapeutsB (of 
Alexandria) — the outward signs of repentance and mortification, but something was 
manifestly lacking for their spiritual completeness." In bis anxiety to find out what 
was wrong, the apostle asked this searching question, " Did ye receive the Holy Ghost 
when ye believed?" They did not; they knew nothing about the Holy Ghost. So 
St. Paul lifts them on stage after stage. First to the apprehension of Christ, the 
Messiah and Saviour, to whom John gave witness, and then to the experience of the 
coming and the indwelling of the Holy Ghost, as the seal of the believer. And in this 
we are plainly taught that there is a progression in Christian truth — that it is unfolded 
to us in parts and stages. And we may even cherish the inspiring assurance that " the 
Lord hath yet more Ught and truth to break forth from his Word." A sentiment is 
allowed to prevail that " revelation must always be perfect and complete." It is always 
perfect in its fitness to its times and to its purpose, but any particular revelation is 
only a piece and a part of the truth, and it is inqierfect when it is treated as separate 
from the whole of which it is a part. 1. There is historical progression in Divine 
revelation. Broad principles, covering the general relations of God with men, were 
given to the early world. Each passing age was helped to fill in some part of the out- 
line. There was a fulness of times for the manifestation of Messiah, and, step by step, 
truth had advanced to meet the revelation which he brought. 2. There is progression 
in our apprehension of the Christian truth. No man can grasp it all at once. It comes 
to us all bit by bit, step by step. Some of the more advanced Christian truths cannot 
possibly be grasped until certain other and preparatory ones are well learned ; and some 
even of these preparatory truths cannot be really grasped until we have passed through 
the sanctified experiences of middle life. Take, for rnatance, the Fatherhood of God. 
A man must experimentally learn the mystery of the human fatherhood before he can 
really receive the full revelation of the Divine Fatherhood. As a srni he may know 
how he feels towards the Father, but until he is a father he cannot know how the great 
Father feels towards him. In the matter of our salvation the Divine order of progress 
seems to be (1) John and repentance ; (2) Jesus and faith ; (3) the Spirit and holiness. 

L In the proobession op Christian truth, the doctrine op the Holt Ghosi 
18 the highest revelation tbt haig. It comes last. It comes after and through 
the objective Christ. It is the inward witness to bim who lived, laboured, died, and 
rose, " God manifest in the flesh." The spiritual operations of God in men's minds and 
hearts may be traced in Old Testament times. All spiritual life always is by the 
energy of God's Spirit. And the speciality of the working of the Holy Ghost in the 
B6W kingdom is not that he is some new Spirit, but that his agencies of motive 



BH. XIX, 1—41.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 131 



perBuasion, and instruction are all taken from the manifested life of the Son of God. 
He " takes of the things of Christ, and reveals them unto us." Our Lord said of him, 
" He shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you." 

II. The truth of the Holt Ghost, beino the highest truth, is the one 

THOSE practical nTFLUENCE IS MOST ESSENTIAL TO HIGH AND HOLT LIVING. We are 

responsible for attaining the best that can be attained. We are not at the highest 
when we accept of the trutii of Christ /or us ; that is but a low first step of spiritual 
apprehension. We have but talsen a little step up when we apprehend the truth of 
Christ with us. We only gain the wonderful experiences, and reachi the highest 
Christian power, when we know of Christ m us. All growth in the Christian life is 
response to the life of the Spirit in our souls. Growth (1) in knowledge ; (2) in graces ; 
(3) and in the mastery of the soul over the body. His presences and his working in 
ua are the spring of all our impulses to whatsoever is good and wise and true. 

III. The TRUTH OF THE SpiBIT, BEING THE HIGHEST TRUTH, IS THE ONE MOST 

BASILT IMPERILLED. Therefore we should be most jealous of the doctrine and the 
personal experience of the indwelling of the Holy Ghost. The Christian sin that is of 
unspeakable sadness is quenching or grieving the Spirit. The sin that hath never 
forgiveness is sin against the Holy Ghost. The prayer that utters forth to God a soul's 
innermost agony is this : " Take not thy Holy Spirit from me." The highest truths 
are always likely to fade first. In the individual experience, and in the Church 
doctrine, the truth of the Spirit will fade from its place and power long before any 
dimness seems to pass over the figure of the manifested human Christ. Trees mostly 
die from the top downward. And the first effect of wearing and weathering is to rub 
off those delicate touches and tints, which are the highest efforts of the artist, and 
give the supreme charm to his work. 

Impress that we may he, like these Bphesians, behind the revelation that has been 
made for us, or indifferent to it. Then we may pity them, but we must blame ourselves. 
And we must humble ourselves, and repent, if, knowing of this gentle, awful, gracious, 
comforting Holy Ghost, we are found neglecting his Divine inworkings. He is the 
last and highest revelation of God to men ; then let us not " grieve the Holy Spirit of 
God, whereby we are sealed unto the day of redemption." — E. T. 

Ver. 9. — The first Christian congregation. St. Paul had before this taken a room 
near the synagogue at Corinth, but it seems that this case at Bphesus represents the first 
distinct effort to form a Christian congregation, with its own order and officers, as 
separate from the synagogue. Now St. Paul casts himself free of Judaism ; the time had 
come for separation, and for arranging a distinctly Christian organization. The school 
of Tyrannus was a public hall for lecturing and discussion. Canon Farrar says, " There 
must have been many an anxious hour, many a bitter struggle, many an exciting 
debate, before the Jews finally adopted a tone, not only of decided rejection, but even 
of so fierce an opposition, that St. Paul was forced once more, as at Corinth, openly to 
secede from their communion. We do not sufficiently estimate the pain which such 
circumstances must have caused to him. His life was so beset with trials, that each 
trial, however heavy in itself, is passed over amid a multitude that were still more 
grievous. But we must remember that St. Paul, though a Christian, still regarded 
himself as a true Israelite, and he must have felt, at least as severely as a Luther or a 
Whitefield, this involuntary alienation from the religious communion of his childhood." 
We do but suggest three lines of thought ; the treatment of them wUl depend upon 
the standpoint of the preacher. 

I. Separation as affecting the idea of the Ohuech. Several distinct conceptions 
of Christ's Church on earth are found established among Christian people. Show how 
the idea of separation stands related to each ; and how the Church, as a whole, ought to 
stand to any separated members. 

II. Separation as affecting the fellowship of Christians. Show that as 
fellowship depends on common Christian life and interests, we may reasonably expect 
it to triumph over differences in modes of worship, places of worship, and even over 
diversities of opinion. 

III. Separation as affecting the relations of ministers to sections. 
Especially pcir^, out the peril of over-estimating the point of division, and setting it vx 



188 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. xix. 1— 41 

undue prominence in public teaching. A minister may preach sectional opinion rathei 
than the " whole counsel of God."— R. T. 

Ver. 11. — Tht call for special miracles. It should be carefully shown that Scriptura 
miracles are never mere wonders, or displays of mere power. Thi-y are always signs, 
and always wrought for the sake of some immediate or prospective moral benefit. This 
may be affirmed, however singular the mere form of the miracle may be. The circum- 
stances under which God sees fit to allow his servants to work miracles need careful 
examination and consideration. In connection with the text we find special circum- 
stances. St. Paul had separated the disci pies, and formed a distinct Christian community. 
For his own sake, and for the satisfaction of the people, it was important that some 
attestation of the Divine approval should be given. The question had to be settled — 
Was the Christian community, thus separately constituted, as fully under the power of 
the Holy Ghost as the older Jewish Christian community had been ? The speciality 
of the miracles is desip;ned to intimate that, under these circumstances, a new and 
mightier baptism of God's Spirit came upon the apostle, so that, apart from conscious 
efforts of his own ^ill, healing virtue went forth from him. It is also noticed that 
" This great effusion of healing power, which, it is implied by the tense of the verb 
wrought, continued for some time, was granted as a counterpoise to the magical and 
theurgic practices to which the Ephesians were addicted " (vers. 13, 19). In explanation of 
the agency of " handkerchiefs and aprons," the following notes from Eastern travellers 
may be helpfully suggestive: — Thomson, in 'The Land and the Book/ says, "The external 
instruments connected with working miracles had, in ancient times, transferred to 
them, in imagination, a portion of the sanctity and reverence due to him who used 
them, or to that Divine power which was transmitted through them. This applied not 
only to the staves, robes, and mantles of prophets while living, but to such tilings 
as their bones also, and even their very gravestones, when dead. It is now common to 
bind on or wrap round the sick some part of the robes of reputed saints, in the belie! 
that healing virtue will be communicated from it." Morier says, "At a short distance, 
near the roadside, we saw the burial-place of a Persian saint, enclosed by very rude 
walls. Close to it grew a small bush, upon the branches of which were tied a variety 
of rags and remnants of garments. The Persians conceive that these rags, from theii 
vicinity to the saint, acquire peculiar preservative virtues against sickness; and, su\y 
stituting others, they take bits away, and, tying them about their persons, use them as 
talismans." How far God was pleased to fit in with the common sentiment of the age, 
in his gracious condescension, requires consideration ; we may observe that such special 
manifestations of miraculous powers were strictly temporary, limited to the particular 
occasion for which they were required. We view these " special miracles" as the out- 
ward sign of three things. 

I. God's approval of St. Paul's action ih beparatino the disciples. That 
action had been intensely trying to the apostle himself ; and a very questionable thing 
to the view of the synagogue folk, and of the disciples who followed the apostle. If 
miraculous attestations had been withheld just at this juncture, the enemies of St. Paul 
would have been enabled to assert the Divine disapproval of his conduct, and St. Paul 
would himself have been disheartened. Compare how graciously now God often gives 
success to his servants when they are called to take special action ; giving them con- 
verts in unusual numbers, and so silencing their adversaries. 

II. God's attestino presence with the Church's life and labour. In those 
days miracles were the strong affirmation, — " God is with us." The very point of them 
is that they were wrought in the power of God. The very purpose of them is to 
bring home to men's hearts the conviction that what the miracle-worker says is from 
God, seeing that, so evidently, what he does is from God. Miracles are needed when 
men are dependent on outward and sensible proofs. Miracles are not needed when 
men are able to estimate moral and spiritual proofs. And, therefore, miracles are not 
needed now. 

III. God's condescension in PEBSUADora the Ephesians by adapting his dealincmj 
TO THEIR sentiments. I'hey were inclined to magic, and based their belief on super- 
stitious rites. God would not admit the truth of their " black arts," but he wouli 
consider the tone and temper of mind which characterized them, and adapt his dealing! 



OH. XIX. 1—41.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 13; 

go as to meet their prejudices and persuade them. So teaching us that while we must 
never misrepresent or prejudice God's truth, we must always seek so to know men that 
we may adapt our presentations of truth to them, and meet them on their more 
impressionable sides. — B. T. 

Vers. 18, 19. — Signs of religious sincerity. The incidents narrated in these verses 
suggest the subject of the demands which men feel that a Christian profession make* 
upon their practical life and conduct. It appears that these disciples at Ephesus had 
been converted for some time before they made these sacrifices; but presently the 
relation of the Christian truth to their magical and superstitious sentiments was fully 
recognised, and they were impelled to destroy the books which had been associated 
with their early religious beliefs. " Ephesus was the chief seat of the black art at this 
time, and the popular mind was familiar with the pretension to supernatural gifts and 
endowments, and by its experience in sorceries and charms was in a measure hardened 
against the due effect of miracles." " Magicians and astrologers swarmed in her streets, 
and there was a brisk trade in the charms, incantations, books of divination, rules for 
interpreting dreams, and the like, such as have at all times made up the structure of 
superstition." " By actually destroying the books, they not only acknowledged the 
sinfulness of the practices taught therein, but also cut off at once and absolutely the 
possibility of relapse on their own part, or of leaving a temptation or stumbling-block 
in the way of others." But the books burned were private property, and did not stop 
the evil work of those who made and sold such books. In one form or in another the 
question always comes before the new converts — What are you prepared to give up for 
Christ's sake V 

I. SiNOEltE AND EARNEST ChBISTIAN LIFE 18 ALWAYS, IN ORBATEB OB LESS DEGREE, 

ANTAGONISTIC TO THE FOHMEK LIFE. A man may take up with religion as a mere 
matter of profession, and And that such a religion makes little or no demand for change 
in his general sentiments or conduct. But if a man is truly regenerate, if religion is to 
him a serious, searching reality, he will soon find out that it is out of harmony with 
much in his former life, and as he cannot give up the religion he must give up the old 
habits and indulgences. This applies not only to such evils as intemperance and immo- 
rality, but also to more minute forms of questionable indulgence. Earnest Christian 
life is found to be corrective of even our cherished ideas, our views of truth and duty ; 
and the most moral and amiable man is made so sensitive to purity and truth by a 
Divine regeneration that he finds something in his former life and thought which is out 
of harmony with his new feeling. It appears, therefore, that our Lord's principle is 
much more minutely searching than we imagine it to be : " Wherefore by their fruits 
ye shall know them." The point of this head may be represented in full detail, as it 
concerns the several classes of a congregation. The principle enunciated will gain force 
by precise apjilication to the class evils which sincere piety resists. 

II. SiNCEKE AND EARNEST CHRISTIAN LIFE CAN ONLY BE MAINTAINED BY SETTING LIFE, 

ACTION, AND RELATIONS IN RIGHT TONE. A man may feel how opposed his sentiments 
and his habits are to the Christian profession he makes, and yet he may do nothing 
towards readjusting their relations. He may try to live his old self-willed life, and at 
the same time try to keep his faith in Christ and his soul-allegiance to him. But the 
point on which we now insist is, that he cannot do this. He imperils his Christian Ufe 
in the attempt. He keeps himself open to Satanic temptations. He is in the almost 
hopeless, and certainly dishonourable, condition of those who, in olden times, " feared 
the Lord and served other gods." Full consistency between life and prolession is 
absolutely necessary. In any case of conflict between the two, the Spirit of God will 
help us to a victory. If, even in small matters, we fail to keep the full harmony 
between piety and conduct, piety loses its tone, and gradually its very life. Formalism 
can allow licence. Piety never can. 

III. Efforts to adjust condbot so as to match religion may involve serious 
SACRIFICE. As in the case of these Ephesian Chiistians. They destroyed books 
representing a great wealth. They might have sold them ; but since others might be 
injured by them, they destroyed them, at great personal sacrifice. Illustration may ba 
ti.ken from certain forms of trade, which Christians feel they can no longer carry on ; 
or from certain pleasures, in 'vh'cli they feel they can no longnr indulge. Impress, in 



140 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh.xix.1— 41 

conclusion, the teaching of our Lord about the foolishness of the man who would taka 
up a Christian profession, and does not " sit down first and count the cost." — B. T. 

Ver. 20. — The prevailing power of the Word. " So mightily grew the Word of the 
Lord and prevailed." Compare other Scripture figures ; e.g. " His Word runneth very 
swiftly " (Ps. cxlvii. 15). " Finally, brethren, pray for us, that the Word of the Lord 
may have free course, and be glorified " (2 Thess. iii. 1). 

L 1 HE GBOWINO POWEB OF God's Woed. Beference is to the gospel message — the 
tidings brought to men concerning Jesus Christ ; the message brought by Jesus Christ, 
the message centering in, and gathering round, Jesus Christ. Put into all kinds ot 
moulds and shapes and forms of language, the " Word of the Lord " is this : The 
heavenly Father has himself overcome the hindrances and separating difficulties 
dividing him from his children. He is become a reconciling God, and in Jesus Christ 
his Son he is willing to pardon ; he is waiting to welcome back home every 
returning, repenting, believing child. The apostle thinks of this gospel message as 
a " living thing," and so he speaks of its " growing." Wherever there is life there is 
growth. If there be life in the seed, there will be growth of blade, breaking the soil, 
and shooting up into the light. If growth ever ceases in our bodies, death ensues. 
And so, if there be life in God's gospel, it will have the power of widening, spreading, 
and enlarging its influence. The sign of growth noticed in connection with the text is 
the power which Christian truth increasingly gained over the feelings and the conduct 
of the Ephesian disciples, leading them to a most impressive public act of self-denial. 
Show that the growth takes two forms. (I) Inward growth; the gospel as the soul's 
new life, gaining an ever-increasing self-mastery. (2) Outward growth ; the gospel as 
a testiinony, winning more and more adherents as it is proclaimed more fully and 
widely. And impress (3) that these two modes of growth are mutually related and 
mutually helpful. Culture of inward spiritual life always should bear its fruit in 
enlarged Christian activity ; and greater energy put into Christian work should always 
he felt to make greater demands on Christian life and feeling. Illustrate this twofold 
growth from the history of the early Church. 

II. The PBBVAiLiNa power of the Word. This sets before us two points. 
1. Since there is life in the Word, and that life is seen in growth, it will be sure 
to meet with opposition. If the apostles would only have ceased to witness for Christ, 
they would have suffered no persecution. If any of us wiU let the life in Christ fade 
down and die within us, the world will cease to present any opposition. The dead in 
trespasses and sins have no difficulties ; but " they that will live godly must suffer 
persecution." It is a simple condition of growth, that it involves resistance ; it pushes 
its way against opposition. And, in the case of earnest piety, this opposition becomes 
more than resistance — it is enmity and wilful endeavour. 2. Since there is life in the 
Word, we may be sure that it will overcome the opposition ; or, as the text says, it will 
"prevail" — gain the mastery. This may be illustrated from martyr-times, when 
Christianity has seemed to be crushed, but the life has proved stronger than all out- 
ward resistances. See especially, in recent years, the result of persecutions in Mada- 
gascar. Illustrate also from missionary spheres, in which various kinds of hindrances 
are presented, yet the lile in the Word gains gradual mastery. Illustrate by St. Paul's 
sublime triumphs over all forms of opposition met with in his missionary work. And 
show how the prevailing power of the Word is found in individual experience ; in the 
gradual mastery of personal habits ; and in our external relations and circumstances. 
Impress that faith in the " growth " and " prevailing power " of Christianity needs to 
be kept alive in the Church and in all our hearts ; and that such a faith would prove 
an abiding inspiration to holier living and to nobler laboiuring. — 'Si. T. 

Vers. 24 — 29. — Self-interest opposing Christianity. The introduction should concern 
the temple, statue, and worship of the goddess Diana ; the reputation in which this 
goddess was held ; the numbers of persons who visited her shrine ; the various oppor- 
tunities afforded by this fact for making money ; and the fears which irere created by 
the act of self-sacrifice in burning the magical books. " The shrines were miniature 
models of the temple, containing a representation of the statue of the godd »ss," and 
they were chi«fly made for the visitors to take away as memorials of their visit 



oaxix. 1— 41.] THE ACTS QP THE APOSTLES. 141 



" Tliere was a sacred month at Ephesus — the month of Diana — when a great religious 
gathering took place to celebrate the public games in honour of the goddess. It was 
the pleasant month of May. Trade was brisk then at Ephesus, not only from the 
large temporary increase of population, by the presence of provincials, and strangers 
from more distant parts, but from the purchases they made in the shops and markets. 
Among the tradesmen of Ephesus, there were none who depended more upon the 
business of this month than did makers and dealers in holy trinkets." " In the sacred 
month of the third year of St. Paul's stay in Ephesus, the makers of the ' silver 
shrines' found, to their consternation, that the demand for their commodity had so 
materially fallen off as most seriously to affect their interests. Ujion this one of the 
leading men of their guild convened a meeting of their craft, and, in an inflammatory 
speech, pointed out Paul as the person who, by his preaching that there were ' no 
gods made with hands,' had not only produced this crisis in the trade, but had 
endangered their glorious temple, and imperilled that magnificence which the world 
admired." Kitto well says, " Here we witness a curious, but not unparalleled, union of 
the 'great goddess Diana' with the great god Se?/', whose worship still exists, though 
that of Diana is extinct." This brings out the point which seems to have practical 
interest for us, which we have suggested in our heading. Self-interest opposes (1) vital 
religion; (2) earnestness in Christ's services ; and (3) the very progress of Christianity. 
We observe — 

L Chbistiakitt is a life. It is a Divine inward renewal ; it is a new creation ; it is 
an impartation of Divine life ; it is not, primarily, an interference with social evils, or 
any endeavour to set the world's wrong right. St. Paul preached the Christian truth, 
and" bade men seek Christ for themselves, that "they might have life ; " but we have 
no reason whatever for supposing that he attacked the shrine-makers, or even made 
any peril for himself by arguing against the claims of Diana. The power of Christianity 
still Uis in the change which it works in each individual, the regeneration of the man, 
his posaswioa of a new life. Christian teachers must deal afterwards with the rela- 
tions between the Christian life and the family and society ; but the Christian preacher 
comes first and declares that " God hath giveu unto us eternal life, and this life is iu 
his ion : he that hath the Son hath life." 

II. CUBTSTIANITY IS SURE TO EXERT A SOCIAL DIFLTJENCB. It COmeS tO Save SOuls ; 

but the action of the renewed cannot fail to tell on social life, bringing in a new set of 
sentiments and habits, and steadfastly resisting some of the older ones. lUustraiions 
may be found in connection with slavery. Christianity makes no plea against it, and 
yet, when men become Christians, they are sure to feel the evil of slavery, and are 
ready to resist it, as a social custom, even at a great sacrifice. So with war. At 
Ephesus no word need have been spoken about the superstitious use of charms and 
amulets ; but when the Ephesians accepted Christ as their Saviour, a social sentiment 
against these superstitions would speedily be raised. The one all-effectual counteractive 
to social and moral evils is strong, vigorous, noble Christian life ; and just this the 
world BO greatly needs to-day. 

in. Christ lANiTT, in exerting its social ini'lubnob, is suek to bear heavily on 
SOME. It did on the shrine-makers of Ephesus ; it has done on slaveholders in England 
and America ; it does on drink-sellers, and on all whose trade is in any form immoral : 
it does on those who would make personal gain out of the superstitions and fears of 
the people ; it does on those who proclaim sceptical and infidt-l ideas. 

IV. The intbnsbst opposition to Christianity is aroused whbeb self-interest 
"B affected. Men may feel more deeply when they are touched in their emotions, but 
they make more immediate and active show of their feelings when they are affected in 
their self-interests. And, on the ground of such self-interest, combinations of men are 
easily made to resist a truth or a reform. Show how this finds application in ikese our 
own milder times. Spiritual Christianity finds itself affecting men's purely worldly 
interests nowadays. Many a man wages a great fight with himself ere he lets his 
piety master his very trade ; and wins a willingness to sacrifice golden opportunities of 
advancement and wealth, rather than lose his soul's eternal life. And there are modern 
illustrations of the way in which men, whose self-interest is touched, will combine to 
resist revival and reformation. In so many forms the principle laid down by our Lord 
finds ever fresh illustration : " Ye cannot serve God and mammon." 



142 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[OH. XX. 1— 3& 



Remarking on the deceptions which lead men to combine against established order oi 
new truth. Bode names the following :—."!. One pretends to high aims, and is influenced 
by the grossest selfishness. 2. One thinks himself free to act, and is the involuntary 
instrument of crafty seducers. 3. One values himself as enlightened, and commitg 
the most unreasonable acts of folly. 4. One prid' s himself that he contends for the 
right, and perpetrates the most unrighteous deeds of violence. 5. One is filled with 
extravagant expectations, and in the end gains nothing." — R. T. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XX. 



Ver. 1. — Having sent for . . , and exhorted 
for called unto him, A.V. and T.B. ; tooh 
leave of them, and departed for and embraced 
them, and departed, A.V. Departed for to go 
into Macedonia. This was St. Paul's purpose, 
as he had written to the Corinthians (1 Cor. 
xvi. 5) from Ephesua. He judged it wise, 
not only with a view to his own safety and 
that of his companions, but also for the rest 
and quiet of the Ephesian Church, to take 
advantage of the lull in the popular storm, 
and withdraw into quiet waters before any 
fresh outbreak occurred. Aquila and Pris- 
ciUa seem to have left Ephesus about the 
sajue time, or soon after, since the Epistle to 
the Romans found them again at Rome (Rom. 
xvi. 3, i); and, if the view mentioned in the 
note to ch. vx. 40 is true — that in the riot 
they bad saved St. Paul's life at the risk of 
their own — there were probably the same 
prudential motives for their leaving Ephesua 
as there were in the case of the apustle. 

Ver. 2. — Through for over, A.V. When he 
had gone through (SifA9t6v) ; see above, ch. 
viii. 4, 40 ; x. 38 ; xiii. 6 ; xviii. 23, note, etc. ; 
Luke ix. 6. Those parts ; ix4pri, a word espe- 
cially used of geugraphlcal districts: rck 
fjLiprj Trjs Ta\t\aias I ra /ieprf Tdpou Kal ^iS&j/os 
(Matt. ii. 22; xv. 21; see too oh. ii. 10; 
six. 1). Greece {'EwdSa, not 'Axatav, as ch. 
xix. 21 ; xviii. 12, and elsewhere). Mace- 
donia and Achaia are always coupled togetlier 
(see Tacit., 'Ann.,' i. 76), as in Bom. xv. 26; 
1 Thess. i. 7, 8. In the Secimd Epistle to the 
Corinthians, written from Macedonia, it is 
always Achaia (2 Cor. i. 1, etc.). In fact, 
'EWcis is found nowhere else in the New 
Testament, Achaia being the name of the 
Roman province. Bengel and others under- 
stand Hellas here of the country between 
Macedonia and the I'elupouaesus, espeeially 
Attica; which would muke it probable that 
St. Paul revisited Athens. But Meyer, 
Kuinoel, A 1 lord, 'Speaker** Commentary,' 
etc., think it is synonymous with Achaia. 
There must, however, be some reason for 
this nnusual use of Hellas instead of Achilla. 
None seems so likely as that it was meant to 
cover wider ground than Achaia would 
naturally iudirato, namely Attiea. 

Ver. 3. — When he had spent . . . there for 



there abode, A.V. ; a plot was laid against Mm 
by the Jews for when the Jews laid wait for 
him, A.V. ; for for into, A.V. ; determined for 
purposed, A.V. (iyepero •yi'tojuns, E.T.). When 
he had spent three months. For this use of 
iroieii/, see ch. xv. 33 ; xviii. 33. See also 
2 Cor. xi. 25, where the B.V. varies the 
rendering, and seems to take iroie7ii as a verb 
neuter, as the A.V. does here, the aocu.sative 
(liTjyas Tpeij) being taken as that of time 
how long. And a plot, etc. There is no 
"and" in the Greek. It is better to take 
the T.B., and to consider Trocfia-as as a nomi- 
native pendens as dKiyvSpTes is in ch. xix. 84, 
according to the readinj? of Meyer, Alfoi-d, 
etc. A plot was laid against ^iTn by the Jews. 
It appears from this that Apollos had not 
Bueoeeded in subduing the bigoted hatred of 
the Corinthian Jews. But probably the 
desperate measure of a plot against his life 
(cTTiiSouA.^), as ill ch. ix. 23, 24; ver. 19 of this 
chapter, and ch. xxiii. 30) is an indication 
that many of their number had joined the 
Cliureh ; and that the unbelieving remnant, 
being failed in argument, had recourse to vio- 
lence. He determined ; literally, according 
to the R.T., he was of opinion. But the T.E. 
has iyevero yviiixri, "bis opinion was," the 
construction of the sentence being changed. 
The three montlis were probably chiefly 
spent at Corinth, according to the intention 
expressed in 1 Cor. xvi. 6, thougli it would 
seem that he had stayed a longer time in 
Macedonia than he anticipated. It was 
during his sojourn at Corinth that the 
Epiotle to the Romans was written. 

Ver. 4. — As far as for into, A.V. ; Bercea 
for Berea, A.V. ; the ton of Pyrrhus is 
added in the R.T. and R.V. ; Timothy for 
Timotheus, A.V. Accompanied; a-ui/einero, 
peculiar to Luke in the New Testament, but 
common in meOical writers. As far as Asia. 
If it were merely said, " there accompanied 
him," it miyht have been thought, with re- 
gard to the Macedonians Sopater, Aristar- 
chus, and Secuudus, that they had merely 
gone as far as their respective cities, Beroea 
and Thessalonica ; it is therefore added (in 
most manuscripts, thoiif,'h not in B or the 
Codex Sinaitious), " as far as Asia." It does 
not necessarily follow that they all went aa 
far as Jerusalem, though we know Tropbiraui 
and Aristarchus did. Sopater may probab)- 



CH. XX. 1—38.] 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 



143 



be the same as Botipater (Bom. zvi. 21), 
whom St. Paul calls " his kinsman," though 
some think "the son of Pyrrhus" was 
added to distinguish him from him. The 
Thessalonian Aristarchus is doubtless the 
same as the person named in oh. six. 29; 
xzvii. 2; and bo one would have thought 
Gains miiiit be the same as is named with 
Aristarchus in oh. xix. 29, were it not that 
this Gaius is described as of Oerhe, whereas 
the Giiius of ch. xix. 29 was a man of Mace- 
donia. Gaius of Derbe is here coupled with 
Timothy, who was of the neiglibouring city 
of Lyotra (eh. xvi. 1), but was too well known 
to make it needful to specify his nationality. 
Secundns is not mentioned elsewhere. Com- 
pare Tertiut and Quartut (Rom. xvi. 22, 23), 
and the common Roman names, Quinotua, 
SextuB, Septimus, Ootavius, Deoimus. 
Tychicus, of Asia, is mentioned in Eph. vi. 
21 ; Col. iv. 7; 2 Tim. iv. 12; Titus iil. 12; 
by which we learn that he continued to be in 
cii&stant attendance on St. Paul, and have 
abundant confirmation of his being "of 
Asia." Trophimus is called " an Ephesian " 
(ch. xxi. 29), and is named again as a com- 
panion of St. Paul, and presumably "of 
Asia" (2 Tim. iv. 20). It is not improbable 
that some at least of these followers were 
chosen by the Churches to carry their alms 
to Jerusalem (see 2 Cor. viii. 19—23 ; Ix. 12, 
13; 1 Cor. xvi. 3, 4; Rom. xv. 25—28). 

Ver. 5. — But theie had gone for these going, 
A .V. and T.R. ; and were waiting for tarried, 
A.V. The narrative is so concise that the 
exact dutails are matters of conjecture. 
Tliere is consequently much difference of 
opinion about them. Howson, with whom 
Farrar (vol. ii. 274) apparently agrees, thinks 
that tlie whole party travelled together by 
land through Ueroea and Thessalonica, to 
riiilippi ; that the party consisting of 
Sopater, Aristarchus and Secundus, Gaius, 
Timothy, Tyohicus, and Tropliimus, went on 
at once from Philippi via Neapolis, to Troas, 
leaving St. Paul, who was now joined by St. 
Luke, at Philippi, to pass eight or nine days 
there during the Feast of the Passover. 
And this seems quite consistent with St. 
Luke's narrative. But Lewia (vol. ii. p. 74) 
thinks that only St. Paul (accompanied, as 
he supposes, by Luke, Titus, and Jason) 
went to Macedonia, and that the others 
Siiiled direct from Cenchiete to Troas. Renan, 
on the other hand, thinks they all sailed 
together from Cenchreee to Neapolis, whence 
Paul's party went to Philippi, and the others 
to Troas. There is no clue to the reason 
why the party thus separated. 

Vep. 6. — Tarried for abode, A.V. We ; dis- 
tinctly marking that Luke, the author of the 
narrative, whom we left at Philippi (ch. xvL 
13, 14), joined him again at the same place. 
Beoan fjf. 498) well remarks, " At Philippi 



Paul once more met the disciple who had 
guided him for the first time to Macedonia. 
He attached him to his company again, and 
thus secured as his companinn in the voyage 
the historian who was to write an account of 
it, with such infinite charm of manner and 
such perfect truth." It may be noted that 
this passage is quite conclusive against the 
notion entertained by some, that Timothy 
was the writer of tlie Acts. From Philippi ; 
i.e. from Neapolis, the port of Philippi. 
After the days of unleavened bread, which 
lasted eight days, including the day of 
eating the Passover. In five days. An 
unusually long voyage, owing, doubtless, to 
unfavourable winds. On the former occasion 
when he sailed from Troas to Neapolis he 
was only two days (ch. xvi. 11). Where we 
tarried seven days. As the last of these 
seven days was Sunday — " the first day of the 
week" — liemust ha vearrived on the preceding 
Monday, and left Neapolis on the preceding 
Thujsday. Some, however, reckon the days 
differently. It must be remembered that 
the apostle's movements were dependent 
upon the arrival and departure of the mer- 
chant-ships by which he travelled. 

Ver. 7. — We were gathered for the disciples 
tame, A.V. and T.R. ; discoursed with for 
preached unto, A.V. ; intending for ready, 
A.V. ; prolonged for continued, A.V. The 
first day of the week. This is an important 
evidence of the keeping of the Lord's day 
by the Church as a day for their Church 
assemblies (see Luke xxiv. 1, 30, 35 ; John 
XX. 19, 26 ; 1 Cor. xvi 2). To break bread. 
This is also an important example of weekly 
communion as the practice of the first 
Christians. Comparing the phrase, " to 
break bread," with St. Luke's account of the 
institution of the Holy Eucharist (Luke xxii. 
19) and the passages just quoted in Luke 
xxiv., and St. Paul's language (1 Cor. z. 
16 ; xi. 24), it is impossible not to conclude 
that the breaking of bread in the celebration 
of the Lord's Supper is an essential part of 
the holy sacrament, which man may not for 
any specious reasons omit. Further, this 
passage seems to indicate that evening 
Communion, after the example of the first 
Lord's Supper, was at this time the practice 
of the Church. It was preceded (see ver. 
11) by the preaching of the Word. The 
following description, given by Justin 
Martyr, in his second Apology to Antoninus 
Pius (or Marcus Aurelius), of the Ohuroh 
assemblies in his day, not a hundred years 
after this time, is in exact agreement with 
it : — " On the day which is called Sunday, 
all (Christians) who dwell either in town or 
country come together to one place. The 
memoirs of the apostles and the writings of 
the prophets are read for a certain time, and 
then the president of the meeting, when tht 



144 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. XX. 1—88, 



reader liss stopped, makes a discourse, in 
which he instructs and exhorts the people 
to the imitation of the good deeds of which 
they have just heard. We then all rise up 
together, and address prayers (to God) ; and, 
when our prayers are ended, bread and wine 
and water are brought, and the president, to 
tlie best of his ability, offers up both prayerg 
and thanksgivings, and the people assent, 
saying ' Amen.' And then the distribution 
of the bread and wine, over which the 
Ihanksgivings have been offered, is made to 
all present, and all partake of it." He adds 
ihat the elements are carried to the absent 
Oy t&e deacons, and that collections are 
made for poor widows, and orphans, and 
sick, and prisoners. Disoonrsed (SieKeyero) ; 
ch. ivii. 17, note. Prolonged (irapeTuve). 
The word is found only here in the New 
TestamsiLV but is of frequent use in medical 
wntflrs 

Ver.'s.— »r« for they, A.V. and T.B. It 
is not obvious why St. Luke mentions the 
many lights. Some say to mark the 
solemnity of the first day of the week 
(Kuinoel) ; some, to remove all possible 
occasion of scandal as regards such midnight 
meetings (Bengel); some, to explain how 
the young man's fall was immediately per 
ceived (Meyer) ; others, to account for the 
young man's drowsiness, wliioh would be 
increased by the many lights, possibly 
making the room hot (Alford) ; for orna- 
ment (Olshausen). But possibly it is the 
mere mention by an eye-witness of a fact 
which struck liim. It is obvious that the 
room must have been lit for a night meeting 
—only perhaps there were more lights than 
usual. 

Ver. 9. — The for a, A. V. ; home down with 
for being fallen into a, A.V. ; discoursed yet 
longer for was long preaching, A.V. ; being 
borne down by hit sleep he for he sunk down 
with sleep, and, A.V. ; story for loft, A.V. In 
the window ; or, on the window-seat. The 
window was merely the opening in the wall, 
without any glass or shutter. Borne down ; 
KaTa<j>ep6ii€vos, the proper word in connection 
with sleep, either, as here, when sleep is the 
agent, or, followed by tts Sirmv, falling into 
sleep. Tet longer ; rather, as in the A.V., 
long ; i.e. longer Oian usual, somewhat or very 
long. 

Ver. 10. — Make ye no ado for trouble ttot 
yourselves, A.V. Fell on him, and embrac- 
ing him said | imitating the action of Elijah 
and Klisha (1 Kings xvii. 17 — 21 ; 2 Kings 
iv. 31). Make ye no ado (/i); BopvPeTcree). 
&6pvPos and eopv^iurBai are words especially 
used of the lamentations made for the dead. 
Thus when Jesus came to the house of 
Jairus, he found the multitude outside the 
house, eopii^oiiKvov, "making a tumult," 
<JL wailiuK and lamenting (Matt. ix. 23'^ 



This is still more clearly brought out in 
Mark v. 38, 39, "He beholdeth a tumult 
(66pvfiov'), and many weeping and wailing 
greatly. And ... he saith unto them. Why 
make ye a tumult (Bopvfi^taBe), and weep } 
The child is not dead, but sleepeth." In 
exactly the same way St. Paul here calmj 
the rising sobs and wailings of the peopli: 
standing round the body of Eutyohus, by 
saying, Vl^ Bopv^iUSe, " Do not wail over hin. 
as dead, for his life is in him." 

Ver. 11. — And when he was gone up for 
when he therefore was come up again, A. V. ; 
the bread for bread, A-Y. and T.E. ; had talked 
with them for talked, A.V. Had oroken the 
bread ; i.e. the bread already prepared, and 
spoken of in ver. 7 (where see note), but 
whioli had not yet been broken in conse- 
quence of Paul's long discourse. And 
eaten, reutrdfievot does not seem to mean 
" having eaten of the bread broken," for the 
word is never used of the sacramental eating 
of bread. That word is always (piyeiv (1 Cor. 
xi. 20, 24) or iffBUiv (1 Cor. xi. 26, 27, 28, 29). 
But ■yevtrdnei'os seems rather to be taken abso- 
lutely, as in oh. x. 10, " having eaten," mean- 
ing "havingpartaken"of the meaUtheogia^e, 
which followed the Eucharist. Talked with 
them {6iu\i)aai). Of familiar converse 
(Luke xxiv.' 14, 15 ; ch. xxiv. 26). Com- 
pare the use of 6iu\ia in 1 Cor. xv. 33 ; from 
whence, of course, comes the word " homily." 

Ver. 12. — Lad for young man, A.V. 

Ver. IS.— But for and, A.V. ; going for 
went, A.V. ; the ship for ship, A.V. ; let tail 
for and sailed, A.V. ; for for unto, A.V. ; 
intending for minding, A.V. ; by land for 
afoot, A. V. Assos. A seaport on the coast of 
Troas, twenty-four Eomnn miles from Troas. 
The town was built on a liigh and precipitous 
cliff. Luke does not tell us wliy on this occa- 
sion he W!<s separated from Paul. Had he 
appointed. The passive SiaTETa7jUEVos ^v is 
here used in an active sense, as in Died. 
Sic. (quoted by Kuinoel) and other Greek 
writers (see Steph., ' Thesnur.'). But some 
consider it as the middle voice (Meyer). 

Ver. 14. — Metformetivith, A..Y. Mitylene. 
The capital of the island of Lesbos, called by 
Horace "pulchra Mitylene" ('Epist.,' i. xi. 
17). The harbour on the north-eastern coast is 
described by Strabo as " spacious and deep, 
and sheltered by a breakwater " (xiii. 2). 

Ver. 15. — Sailing from for we sailed, A.V. ; 
we came for and came, A.V. ; following iat 
next, A.V. ; touched for arrived, A.V. ; and 
the day after for and tarried at Troqyllium ; 
and the next day, A.V. and T.E. Over 
against Chios. Their course would lie 
through the narrow strait between Chios on 
the west ami the mainland on the east. Samos. 
The large island opposite Ephesus. There 
they touched, or put in (irapePdXofiev). U 
I ^V<e clause in the T.B. is genuine, thsy did 



QH. XX. 1— 38.J 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



145 



Dot pass the night at Samos, but " made • 
shoit run fiom thence in the evening to 
Trogyllium " (Alford), " the rocky extremity 
of the ridge of Mycale, on the Ionian coast, 
between which and the southern extremity 
of Samoa the channel is barely a mile wide '' 
(' Speaker's (commentary '). We came to 
mUetiis. Anciently the chief city of Ionia, 
and a most powerful maritime and com- 
mercial place, about twenty-eight miles 
south of fjphesus; though in the time of 
Homer it was a Carian city. In St. Paul's 
time it was situated on the south-west coast 
of the Lattuian gulf, just opposite the mouth 
of the Meander on the east. But since his 
time the whole gulf of Latmos has been 
filled up with soil brought down by the river, 
so that Miletus is no longer on the seacoast, 
and the new mouth of the Meander is to the 
west instead of to the east of Miletus, which 
lies about eight miles inland (Lewin, vol. ii. 
p. 90; Smith's ' Diet, of Geog.'). Miletus 
was the seat of a bishopric in after times. 
As regards this visit to Miletus, some 
identify it with that mentioned in 2 Tim. iv. 
20. .Ajid it is certainly remarkable that so 
many of the same persons in connection with 
the same places are mentioned in both pas- 
sages and in the pastoral Bpistles generally. 
The identical persons are Paul, Timothy, 
Luke, Trophimus, Tychicua, and ApoUos 
(eh. XI. 4, 5, compared with 2 Tim. iv. 11, 
12, 20) ; and the identical places are Oorinth, 
Thessalonica, Trous, Ephesus, Miletus, and 
Crete. But the other circumstances do not 
agree well with the events of this journey, 
but seem to belong to a later period of St. 
Paul's life (see below, ver. 25, note). 

Ver. 16. — Past for by, A.V. ; that he might 
not have to for hecauae he would not, AJV. ; 
time for the time, A.V. ; was hastening for 
hasted, A.V. To spend time ; xpwTpi/S^iroi, 
found only here in the New Testament, but . 
used by Aristotle and others. It has rather ' 
the sense of wasting time, spending it need- 
lessly. The day of Pentecost. The time of 
vear is thus very distinctly marked. Paul 
was at Philippi at the time of the Pass- 
over, and hoped to reach Jerusalem by 
Pentecost. 

Ver. 17. — Called to him for called, A.V. 
The E. V. gives the force of the middle voice 
fiereKoKeffaTo. The elders of the Church ; 
viz. of Sphesus. These are manifestly the 
same as are called 4iritTK6Trous in ver. 28, 
"overseers," or bishops. The distinctive 
names and functions of Ohiurcb officers were 
not yet fixed ; and the apostles themselves, 
aided by degrees by such as Timothy and 
Titus, were what we now call bishops, ex- 
ercising oversight over the elders themselves 
aa well as over the whole flock (see 1 Tim. 
iii. 1). The diocesan episcopate came in 
gradually as the apostles died off, and the 
ACTS — II. 



necessity for s regular episcopate arose (see 
oh. vi. 1—6; xiv. 23, etc.). 

Ver. 18. — Te yourselves for ye, A.V. ; set 
foot in for came into, A.V. ; was for have 
been, A.V. ; all the time for at aU leaeons, 
A.V. 

Ver. 19. — Lowliness for humility, A.V. ; 
tears for many tears, A.V. and T.B. ; with 
trials for temptations, A.V. ; plots for lying 
in wait, A.V. Plots {iirifiov\a'is); comp. 
▼er. 3, and note. There is no special ac- 
count of Jewish plots iu St. Luke's narra- 
tive of St. Paul's sojourn at Ephesus. But 
from oh. xii. 9, 13, and probably 33, we 
may gather how hostile the unbelieving 
Jews were to him. 

Ver. 20. — How that I shrank not from de- 
claring unto you anything for and how I kept 
baole nothing, A.V. ; profitable for profitable 
unto you, A.V ; and teaching for but ham 
showed you and have taught, A.V. I shrank 
not from declaring, eto. The B.V. seems to 
construe the phrase as if it were 'ns 
iTreaTei\afn}v tov fi^ ai/ayyetAat vjiiv ov^ev 
rail (TviupepivTiov, which is a very laboured 
construction, of which the only advantage 
is that it gives exactly the same sense to 
6Tre<rTei\Afir]v as it has in ver, 27. But it is 
mnch simpler to take ovSev here as governed 
by vire(TTei\diiriv, and to take the verb in its 
very common sense of " keeping back," or 
"dissembling" (see the very similar pas- 
sages quoted by Kuinoel from Demosthenes, 
Plato, Socrates, etc., Oi'Sei' vitoffTei\dfiivos, 
HTlSiy wroaTelhafisiws, k.t.X.), and to take 
the TOV fji^ avayyei\aL iifuv kol SiBd^at as 
expressing what would Lave been tlie effect 
of such " keeping back," or " dissembling," 
the ju^ extending to both infinitives (Meyer), 
" so as not to declare and teach," eto. In 
ver. 27 the verb \nveaTsih.a.ii,i)v must be taken 
in the equally common sense of "holding 
back," or " shrinking," under the influence 
of fear, or indolence, or what not. The 
difference of rendering is required by the 
fact that here you have ohSlv {nriBTiO^ixriv, 
whereas in ver. 27 you have ovk wreo-Tci- 
\afi7i». In several of the classical passages 
quoted above, and others in Schleusner, 
uiroirT6AA€(r6ai is opposed to ira^^aiaQfaBtu, 
or, /iCTct ira^p-ti<jlas SioAex^^"'" (oomp. theie- 
fore for the sentiment, eh. ii. 29; iv. 13, 29. 
81; ii. 27; xiii. 46; xiv. 3; xxvia 31, 
eto.; Bph. vi. 19,20). 

Ver. 21. — To Jews and to Greeks for both 
to the Jews, and also to the Greeks, A.V. (see 
ch. xix. 10, 17). Eepentanoe, eto. The two 
cardinal points of gospel teaching, as they 
are the two neceosary qualities for every 
Christian man. "Eepeutance whereby we 
forsake sin, and faith whereby we steadfastly 
believe the promises of Glod." There is no 
ground for the remarks of Euinoel and 
others, that repeiUanee la tc lie referred 



146 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. zx. 1 — 38. 



ehiefly to the Gentiles, and faith to the 
Jews (see ch. il. 38 ; iii. 19 ; v. 31, etc. ; 
Mark i. 15, etc.). 

Ver. 22. — Bonnd in the spirit. Tiy 
TtviiiuiTi may either mean "in my spirit " or 
" by the Spirit," i.e. the Holy Ghoat. If the 
fuTmer, vrhich is the most probable sense 
(as rh Tlfiv/jLa rh Syiov follows in the next 
verse), is taken, the sense will be that St. 
Paul felt himself constrained to go to Jeru- 
salem. A sense of absolute necessity was 
upon him, and he did not feel himself a free 
agent to go anywliere else. If the latter 
sense be taken, the meaning will be that the 
Holy Ghost was constraining him to go to 
Jerusalem. 

Ver. 23. — Testifieth unto me for toitnesseth, 
A.V. and T.H. The Holy Ghost, speaking 
by the prophets in the different Church 
assemblies, as the apostle journeyed from 
city to city. We have one instance of such 
prophesying recorded in ch. xii. 10, 11. 
Tlie instances to which St. Paul here al- 
luded were not mentioned in Luke's brief 
narrative. 

Ver. 24 — IJioM not my life of any account, 
M dear for none of these things move me, 
neither count I my life dear, A.V. and T.K. ; 
may accomplish my course tor might finish my 
eour»e with joy, A.V. and T.K. j received for 
have received, A.V. ; from for of, A.V. I 
hold not my life, etc. It is inconceivable 
that St. Paul should have uttered, or St. 
Luke have reported, such an unintelligible 
sentence as that of the R.T., when it was 
perfectly easy to express the meaning clearly. 
Neither does the mention of liis life, in the 
first instance, tally with that of " bonds and 
afflictions." The T.E., which has con- 
siderable support, seems to be far preferable. 
The first clause, OvSevhs K6yovTroiovfiai,'nicSLU8 
quite naturally, " I take no account of any- 
thing ; " I value nothing, neither liberty, 
nor ease, nor comfort. I am ready to suffer 
the loss of all things, and I do count them as 
dung (Phil. iii. 7 — 9); and then he adds 
yet further, " Neither do I count my own 
life as precious, so as to accomplish my 
course," etc. This metaphor of running a 
race is a favourite one with St. Paul (1 Cor. 
ix. 24; Gal. v. 7; PhU. iii. 13, 14; 2 Tim. 
iv. 7). To testify the gospel of the grace of 
God. An invaluable epitome of the Chris- 
tian ministry. The essential feature of the 
gospel is its declaration of God's free grace 
to a guilty world, fori<iving sins, and im- 
puting ri}i;hteousness through faith in Jesus 
Christ. The distinctive work of the ministry 
is to declare that grace. So St. Paul de- 
scribes his own ministry, and the record of 
his ministry in the Acts and in his Epistles 
exactly agrees with this description. 

Ver. 25. — Went about for have none, A.V. ; 
kingdom for kingdom of God, A.V. and T.K. 



I know that ye all, etc. It is a very per- 
plexing question whether St. Paul in tliis 
statement spake with pr phetio, and there- 
fore Infallible, foreknowledge, cr whether 
he merely expressed the strong present con- 
viction of his own mind, that be should 
never return to Asia again. Tl e question 
is an important one, as the autlic nticity of 
the pastoral Epistles is in a great measure 
bound up with it. For, in the apparent 
failure of all hypotheses to bring the 
writing of them within the time of St. 
Luke's narrative, prior to St. Paul's jonrney 
to Rome, we are driven to the theory which 
places the writing of them, and the circum- 
stances to which they allude, to a time sub- 
sequent to St. Paul's imprisonment at Rome. 
But this involves the supposition that St. 
Paul returned to Ephesus after bis release 
from his Roman imprisonment (1 Tim, i 
3 ; iv. 14 ; 2 Tim. i. 15, 18 ; iv. 9—14, 19 ; 
Titus i. 5), and consequently that St. Paul's 
anticipation, that he was in Asia for the 
last time, was not realized. The question 
is well discussed by Alford, in the ' Prolego- 
mena to the Pastoral Epistles,' and in 
Paley's ' Horse Paulinse,' oh. xi. But it can 
hardly be said to be definitively settled (see 
above, note to ver. 15). Bengel thinks the 
explanation may be that most of those 
present were dead or dispersed when Paul 
returned some years later. 

Ver. 26. — Testify unto you for tak« you to 
record, A.V. The solemnity of this address 
is dependent upon the speaker's conviction 
that he was speaking to his hearers for the 
last time. Hi nee the force of the words, 
" this day " (eV tiJ o-jf^epoy riiieptf) ; " my last 
opportunity." I am pure, etc. (comp. Ezek. 
iii. 17—21 ; xxxiii. 2, 9 ; Heb. xiii. 17). Note 
the peril of hiding or watering God's tmth. 

Ver. 27. — Shrank not from declaring for 
have not shunned to declare, A.V. (see ver. 
' 20, note) ; the whole for aU the, A.V. Conn- 
Bel of God. His revealed will and purpose 
concerning man's salvation (oh. ii. 23; iv. 
28 ; Bph. i. 1 1). 

Ver. 2S.~Take heed for take heed there- 
fore, A.V. and T.R.; in for over, A.V. ; 
oishops for overseers, A.V. ; purchased for 
hath purchased, A.V. Take heed, etc. ; wpo- 
aix^-Ti cauToi!, peculiar to Luke (ch. v. 53 ; 
Luke xii. 1 ; xvii. 3 ; xxi. 34). Now follows 
the weighty charge of this great bishop to 
the clergy assembled at his visitation. 
With the true feeling of a chief pastor, he 
thinks of the whole flock, but deals with 
tliem chiefly through the under-shepherda. 
If he can awaken in these individually a 
deep concern for the souls committed to their 
charge, he will have done the best that can 
be done for the flock at large. The first 
step to such concern for the fl(ckis that 
each be thoroughly alive to the worth and 



OH. XX. 1 — 38.J 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



Ut 



the wants of his own soul. " Take heed 
unto yourselves." He that is careless about 
his own salvation will never be careful 
about the souls of others (comp. 1 Tim. iv. 
16). In the which the Holy Ghost, etc. 
'Ey $, no doubt, does not strictly contain 
the idea of " over which ; " liut the idea of 
authoritative oversight is contained in the 
word i-irlffKoiros, and therefore the rendering 
of the A.V., and of Alfonl's A.V. revised, 
is substantially correct. Perhaps the exact 
force of the iv ^ is " among which," like 
ill r!ij,iv (ch. ii. 29, and elsewhere). The 
oall and appointment to t)ie ministry is the 
special function of the Holy Ghost (John 
XX. 22, 23 ; oh. xii. 2 ; Ordination Service). 
To feed; woinaiveiv, the proper word for 
" tending " in relation to rh iroiij.viov,the flock, 
as TToiiiii', the pastor, or shepherd, is for him 
who so feeds the flock of Christ (see John 
X. 11, 16; xxi. 17; Heb. xiii. 20; 1 Pet. v. 
2, 3). St. Peter applies the titles of " Shep- 
herd and Bishop of souls" to the Lord 
Jesus (1 Pet. ii. 25). St. Paul does not use 
the metaphor elsewhere, except indirectly, 
and in a different aspect (1 Cor. ix. 7). The 
Church of God ; margin. Church of the Lord. 
There is, perhaps, no single passage in 
Scripture which lias caused more controversy 
and evoked more difference of opinion than 
this. The T.B. has toS 0fct/, but most 
uncials have roS Kvpiov. Kuinoel asserts 
that the reading toS Kufitov rests on the 
authority, besides that of the oldest manu- 
scripts, of the old versions, and of many of 
the most ancient Fathers, and says that it is 
undoubtedly the true reading. Meyer, too, 
thinks that the external evidence for rod 
Kvpiov is decisive, and that the internal evi- 
dence from the fact that iKKX-nirla toC 
Kvpiov occurs nowhere else in St. Paul's 
writings, is decisive also. But on the other 
hand, both the Codex Yaticanus (B) and 
the Codex Sinaiticus (x), the two oldest 
manuscripts, have 0eoS (0u). The Vulgate, 
too, and the Syriac have it ; and such early 
Fathers as Ignatius (in liis Epistle to the 
Ephesians) and TertuUian use the phrase, 
" the blood of God," which seems to have 
been derived from this passage. And 
Alford reasons powerfully in favour of 0eoS, 
dwelling upon the fact that the phrase 
€icK\i)o-(a Tov ®€ov occurs ten times in St. 
Paul's writings, that of ixKKiiaia tov Kvpiov 
not once. The chief authorities on each 
side of the question are : (1) in favour of 
TOV Kvplou, Lachmann, Tischendorf, Borne- 
mann, Lange, Olshausen, Davidson, Meyer, 
Hackett, as also Grotius, Griesbach (doubt- 
fully), Wetstein, Le Clerc, and others ; (2) 
in favour of tov @eov, Bengel, Mill, Whitby, 
Wolf, Scholz, Knapp, Alfurd, Wordsworth, 
etc., and the B.T. It should be added that 
the evidence for raS @eov has been much 



strengthened by the pnbliciition by Ti- 
schendorf, in 1863, of the Codex Sinaiticus, 
and in 1867 of the Codex Vaticanus, from his 
own collation. The result is thae tou 0eou 
seems to bo the true reading (see the firat 
of the two collects for the Ember weeks in 
the Book of Common Prayer). With rejjard 
to the difficulty that this reading seenjs to 
imply the unscriptural plirase, " the blood 
of God," and to savour of the Monophysite 
heresy, it is obvious to reply that there is 
a wide difference between the phrase as it 
stands and such a one as the direct " blond 
of Gud," which Athanasius and others ob- 
jected to. The mental insertion of "tlie 
Lord " or " Christ," as the subject of the 
verb "purchased," is very easy, the tran- 
sition from God the Falher to God incar- 
nate being one that might be made almost 
imperceptibly. Others (including the E.T.) 
take the reading of several good manu- 
scripts, Aia TOV oiixaTOs tov ISiov, and under- 
stand ToB ISiov to be an ellipse for tov 
ISiov viov, the phrase used in Rom. viii. 32 ; 
and so render it " which he purchased by 
the blood of his own Son." Oi ISioi, his 
own, is used without a substantive in John 
i. 11. This clause is added to enhance tlie 
preciousness of the flock, and the responsi- 
bility of those who have tlie oversight of it. 
Ver. 29. — I know for for I know this, 
A.V. and T.E. ; grievous wolves shall for 
shall grievous wolves, A.V. After my depart 
ing (a,(pi^iv, not avaKvaiv, as 2 Tim. iv. 6). 
The word, which is only found here in the 
New Testament, usually means "arrival" 
in classical Greek, but it also means, as hei e, 
" departure." It is not to be taken in the 
sense of " departure from this life," but 
refers to that separation, which he thought 
was for ever, which was about to take place. 
Grievous wolves ; still keeping up the meta- 
phor of the flock. The wolves denote the 
false teachers, principally Judaizers. See 
2 Tim. iii. 1—12, and 13, "But evil men 
and seducers shall wax worse and worse, 
deceiving, and being deceived." These came 
from Judaea. 

Ver. 30. — And from among for also of, 
A.V. ; the disciples for disciples, A.V. From 
among your own selves ; as opposed to tiie 
strangers from Judaea in the preceding verse. 
So 2 Tim. iv. 3, "The time will come 
when they will not endure sound doctrine ; 
but after their own lusts shall they heap to 
themselves teachers, having itching ears " 
(see, as instances, 2 Tim. ii. 17, 18; iv. 14). 
Speaking perverse things. So 2 Tim, iv. 4, 
" They shall turn away their ears from the 
truth, and shall be turned unto fables." To 
draw away the disciples, etc. ; i.e. to induce 
Christians to leave the communion and doc- 
trine of the Church, and join their heresy. 
The A. v., "to draw away disciples," 'ii 



Itf 



THE ACTS OF THB APOSTLES. 



[oh. IX. 1—38. 



manifestly wrong ; rotis iiainiThs are Christ's 
disciples. For the general statement, see 2 
Tim. iil. 6, " They which creep into houses, 
and lead captive silly women j " and comp. 
Rom. ivi. 17, 18, which, •ocording to 
Benan, was addressed to the Ephesians. 
For the rise of false teachera in Asia, see 

1 Tim. i. 3, 20 ; iv. 1—7 ; Ti. 20, 21 ; 2 Tim. 
i. 15 ; iii. ; iv. ; 1 John ii. 26 ; iv. 1, 3, 5 ; 
•nd througli the whole Epistle; Bev. ii 
1—7. 

Ver 81.^ Wherefore wateh ye for therefore 
viafch, A.V. ; remembering for and remember, 
A.V. ; admonish for warn, A.V. By the 
jpaoe of three years (tputUv). The word 
IB only found here in the New Testament ; 
but it is used in the LXX. of Isa. xv. 5 aud 

2 Chron. xixi. 16, and in classical Greek. 
We have hereone of the few chronological 
data in the Acts. Three years includes 
the whole of his sojourn at Ephesus as his 
head-quarters. There were first the three 
months during which he preached in the 
synagogue! ; then the two years which he 
spent in preaching in the school of Tyrannus, 
and which terminated with the incident of 
burning the books of magic (ch. xix. 8, 10, 
19). Then there was an indefinite time 
described in ch. xix. 22 as "for a while" 
'aiiris iircax^ XP"^""")) during which he wag 
jusy making plans, probably writing letters, 
fending off Timothy and Erastus to 
Macedonia, and perhaps making missiumiry 
expeditions in the neighbourhood. This 
may have occupied three or four months 
longer, and made up a term of two years and 
six, seven, or eight months, which would 
quite justify the term rpicTia. Every one. 
Each one separately, not merely the whole 
flock together. A weighty lesson for every 
ooe who has the cure of souls (comp. John 
r. 8). Night and day. Tlje night is men- 
tioned first, in accordance with Hebrew usage 
(6en. i. 5, 8, 13, etc.; comp. the word 
nxBritiepov in 2 Cor. xi. 25). St. Paul 
enforces the word "Watch," so apprnpriate 
to shepherds who watch over their flocks by 
aight (Luke ii. 8), by his own example of 
admonishing by night as well as day. 

Ver. 32. — Now fur now irethren, A.V. and 
T.E. ; the inheritance for an inheritance, A.V. 
and T.E. ; that for which, A.V. I commend 
you to God {TrapaTldcfiai ujuas). A most 
beautiful and significant phrase I The 
apostle is leaving for ever the flock which 
he had fed with such devoted care and loved 
with such a fervent love. He was leaving 
them with a strong impression of the 
dangers to which they would be exposeu. 
To whom could he entrust them ? to what 
loving hands could he consign them ? He 
gives them to God, to take watchful custody 
af them. He brings tliem to him in the 
■myer of faith. He commits to him the 



precious deposit (jrapaSiiKri), to be preserved 
safe unto the day of Christ. So the Savioui 
of the world, when dying on the cross, said, 
"Father, into thy hands I commend my 
spirit " (Luke xxiii. 46), and then trustingly 
gave up the ghost (see too eh. xiv. 23). No 
less beautiful are the words which follow : 
And to the word of his grace. He was think- 
ing of the grievous wolves, and of their penii- 
cious doctrine ; of the deceivers that should 
arise, and their soul-destroying heresies; 
and so he turns to the one source of safety 
" the Word of God's grace in Jesns Christ." 
If they are kept in that Word of truth, if 
they nourish their souls with that sincere 
milk, they will be safe. The gospel which 
he had preached woulJ be their safety unto 
the end. It would build them up on the 
one Foundation which never can be moved ; 
it would preserve them holy to take pos- 
session of the inheritance of the saints in 
light. The inheritance (tV KX-npovo/ilav) ; 
comp. Eph, i. 14, 18 ; v. 5 ; and i. 11, 4KKri- 
piidniief. In ch. xxvi. 18 it is xKripov (as 
in Col. i. 12), and the Tiyiaa-fiemi are 
further defined by the addition of mo-Tei 
T77 eij i/xe, "by the faith whicli is in me" 
(for the use of ayid^eaBai, comp. Heb. x. 10, 
14; 1 Cor. i. 2; vi. 11, etc.). 

Ver. 33. — Coveted for have coveted, A.V. 
Apparel. One of the items of an Oriental's 
treasure for the purpose of gifts (2 Kings 
V. 5, 22, 23, 26 ; Gen. xlv. 22 ; Mutt. vi. 
19, 20). St. Paul contrasts liis own ex- 
ample in not seeking such gifts with the 
conduct of the false aposlks who draw away 
disciples after them for gain (1 Tim. vi. 
5—10 ; Eom xvi. 17, 18 ; comp. 1 Cor. ix.). 

Ver. 34.— Fe for yea ye, A.V. and T.B.; 
ministered for have ministered, A.V. These 
hands (see 1 Cur. iv. 12, written from 
Ephesus a few months before). 

Ver. 35. — In all things I gave you an 
example for I have showed you all things, 
A.V. ; help for support, A.V. ; he himself for 
he, A.V. In aU things (iravra, for koto 
irtti/Ta, i.q. irdi/Ttos'); altogether, in all re- 
spects. Gave you an example. The common 
use of iiroSeliei/vnt is, as rendered in the 
A. v., "to show," "to te«ch," as in ch. 
ix. 16 ; Luko vi. 47 ; and repeatedly in the 
LXX. But perhaps its force here is 
equivalent to the phrase in John xiii. 15, 
iivoSefyiia eSwkci v/i'iv, "I have given you aii 
example that ye should do as I have doni 
to you," as the R.V. takes it. So labouring ; 
viz. as ye have seen me do. To help 
the weak. Meyer, following Bengel and 
others, understands this to mean "the 
weak in faith," like lurBeylis in 1 Cor. ix. 
22. They say that St. Paul's sell-denial in 
refusing the help he had a right to claim as 
an apostle, and supporting himself by hia 
labour, was s great argument to convince 



uu. XX. 1 — 38.] 



THE ACTS OF THK APOSTLES. 



148 



the weak in faith of his disinterestedness 
and of the truth of his gospel, and so he 
recommends the elders of the Church to fol- 
U>w his example. But the word here is acrSf- 
itoivTwy, and haBeveiv and h.iT65vela rnther 
suggest the idea of hodily weakness (Matt. 
XIV. 36 ; X. 8, etc. ; Luke v. 15, etc.), and the 
words of the Lord Jesus which follow suggest 
almsgiving to the needy. So that it is 
better to understand the word of the weakly 
and poor, those unable to work for them- 
selves. Doubtless St. Paul, ont of his scanty 
earnings, found something to give to the 
sick and needy. The sentiment in our text 
is thus exactly analogous to the precept in 
Eph. iv. 28. The very word there used, 
X^pci", recalls the ai X''P*> oStoi of ver. 84. 
To remember the words of the Lord Jesns. 
This is a solitary instance of a saying of our 
Lord's, not recorded in the Gospels, being 
referred to in Scripture. There are many 
alleged sayings of Christ recorded in apo- 
cryphal Gospels or in the writings of Fathers 
as Papias and others (Bouth, ' Beliq. Sac.,' L 
9, 10, 12), some of which maybe authentic ; 
but this alone is warranted by Scripture. 
How it came to St. Paul's knowledge, 
and that of the Epbesian elders to whom he 
seems to have taken for granted that it was 
familiar, it is impossible to say. Bat it 
seems likely that, in those very early days, 
some of the Lord's unwritten words may have 
floated in the memory of men, and been pre- 
served by word of mouth. Clement (1 Cor. 
ii) seeiua to refer to the saying when he writes 



in praise of the former character of the 
Corinthians, that they were then i^Siov 
8iS((vTes ti XanHvoiiTes. But he probably had 
it from the Acts of the Apostles, as had 
the author of the 'Apostol. Constitut.' (iv. 
8, 1). Similar apophthegms are quoted from 
heathen writers, as those cited by Kuinoel : 
AmpuaSai (cal StS6vai Kpeirrov % Xafi^dviiv 
(Artemidor., ' Onirocr.,' 4, 3) ; MaK\6y iarl 
Tov i\ev9e()ov rh SiSovai ots Set, ij Xafi^Aveiv 
ie^v 5€i (Arist., ' Nicom.,' 4, 1), " It is more 
becoming to a free man to give to whom he 
ought to give, than to receive from whom 
he ought to receive." 

Ver. 38. — The word which he had spoken 
for the wordi which he spake, A V. ; behold 
for see, A.V. ; brortght him on his way for 
aecompanied him, A.V. Brought him on 
his way ; Trpoeirefiwoy, as ch. xv. 3 ; xxi. 5. 
So too 1 Cor. xvi. 6, 11 ; 2 Cor. i. 16; Titua 
iii. 13; 3 John 6. But the rendering aooom- 
panied gives the meaning of the two last 
passages in the Acts better than that of the 
E.V. It is impossible to part with this 
most touching narrative, of such exquisite 
simpl'city and beauty, without a parting 
word of admiration and thankfulness to God 
for having preserved to his Church this 
record of apostolic wisdom and faithfulness 
on the one hand, and of loving devotion 
of the clergy to their great chief on the 
other. As long as the stones of the Church 
are bound together by such strong mortar, 
it can defy tl^ attacks of it* enemies &om 
without 



H0MILETIC3. 

Vers. 1 — 12. — "In labours more abundant." The rapid succession and the unbroken 
continuance of St. Paul's labours is truly marvellous. Rest or recreation seem to be 
things unknown to him. The tension of spirit caused by imminent and pressing 
danger seems not to have produced in him, as it does in most men, the need of breathing- 
time to recover their usual tone. His one idea of the use of life, and of the various facul- 
ties of mind and body with which his life was equipped, was appireutly to preach 
Jesus Christ to those who knew him not, and to confirm and establish those who knew 
him in the faith of the gospel. His energy never flagged and his courage never quailed. 
Most men's nerves would have been shaken by the terrible riot at Ephesus, when he had 
been " pressed out of measure, above strength," and had despaired of life. But no sooner 
was the uproar ceased than St. Paul started upon a new course of labour and danger. 
He went back to Philippi, where he had been before " shamefully entreated," stripped, 
scourged, cast into a dungeon, and made fast in the stocks ; to the other cities oi 
Macedonia, from whence he had been forced to escape by night for fear of the violence 
of the Jews ; to Corinth, where he had been dragged before the judgment-seat of Gallic, 
and where the bigotry of the Jews was ready to commence fresh plots against his life. 
And wherever he went, heart and mind, tongue and pen, were kept at fall stretch in 
preaching and teaching the things concerning Jesus Christ. Such activity of mind and 
body is indeed wonderful. We see the same untiring spirit, the same inexhaustible 
love for souls, in the midnight preaching at Troas. Other men, on the eve of a long 
journey, would have sought repose. Not so St. Paul. The comfort and stability of the 
Church at Troas, the growth in grace and knowledge of the disciples there, were his on« 



IBO THE ACTS OP THE APOaiLBS. [oh. mc 1—38, 



consideration. Here was an opportimity of preaching Christ to them, of advancing theii 
spiritual life, of imparting to them more of the fulness of the blessing of the gospel of 
Christ — an opportunity that might never recur, and so he would make the most of it. 
Hence the whole night given to prayer and preaching and breaking of bread, to com- 
munion with God and fellowship with his saints. Such an example ought to be 
studied by every minister of the Word of God, with a view to following the apostle as 
lie followed Christ. Indolence, self-indulgence, and indifference to the growth of the 
Church of God, must surely be put to shame in the presence of such abundance of 
labour. And every man's faith must be strengthened, and his love for Christ and for 
tiouls kindled into a flame, as he catches the warmth of the glowing love of this mighty 
worker inthe kingdom of God. 

Vers. 13 — 38. — Th« charge. The previous section brought before us St. Paul's 
labours as a missionary and an evangelist. The present section sets him before us as 
the Christian bishop, delivering his solemn charge to the presbyters of the Church. The 
qualities brought out in the charge are a transparent integrity of character; a noble 
ingenuousness, which enables him to speak of himself without a particle of vanity; and 
a resoluteness of purpose to do what is right, which no persuasion could weaken and 
Lo dangers turn aside. And then, besides, there is the most tender care for the Church 
of God. We see a mind full of anxious thought for the future of the Church which he 
loved, and loved doubly because he knew that Christ loved it and had died for it. We 
see a prescience and a wisdom which looked at things as they really were, and not as he 
wished them to be ; which took a true measure of cause and effect ; and did all that 
could be done to provide an antidote to the coming evils which he foresaw. Foreseeing 
the rise of heresies and false teachers, and the rapid growth of false doctrine, which 
■ (ould make havoc among the flock, he threw the whole vigour of his intellect, and the 
vhole warmth of his affection, into the address by which he hoped to raise up in the 
clergy before him an effectual barrier against the destruction which he feared. And 
certainly, if words have any effect ; if the eloquent speech of one whose life is stiU 
more eloquent than his tongue, can move the hearts and stii the spirits of other 
men, albeit they be men of inferior mould, to virtue and energy of holy action; 
if prayer and blessing, bursting forth from the full heart of a chosen vessel of God's 
grace, have any influence and bear any fruit ; — it mnst be that this eloquent charge, so 
simple, so forcible, so pathetic, so plainly stamped with the image of Paul's inner man, 
wrought powerfully upon the minds of the Ephesian presbyters. His words must have 
brought back the memory of his self-denying and superhuman labours ; and many a 
resolution must have sprung np in their hearts to live for Christ, and to be steadfast unto 
death in defence of his precious truth. And when they rose up from that parting 
prayer, with streaming eyes and sobbing voice, surely they must have gone back to the 
oversight of their flocks with a devotion such as they had never felt before. So great is 
the influence of burning words, glowing with love and enforced by example, when they 
proceed from one whose office and whose character alike command reverence and 
respect. God grant that his Church may ever be "ordered and guided by faithful and 
true pastors, through Jesus Christ onr Lord t " 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ven. 1 — 12.— Human life : lights and shadows. In these verses we are reminded of — 
L Thb boantt record of humaj; life. We have six verses of this valuable chronicle 
given to the unimportant incident of the accident which befell Eutychus (vers. 7 — 12), 
and only three to Paul's visit to Macedonia and Greece ! We do not understand why 
Luke should thus apportion his space, but the fact that he did so reminds us how often 
most interesting and instructive scenes, or even precious and influential periods, of our 
life are left unreported. We should have liked to read a full description, in copious 
detail, of the apostle's visit to the Churches of Macedonia, and especially of his inteiv 
view with tha Church at Corinth. But we are not gratified. Doubtless some of the 
Biost heroic deeds have been wrought in secret, and no tongue has told the story: 



OH. XX. 1-^38.J THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. l5i 

doubtless some of the most saiatly sufferings have been endured unseen by mortal aye, 
and no pen has described the scene. 

" If singing breath or echoing chord 
To every hidden pang were given. 
What endless melodies were poured, 
As sad as earth, as sweet as heaven I " 

Let it bo enough that one eye sees and one heart enters into our struggles and oiu 
sorrows, and that " our record is on high." 

IL The prioblessness of Chkistian fellowship. " After the uproar was ceased, 
Paul called unto him the disciples, and embraced them " (ver. 1). After the storm was 
over, it was an intense relief to pour out their agitated hearts in mutual sympathy, con- 
gratulation, devotion. We know (2 Cor. ii. 13) that Paul found no rest in his spirit 
because he found not Titus his brother at Troas, and accordingly went on to Macedonia 
to seek him, and that he was greatly comforted by finding hira there (2 Cor. vii. 6, 7). 
"We read of the friends who "accompanied him into Asia" (ver. 4), and throughout we 
feel how precious beyond all reckoning was the sympathy and succour which came to 
the wearied and buffeted apostle from true human hearts. Loyal Christian fellowship 
is one of those beneficent gifts from God which we should count among our chief 
treasures, for which we should render heartiest thanksgiving ; it is also one of those ways 
in which we can render invaluable service to faithful men, and thus an appreciated 
service to Christ, the Lord. 

IIL The penalty of unflinchino FAiTHFtiLNEsa. When Paul was about to return 
to Sjrria, he found the enmity of his countrymen ready to waylay him. " The Jews 
laid wait for him" (ver. 3). He could not but speak as Christ, by his Spirit, taught 
him ; and his preaching became more clear and distinct as to the non-necessity of the Law 
of Moses ; his doctrine became less exclusive, more liberal, i.e. increasinL;ly repugnant 
to the narrow-minded Jews ; and the fierceness of their hostility found vent in plots 
against his life. Whoso will follow Christ in " bearing witness to the truth " must be 
ready to " take up his cross and follow him" along the path of the persecuted. To be 
quite true to our convictions, to be fearlessly faithful to the Lord who reveals to us his 
will, is to bear the penalty of the dislike, the hatred, the intrii;ues of men. 

IV. The ovbrbulino peovidbncb of God. His enemies schemed, but God thwarted 
their schemes ; he " turned aside," and their murderous designs were defeated. Christ had 
more work for bim to do, and the uplifted hand of the enemy must be arrested. 

"Though destruction walk around tu, 
Though the arrows past us fly. 
Angel-guards from thee surround na, 
We are safe, if thou art nigh." 

V. The overflow of saored zeal. Paul desired to use his opportunity at Troas, 
and " on the first day of the week " he preached, " ready to depart on the morrow " 
(ver. 7). In the " multitude of his thoughts within him," or conscious that he was soon 
U) leave and feeling that he might never return to them, disregarding the lateness of the 
hour and the condition of the chamber, he stUl preached on. He " continued his speech 
until midnight." That which would be unwise as a rule is allowable as an exception. If 
" anger hath a privilege," much more so has zeal. We admire the man whose fulness of 
sottl makes him oblivious of all attendant circumstances. It is well to have a capacity 
for devotedness which will sometimes lift us far above the level of ordinary moods, and 
make us forget everything but our subject and our cause, or rather everything but the 
truth of God and the cause and kingdom of Jesus Christ. — 0. 

Vers. 17, 20, 27, 31, 33 — 35. — Paul at Miletus : the review which gratifies. It has 
been truly said that our whole life is divisible into the past and the future. The present 
is a mere point which separates the two. And there is a certain time which must 
come, if it have not already arrived, when, instead of finding our satisfaction iu looking 
forward to the earthly good which we are to partake of, we shall seek our comfort and our 
joy iu looking back on the path we have trodden and the results we have achieved. Ill 
indeed will it be for those who will then have no future for which to hope^ and n<^ [last 



t52 l^HE ACTS OF THE APOSTLEa [ch. xi, 1— Sft 

which they can survey with grateful pleasure. It was well with Paul, for ^^hen he had tc 
turn his eye backward on a ministry which had been fulfilled, he could regard it with pure 
and devout gratification. That we may stand in that enviable position in which he 
now stood, we must be able to remember — 

I. LowLT-MiNDBD coNSEOEATioN TO THE BBBVIOB OP GoD. " From tke first day that 
[ came in into Asia ... I have been with you at all seasons, serving the Lord with all 
Immility of mind" (vers. 18, 19). The man who spends his days in spiritual pride, or 
godless unconcern, or arrogant infidelity, will, if not in the later years of this life, from 
the other side of the grave, look back on his earthly course with bitterest shame, with 
fearful pangs of remorse. He who in old age can survey an entire life yielded, with a 
deep sense of dependence and obligation, to the living God and the loving Saviour will 
have a cheering ray to light up his shaded path. Well may youthlul lips take up the 
strain— 

'Twill please us to look back to itm 
That our whole lives were thine." 

n. FiDBLiTT IN CUB SPECIAL SPHERE. PauI could feel that, as k minister Of Jesus 
Christ, he had done his work thoroughly, conscientiously, faithfully, as in the eye of 
Christ himself. " I kept back nothing, ... I have taught you publicly, and from 
house to house" (ver. 20); "I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel 
of Gud " (ver. 27) ; "I ceased not to warn every one . . . with tears " (ver. 31). He 
had thrown the utmost energy of his soul into his work; he had wrought good " with 
both hands earnestly." Whatever our vocation may be, it will be a sorry thing to have 
to recall to our memory duties hardly and punctiliously discharged, just gone through 
decently and creditably ; still worse to have to remember duty left undone or miserably 
mismanaged. Pleasant and gratifying, on the other hand, to feel that we went to our 
work with agile step and eager spirit, went through it with conscientious care, and 
threw into it our utmost strength. Heartiness and zest to-day mean a harvest oi 
refieshing memories for to-morrow. 

III. Endubance of tbial. Paul reflected that he had served the Lord " with many 
tears and temptations [trials] " (ver. 19). These trials unto tears were hard to bear 
patiently at the hour of endurance, but it was a comfort and satisfaction to his spirit 
afterwards to think that they had never withdrawn him from his confidence in Christ 
or from his post of active service. The secure and strong position of manhood is all the 
more satisfactory for the yoke that was borne in youth ; the quietude of age is the more 
acceptable and enjoyable for the struggle or burden of middle life ; the rest and rejoicing 
of the future will be the sweeter and the keener for the toils and the troubles of this 
present time. The evils that have been left behind, when taken meekly and acquiesced 
in nobly, materially enhance the blessedness of the hour of freedom and felicity. 

IV. The diligence that means honesty and that includes beneficence. (Vers. 
33 — 35.) It is not only that ( I) we should pay the debts which we have formally and 
deliberately incurred ; but that (2) in a world where we are daily receiving the benefit ol 
the toils aiid sufferings of past ages and of our contemporaries, we are bound, in all 
honesty, to do something in return — something by which our fellows and, if possible, 
the future shall be enriched ; (3) where self-support is not positively demanded, it may 
be wisely rendered, in order (as with Paul) that there may be no reason for injurious 
suspicion ; and (4) we should strive to gain enough that we may spare something for 
the strengthless and dependent — so labouring that we " may support the weak," and 
know the greater blessedness of givmg, according to the Word of our Lord (ver. 36 • 
see Eph. iv. 28 ; Heb. xUi. 16).— 0. 

Ver. 21. — Paul at Miletus; tJie substance of Christian doctrine. Surely we have 
here an excellent summary of distinctive Christian doctrine. These two thincfs are 
the essentials of Christian truth. Without repentance there can be no living faith j 
without faith there can be no real spiritual life ; with both of these, a man is a recog- 
nized citizen of the kingdom of God, an inheritor of eternal life. There must be— 

I. The tuenino of the heakt and ufk unto God. This is what constitutes 
repentance. Repentance may include, but is not constituted by : 1. Strong feelings- 
of sorrow and shame in view of past sin. It is possible and even commcn to prodnoe 



o«.«i,l— 38.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 153 

very pungent and powerful feelings by means of energetic oratory ; but these, if they are 
not real, profound convictions, will be temporary, if not even momentary ; they are not 
the essential thing. Eepentance will, at some time, include strong feeling of abhorrence 
of sin, but it may not commence with vivid and convulsive emotions, and is not to be 
identified with these. 2. Change of outward behaviour. It is indeed true that, when 
really penitent, the idolater will abandon his idolatry, the thief his dishonesty, the 
drunkard his intemperance, the liar his falsehoods, the truculent man his violence, etc. ; 
but it must be remembered that men sometimes change their habits for other reasons 
than those of religious conviction. Amendment in outward behaviour, valuable and 
desirable as it is, docs not constitute " repentance unto God ; " it has also to be considered 
that there may be, and often is, the truest repentance where there is no alteration of 
conduct observable by man. The essence of repentance is the turning of the heart 
to God, and therefore of the life; it is that "change of mind" which consists in the 
soul turning from forgetfulness of God to thoughtfuhiess about him, from indifference 
to Ub claims to earnest consideration of them, from unwillingness to own his sway 
to a perfect readiness to yield everything to him, from the guilty retention of our 
powers for ourselves to • cheerful surrender of ourselves and our days to the living 
God, our Father and our Redeemer. Thence will follow all the compunction for sin 
and all the change of conduct which the past career ot the sonl will demana. Of this 
" Greek and Jew " alike have need : the Greek (the Gentile) has need to ch.mge his 
thought of God, and the Jew his also ; whether from supei»liiion,or from indifference, 
or from formality, all have to come into a different relation to God — that of humble 
subjection to his will and surrender to his service. 

II. The acceptance op Jesus Christ as Lord and Savioub. "And faith 
toward our Lord Jesus Christ." The faith of which Paul testified to Greek and Jew 
was, we are sure, a living power. It was not a mere passive assent to a form of sound 
words. It was more than an intellectual acceptance of certain propositions. It was 
the cordial, hearty acceptance by the soul of a Divine Saviour and Lord ; it was the 
sonl in all its need welcoming a Redeemer in all his strength to save and bless. It 
meant that acceptance of Jesus Christ in which the soul, conscious of sin and condem- 
nation, flees to him as to the Eock in which it can hide ; in which the heart, recognizing 
its rightful Lord, goes to him in glad self-surrender, and yields itself to him that he 
may (1) guide it in his own paths, (2) use it for his own glory, and (3) conduct it to 
his own kingdom. — 0. 

Vers. 22 — 32. — Paul at Miletus : the forecast which exalts. Paul had received 
intimations " in every city" (ver. 23) that "bonds and afflictions" were in store foi 
him ; he looked forward with absolute certainty to personal suffering of some kind ; but 
this assurance was so far from daunting or depressing him that his spirit rose on strong 
and eager wing to the full height of such apostolic opportunity (Matt. v. 10 — 12). 
The anticipated future, with its bonds and its sufferings and possibly death itself, raised 
the soul of the man, exalted him ; and he stands before us in the noblest stature to 
which even he ever attained. Loftier words never came from human lips than these 
(vers. 22 — 24). His spiritual exaltation included — 

I. Chbbeful anticipatios of personal BUFFEBma. "I go bound in the spirit," 
etc. He felt as one who already wore the bonds and was happy in the bondage. He 
was already "the prisoner of the Lord," and was proud thus to esteem himself. 
So far from casting about to see whether there was any open door of escape, he gladly 
went forth to meet the trials that were in front. 

II. Sublime indifference to bodily estate. " None of these things move me " 
(ver. 24). He was not affected by considerations which are everything to most men ; 
they did not make him wince ; he could be poor or rich, hungry or full, confined or 
at liberty, — it mattered not to him so long as he was following and serving Christ. And 
here is the explanation of his nobility; it sprang from — 

III. Absorption in the Savioue's work. " Neither count I my life dear unto 
myself, so that I might finish," etc. (ver. 24). " To testify the gospel of the grace of 
God " — this was the commanding, all-controlling, all-consuming passion of his soul. It 
impressed everything else into the service ; it burnt up everything that stood in the way. 
It was the dominating force under which every other power ranged itself obediently. 



164 THE ACTS OF TUE APOSTLES. [oh. xx. 1— 3S 

rV. CoNTiDlNO PBATEE. " I Commend you to God," etc. (ver. 32). Lea'dng thesa 
converts and, as he surely believed (ver. 25), to see their face no more, he left them 
in the hands of God ; he trustfully committed them to almighty love, to Divine wisdom, 
to the " faithful Creator." A blessed thing it is for the departing minister, for the 
dying parent, to leave his people or his family to the tender care of him who will matf 
good the kindest and fullest of his promises. 

V. Exalted hope. " An inheritnnce among all them which are sanctified " (ver. 32). 
Paul continually looked forward to the time when he and his converts should meet in 
the heavenly kingdom ; this helped to sustain him under persecution and disappoint- 
ment. He turned from the shame which was put upon him by man to the glory 
which waited to be revealed, and his heart was more than satisfied. This should be 
the result of our contemplation of the future ; it should lead to inward exaltation. 
It should lead to (1) such devotedness to the work we are doing for our Master that 
we shall rise above the fear of man, and even welcome the losses we endure for Christ's 
sake ; (2) the devout committing of ourselves and of our charge to the love and 
faithfulness of him who is unfailingly gracious and true ; (3) a sustaining, animating 
hope, in whose blessed radiance all earthly experiences are lighted up. But in order 
to this there is presupposed in us what there was in Paul (4) an entire surrender 
of ourselves to the Lord Jesus Christ himself. — 0. 

Vers. 28 — 31. — Paul at Miletus : the prospect which pains. Paul, pursuing his path 
of self-sacrificing devotion, going on to he knew not what dangers ahead, looking a 
violent death in the face, was calm, tranquil, even joyful. But the apostle, looking 
forward to a distracted and injured Church, torn by false doctrine, laid waste by sinful 
men, was grieved at heart, and he uses the language of solemn adjuration and entreaty. 

L Human appbehbnsion. We often go forward with painful apprehension that 
some ill is about to befall us ; therefore with hesitating step, with trembling heart. 

1. It has been that men had an intimation from God that evil was in store for them. 
Jhis was not uncommon in Old Testament times, when the purpose of God was 
frequently revealed. It was the case with Paul now ; it was revealed to him that dark 
days were ahead in the experience of the Church at Ephesus. 2. It may be the 
action of individual insight. By the use of a keen and penetrating judgment, a man 
can often perceive that events are leading up to a disaster. 3. It may be a simple 
and sound conclusion from the common heritage of man. It is certain that dark 
shadows must be across the path we tread, and that we shall be entering them before 
long. 

II. The special anxiety op the Christian pastor. Paul apprehended: 1. Attack 
fiom without : " Grievous wolves entering in . . . not sparing the flock " (ver. 29). 

2. Mischief from within : " Of your own selves shall men arise," etc. (ver. 30). This 
is what the Church of Christ has now to fear: the attacks of infidelity, the invitation 
to immorality, from without ; and the subtler and more perilous dangers of spiritual 
decline, of the decay of faith, of injurious doctrines, of the breath of worldliness, within. 

III. The attitude of the responsible. (Vers. 28 — 31.) Paul solemnly charged 
these elders, as those to whose care was committed the Church of God — that sacred 
body which the Lord had redeemed by his own blood — to do these three things. 

1. To keep diligently their own hearts : " Take heed to yourselves " (see Prov. iv. 23). 

2. To watch carefully the spirit and course of their people : " And to all the flock." 

3. To sustain the life of the members by providing spiritual nourishment: "Feed 
the Church of God." If we would do what the Divine Head of the Church demands 
of us, and if we would follow in the footsteps of the most devoted of his servants (see 
ver. 31), we must (1) cultivate a deep sense of our responsibility ; (2) exercise unre- 
mitting vigilance over ourselves and onr charge; (3) supply that kind and measure of 
sacred truth which is fitted to strengthen and to purify those whom we undertake 
to teach. — 0. 

Ver. 35. — Paul at Miletus ; the greater blessedness. We may well be thankful that 
this one word of the Lord Jesus, unrecorded in the " fourfold biography," has been 
preserved to us. It may be said to be Divine indeed. It gives the heavenly aspect of 
human life. It is the exact and perfect contravention of that which is low, worldly, 



OH, xn. 1—38.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 168 

eviL It breathes the air of the upper kingdom. It puts into language the very spirit 
of Jesus Christ. It is the life of the Saviour in a sentence. To receive is qu'te on a 
low leveL Any one and anything can do that ; and the further we go down in the 
scale, the more we find recipiency common and supreme. The selfish man, the spoiled 
child, the ravenous animal, — these are remarkable for receiving. And although it 
may be said that there are truths which only the educated and inspired mind can 
receive, that there are inducements which only noble souls can receive, yet the act 
of receiving is one which is common to lower natures, and is one which ordinarily 
requires only the humbler, if not indeed the baser, faculties. To give is on the higher 
level ; for — 

I. It IB E8BENTIALLT DiviNB. God livos to blcss his universe. His Name is Love ; 
in otht-r words, that which is his distinguishing characteristic, underlying, inter- 
penetrating, crowning all others, is his disposition to bless, his Divine habit of giving. 
He then most truly expresses his own nature, reveals his es.sential spirit, when he is 
giving light, love, truth, joy, life, unto his children. When we give forth of ourselves 
to others, we are living the life which is intrinsically Divine. 

II. -It is Christ-likk. He "went about doing good." He lived to enlighten, to 
comfort, to bestow, to redeem. It was little indeed that he received ; it was simply 
everything that he gave to mankind. 

III. It 18 ANGELIC. " Are they not all ministering spirits ? " 

IV. It is heeoio. By living to expend ourselves for others, we take our stand witi 
the best and noblest of our race. As the world grows wiser it has a diminishing regard 
tor those " great " men who signalized their career by splendid surrotindings, or by 
brilliant exploits, or by displays of muscular or intellectual strength ; it is learning to 
reserve its admiration and its honour for those who generously spent their faculties and 
iheir possessions on behalf of others. These are our heroes and our heroines now; 
and they will be so more and more. If we would take our place — though it be a 
immble one — with the best and worthiest of oui kind, we must be giving rather than 
receiving. 

Y. It is hitman, in the higher sense of the word. It may be human, cu sin has 
unmade man, to be coveting, grasping, enjoying. But it is human, as Ood first made 
man, and as Jesus Christ is renewing him, to think of others, to care for others, to 
strive and suflTer for others, to give freely and self-denyingly to those who are in need. 

VI. It is elevating. To be constantly receiving is to be in danger of becoming 
selfish, of making our own poor self the central object of regard, of depending on con- 
tinually fresh supplies for satisfaction; in a word, of moral and spiritual degeneracy. 
But to be giving — to be spending time, thought, sympathy, strength, money, on 
behalf of others, — is to be sowing in the soil of our souls the seeds of all that is sweetest 
and noblest ; is to be building up in ourselves a character which our Divine Lord will 
delight to look upon. To receive is to be superficially and momentarily happy ; to give 
is to be inwardly and abidingly blessed. It is far more blessed to ^ve than to receive. 

VIL Its eecompense is in the eteenal fdtdbk. (See Matt. xxv. 31 — i6.)— 0. 

Vers. 1 — 16. — Scenes hy the way. I. Pugitivb beeviob. " When they persecute you 
in one city, flee into another," had said the Lord. But not as a hireling who sees the 
wolf coming ; rather as a brave warrior who retreats fighting. The brave retreat may 
reflect more honour than the hopeless prolongation of warfare. We must know when 
to give way. There is a " wise passiveness " and a " masterly inactivity." If we can 
but gain our Christian point, we should suffer no scruple of vanity to stand in our way. 
And how much good may be done in this fugitive way 1 The runner drops the seed as 
he goes. The greatest works have been done for God and the world by sufferers and 
in the midst of suffering. In the world the faithful apostle has tribulation, but peace 
in ids heart ; and it distils from his lips upon his brethren as he goes. Perfect ease is 
not to be coveted by the true servant of Christ. The pulpit is not an easy-chair. Men 
are goaded to their best by pain. They are perfected for teaching in the school of 
suffering. Sympathy and love are deepened by common experiences. Courage is truly 
learned ; they that kill the body are not feared, but only they that Injure the soul. 

II. liOViNG fellowship OF THE SAINTS. (Vers. 7 — 16.) 1. Exhibited in the feast ^ 
love arid the common hearing of the Word. The one prepares for the other ; togethei 



15« THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. ii. i— ac 

[hoy explain each other and enrich each other. Here is the first trace of the Sunday 
jbaervance in the history of the Church. Christian associiuions are engrafted upon old 
customs. 2. At disturbed by grief, and restored. Eutyohus sleeps during the 
[jreaching, and falls down. He was taken up dead, or " for dead," as some expositors 
would interpret. Paul falls upon him, like Elisha in the case of the Shunammite's son 
(2 Kings iv. 34), and Elijah with the widow's son at Sarepta (1 Kings xvii. 21) ; so 
that by vital warmth he may restore him to life. This striking coincidence of death in 
the midst of life, of life in the midst of death, must have powerfully reminded the 
ilisciples of him who is the Resurrection and the Life, of his promise ; and so must 
have strengthened faith, and drawn the bonds of love closer together. " He that 
brought him back is hera." Not small was the consolation of the brethren as the young 
man was restored. 

IIL An iMPRESsrvB scene. 1. The apostle. Tie is on his last mission journey. He 
" works while it is day ; " preaching the Woni with power ; sealing his testimony with 
miracle, pursuing with constancy the end set before him. 2. The sleeper. A warning 
against weakness and idleness. " I say unto all, Watch I " " The spirit is willing, the 
flesh is weak." 3. The unsleeping Divine watchfulness and providence. " We have a 
God who helps, and the Lord God who saves from death." 4. The energy of the 
'ipostolic personality. He goes down in comjjassionate pity, falls upon Eutychus with 
earnest prayer, embraces him with urgent love. 5. The hush of the Divine presence. 
" Make no noise I" A lesson here for the chamber of the dead. God is here; his 
" finger touched him and he slept." Bow before his power and decree; onllect the 
heart from distraction, in recollection of its consolations. " They are not dead, but 
sleep," may be said of our Christian friends. Amidst such humble and resigned silence 
angels pass through the house, with errands of ministry. — J. 

Vers. 17 — 38. — Paul's farewell to the elders of Ephesus. I. The maik fbatuees 
OF THE EVANQBLICAL PREACHER. (Vers. 17 — 21.) 1. The Spirit and conduct of the 
preacher himself; for this is inseparable from the preaching (vers. 18 — 20). He hud 
lived with his ^iick. His life had leen devoted to their service. He had entered the 
sphere of their life as the loving sharer in their joys and sorrows. He had presented 
to them a pattern of humility. He had borne them on his heart. He had been like a 
sower going forth weeping, to bear the precious seed. The life of the true pastor is 
a life of many tears — tears of self-doubt and weakness ; tears of compassion and sorrow 
over others, hke those of Jeremiah over Jerusalem's fall, of Jesus over her deeper fall. 
But this sowing of tears prepares for a harvest of joy. Suggestive was the word of 
Monica, Augustine's mother, " The child of so many tears cannot be lost." Good is 
verbal preaching; better the preaching of the life; and, perhaps, most impressive of all, 
the preaching of suffering and self-sacrifice for the truth. 2. Thematter of his preaching. 
Repentance ; a vmiversal necessity. It includes knowledge of sin ; remorse ; desire for 
salvation. Repentance has been described as a ladder of sorrow by which we descend into 
the depths of the heart. Faith : this, on the other hand, the celestial ladder, by which 
we rise to God and to eternity. It includes the knowledge of a Saviour ; joy in the 
reception of him ; and firm confidence in his reconciling, sanctifying, and blessing grace. 
3. The self-devotion of tlie preacher. (Vers. 22 — 35.) He should be cast in the heroic 
mould — thiit of the hero of the cross. The voice of the Almighty, "Upward and 
onward I " sounds in his ears evermore. He must be ready at any moment to say 
" Good-bye " to dearest friends, and uproot himself from fondest associations. Past 
battles have only trained his faith and courage for greater struggles. This heroic word — 

" Theirs not to make reply ; 
Theirs but to do or die 

—was essentially the motto of the apostle. He must fulfil himself — cannot rest till he 
has striven to the end in the " noble contest," finished the race, attained the goal. In 
the heat of coming storm and darkness kindles the core of light; the Divine love 
has given all for him, and for it he will give all in return. Extremes meet in this 
suffering but triumphant man ; bound by the irresistible command of his Lord, yet free 
b> the joyous obedience of love. 
IL ExHOBTATiDH AND CONFIRMATION. 1. Exhortation to faitl^ulneu. They are 



CH.XI. 1— 38.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 157 

solemnly adjured to this by the recollection of his own faithfulness to them. He is 
clear from responsibility in their regard ; for he has not shunned to declare to them " the 
whole counsel of God." His ministry has been, not merely general, but particular, indi- 
vidual — to each man's heart and conscience. He has discharged liimself of his burden ; 
they must bear their own. To whom much has been given, of them much will be 
required. The duty of the faithful shepherd comprises two things — the feeding and 
tendance of the sheep, and the defence of the flock against its foes. The great word is 
" Watch " — over self, the spirit, teaching, and conversation ; uver the flock, — its Divine 
constitution does not exempt it from human weakness ; and against the wolves, who 
would glide in, under false clothing, to ravage and devour. 2. Solemn commendatory 
prayer. " I commend you to God 1 " — the best conclusion of every sermon, of every 
period of Christian labour. Prayer is the expression of evangelical love ; it throws the 
arms of care and affection around the flock when one's own time of personal labour is 
past. It is the expression of lowliness : after all we have done, the issue mu.'.t be left 
to God. He alone can turn the feeble service into a means of power, he alone give 
the increase to human sowing and watering. It is the expression of faith : there need 
be no fear on the part of the under-shepherd in leaving the flock in the hands of the 
almighty Shepherd himself. " God and the Word of his grace : " in these lies endless 
power. God and truth : in times of persecution or of unsettled belief, these forces go 
on upbuilding, reclaiming, converting, finishing, and fitting souls for eternal glory. We 
need not be anxious about the " reconstruction of theology ; " God is ever reconstructing 
the new out of the ojd ; and fulfilling himself in many ways. Our constructions 
break ; but in him is the unbroken continuity of life itself 3. Farewell reminder. 
Of his own example, and of all the lessons condensed into it. ' He had not been a 
seeker of personal gain ; not of " theirs, but of them " (2 Cor. xii. 14). A mirror for all 
pastors. Happy for them if they can practically prove their disinterestedness by sup- 
porting themselves independently of the "altar" (1 Cor. ix. 13). But this may not 
always be desirable. At least they can show that they do not "preach to live" so 
much as " live to preach." To give is more blessed than to receive. God is the 
eternal Giver, forth-pouring himself in natural and spiritual bounty evermore. And 
the nearer we come to him, the happier we are. The more we take from God, tlie more 
we have to give ; and again, the more we give, the more we have. To impart is to 
obtain release from self, from self-seeldnfr, from the burden of superfluity. It is to 
reap love and thanks, provided always that in imparting anything we truly impart 
ourselves. 4. The parting scene. It is of mingled joy and sorrow. There is the bitter- 
ness of orphanage and desolation of John xvi. IG ; but the brightness of the hoped-for 
reunion. Reproaches of con.science at missed opportunities, but yet the sense that " now 
is the accepted time and the day of salvation." The pain of disruption ; but the con- 
sciousness of abiding in Christ, and of the final recovery of all we have loved and lost — 
ill him.— J. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — Apostolic supervision of Church life. Prom Ephesus through Macedonia, 
to Greece, returning through Macedonia by way of Philippi to Troas. 

L The cautious vigilance of Paul in superintending the rising spiritual life of the 
infant Churches ; a lesson in faithfulness and devotion to the interests of fellow-Chris- 
tians, as well as in allegiance to Christ. It was not enough that the Churches had the 
truth. It was endangered by many diCficullies and surrounding obstructive influences, 
both from Jews and heathen. 

II. The self-sacrifice involved in such journeys, not only in the great toil, but in 
danger to life. 

III. The iNCREAsma influence of the apostle seen in his gathering so many round 
him as his fellow-travellers and I'el low-labourers, a testimony to the hold which his 
teaching had upon the Churches, showing that the view of Christianity given in the 
Pauline Epistles, written about this time, was a fair representation of the current belief 
of the early Gentile Clnirch. Nor could it have been widely diflerent from that taught 
by the Jewish leaders ; otherwise Paul could not have declared that he taught " the 
whole counsel of God." — R. 

VeiB. 7 — 12. — A legacy of Divine testimony. The position of Trms bucIi th«t any 



158 IHB ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ch. xx. 1— 38. 

startling event would spread its influence East and West — to Asia and Europe. Paul 
leaving the scenes of his labours, never more to be seen In them. Some news of con. 
tentions in Corinth might disturb the Churches. Asiatic believers would especially 
need every support. The occasion very solemn. Eucharistic service. Paul's long 
discourse, interspersed probably with questions and answers. Many last words to be said. 
Enemies doubted the nature of Christian meetings. Many lights and open windows 
disproved the calumnies. Upper chamber, three stories from the ground; not large, and 
betokening the lowly character of the assembly. " Not many mighty, noble, and rich." 
Possibly even in Troas some popular opposition made such a place necessary. 

I. A great sign of Divine powbe accompanying Paul's preaching. Had he not been 
approved of God, he could not have wrought such a miracle. It spoke : 1. To the 
world, testifying to the nearness of the kingdom of God ; to the merciful and restoring 
grace of the gospel, which came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them. 2. To the 
Church ; stamping Pauline teaching with authority ; lifting up the courage and hope of 
disciples. The same Divine power ever with the Church always to the end. 

II. A SOLEMN ASSOCIATION with a great and important occasion. Eutychus could 
scarcely be without blame. The people would never forget that it was the Lord's 
Supper, and that those who partake in such a service should watch against human 
infirmities. The wonderful recovery of the lad seemed to shed a new liaht on the 
whole service. What glorious powur was set forth in that little society 1 They were 
comforted for Eutychus and for themselves and for the whole Church. Jesus is life 
from the dead. — B. 

Vers. 13 — 16. — Troas to Miletus. A glimpse into the activity of Paul's life. 

I. His extraordinary energy. Walking probably some twenty miles to Assos to 
meet the vessel. His independence of character. Although a man of strong afiections, 
he loved to be alone sometimes. His purposes were maturely formed and resolutely 
carried out. 

II. His siiiritual life was sustained by fellowship with brethren. The long 
voyages made in those days in sailing-vessels of only moderate speed would afford 
time for conversation with Luke and others, for a narrative of the past labour to be at 
least laid up in Luke's memory. Possibly prepared under the apostle's direction. 

III. The movements of the messenger of Christ were not capricious and arbitrary, but 
under the special guidance of the Spirit. He passed by Ephesus because the Spirit 
urged him on towards Jerusalem. He was lifted above all thought of self and offered 
as a sacrifice in spirit. An example of Christ-like devotion. — B. 

Vers. 17 — 38. — Last words. The scene at Miletus representative. 

I. Of the relations between the apostolic leaders and the Churches. 1. Affectionate. 

2. Founded on a common faith in the gospel of the grace of God. 3. Absolutely free 
from all sordid and worldly entanglements. 4. While recognizing the eminence of 
the leaders, still not dependent on individual men. Sorrowing separation was not 
overwhelming despair. 

II. Of the character of primitive Christianity as exemplified in the words of the 
apostle and in the elders of Ephesus. 1. Simplicity of the faith. 2. Confidence in 
the final victory of the truth as it is in Jesus, notwithstanding the inroads of error. 

3. Dependence on the Holy Spirit. 4. Brotherhood ; helping the weak and ministering 
to the needy. The love felt towards the apostle an example of the kind of feeling 
prevailing at Ephesus and in the early Church, so different from the formal and con- 
ventional Church life now seen, which is content with a very superficial recognition of 
brotherly sympathy. The heroism of Paul a fruit of the Spirit. — R. 

Ver. 21. — The ambassador's messagf- " Testifying both to the Jews," etc. 

L The universal requirement. 1. The temptations of Jews and Greeks, by which 
they were hindered from repenting and beheving — formalism; self-righteousness; 
ritualism ; ignorance. Both in the synagogue and in the heathen temple need of such 
a proclamation. 2. The blessedness ol the change which such a message would effect. 
The Jewish and Gentile characters, though very different, both requirir^g an entire 
renovation. Helplessness apart from the gospel The message worked wonders m 



CH. XX.1— 38J THE ACTS OF .THE APOSTLES, 169 

families. Contrast of the new life of the Christian Church with the old life of Judaism 
and paganism. The same message the substance of all Christian teaching, both in our 
own populations and in heathen lands. 

II. The fibm foundation of ministebial success. The testimony was clear and 
undoubted ; public and private. Repentance and faith. 1. Apostolic preaching aimed 
at personal conversion. It was not merely intellectual, or sentimental, or doubtful in 
doctrine, or perfunctory and cold. 2. The foundation on which the truth was placed 
was the firm one of the gospel facts. Repentance looked towards God who had spoken in 
the Old Testament, and faith looked towards Christ whose life, death, resurrection, and 
ascension Paul testified. Mere change of life is not all, but spiritual renovation through 
Christ. 3. A clear enouncement from the pulpit must be accompanied by a faithful 
testimony from house to house. The private ministry is as important as the public, 
4. Such a testimony of repentance and faith involves all who listen to it in immeasur- 
able responsibility. Let each one add to his seal by personal repentance and personal 
faith.— B. 

Ver. 24. — The missionary spirit. " But none of these things move me," etc, 

I, A Divine cebation. " Received of the Lord Jesus." 1. After the pattern of Christ's 
own mission. 2. By the inspiration of the Divine Spirit. Not by education or any 
lower means. . Not influenced by worldly motives. 3. In the spirit of a witness, 
simply declaring the gospel ; recognizing that " the gospel of the grace of God " is 
■' the power of God " to men's salvation. 

II. An example of spiritual heroism. 1. Victory over fear and selfish calculation. 
2. Endurance in toil. The work of the ministry never finished while there are souls to 
be saved, 3. Superiority to the influence of lower types of character in the Church of 
Christ. A true man will not be swayed by opinion. The spiritual hero must reckon 
with the world's spirit of compromise and the Church's lack of sympathy ; he must be 
sometimes misunderstood and maligned. 4. Lively expectation of the future, Paul 
constantly animated by the prospect of the whole world the kingdom of Christ. The 
true missionary must lay hold of the future by faith. The missionary spirit in the 
Church is very different from mere visionary optimism, or speculative scheming f™- 
mankind. It is not like the socialistic spirit which easily becomes revolutionary, or tne 
spirit of religious fanaticism which easily becomes cruel and self-destructive; it is 
based on distinct promises, and it lifts up the whole nature into the light of God. It 
is the true enthusiasm of humanity (see Isaac Taylor's ' Lectures on Spiritual Chris- 
tianity ').—R. 

Ver. 24. — " The gospel of the grace of Ood." The world requires a gospel. Not 
theories about religion, not theological dogmas, not philosophical speculation, not 
dreamy sentimentality, but the glad tidings of a Divine work actually achieved on our 
behalf. 

I. The grace of God is the substance of the message. Not a new law, seeing 
that the old Law cannot be fulfilled, but a proclamation of Divine forgiveness and life in 
One set forth as a Propitiation, whose righteousness is unto all and upon all them that 
believe. 

II, The world's necessities are supplied bt the gospel. 1. Individually. The 
glad tidings of reconciliation. The creation of a new principle of life in the soul. 
2. Socially. The kingdom of grace. Tidings for the home; for the state; for the 
community of nations; for all sorts and conditions of men. All other gospels set up 
in vain as rivals to this. Preach it in Paul's spirit, and let all who have themselves 
heard it become evangelists, " pure from the blood of all men," — E. 

Ver, 28. — The true Church. " The Church of God which he hath purchased with 
his own blood," Significance of this passage in view of Church history and present 
controversies. 

I. The spirituality of the Church. " Purchased with his own blood," Therefore 
neither an external organism nor a mere idea, but composed of living souls, whose 
salvation is secured by the merit of hi.s blood. Not a mixed multitude, united by a 
formal rite, but, professedly at least, those who are partakers of Christ. The admixture 



180 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. M. 1—38. 

of the evil with the good is the work of the " enemy " who sows tha tares, not ot the 
original formation of the Church. 

II. Influence of the spiritual view of Ohuech life. 1. On those who " feed 
the Church," helping them to take heed to themselves and their flocks. 2. On the 
individual members of the Church, in the assurance of Divine grace, in the maintenance 
of vigilance. 3. On the world, both in " warning " away those who would defile the 
Church, and in inviting those who would enter in at the open gate into eternal '"e. 
The apostle's words regarded as prophetic. The greatest dangers of the Church Lave 
always arisen from lowering the conception of what the Church is. In our proneness to 
error, let us turn " to the Law and to the testimony." — R. 

Ver. 35. — The Divine secret of a llessed life. " Eememher the words of the Lora 
Jesus," etc. Interest of the saying as not found in our Gospels. The life of Jesus said 
it. Possibly preserved traditionally. Summary of many recorded sayings. Christ his 
own interpreter. 

I. An insight into the natube of tbub blessedness. Not in external things, 
not in a passive state, either intellectually or morally. As we give out from ourselves, 
we grow in knowledge and enjoyment. Especially true of the active efforts of Christians 
for the world. To teach is to be taught. To comfort is to be comforted. To sacrifice 
self is to be rewarded with inward peace and strength. 

II. A HELP TO the cultivation OF PBAOTiCAL Chbistian LIFE. 1. Remember 
Christ's care of the poor. The Church an organization for the help of mankind. The 
poor should see that Christianity is on their side. 2. Remember Christ's zeal for the 
liouse of God. The passive state unworthy of God's children. Scanty giving a great 
discouragement to zealous workers ; a great hindrance to the progress of the gospeL 
3. Remember the claims of the world. The example of the Lord Jesus in laying 
down life, not to be remembered only by missionaries, but to teach all his disciples to 
" count all things but loss for his sake." — R. 

Vers. 6 — 12, — The seven days' halt at the gateway between Europe and Asia, This 
seven days' stay at Troas may be safely presumed to have had points of special interest 
about it. The seven (ver. 4) who accompanied Paul into Asia were here found awaiting 
him and Silas and the historian. These ten, beside any others possibly with them, 
must have been the welcomed visitors of the disciples at Troas. Memory dwelt upon 
Troas, for it was the place where, in the vision of the night (ch. xvi. 9), Paul had 
received his call into Europe by the man of Macedonia. And after this visit how many 
fresh memories would cluster around the place and the people and that seven days' 
halt I We may, amid the exceeding brevity of record here, he nevertheless reminded 

L How to the hardest life the Master does not forget to givb some 
NEEDFUL interval OF EEPOSB AND RBFEESHMENT. No life is moic Wearing than that 
which men live who think for nothing, caro for nothing, but making wealth. This 
life often kills tie best of the heart,' the best of the mind, and the best of even the 
bodily constitution. In this sense, men work themselves harder and more mercilessly 
than ever God works them. God never works us mercilessly. But in the hardest 
work he gives, he mingles much mercy. Yet his work in a healthy sense is hard, will 
match any for hardness, nor probably did the hardest^worked slave of self or Satan ever 
work harder than Paul did. But now, so far as we can see, the seven days at Troas 
undisturbed by persecution from without or dissuasion from within, must have been 
days of happy converse and of peaceful rest. How much this party of ten would have 
to say to one another, to hear of the people at Troas and to tell to them I 

II. How THE HOLIEST SERVICE ON EARTH MAY BE EXPOSED TO THE INTERRUPTION 
OF APPARENT ACCIDENT, ANYWAY TO INTERRUPTION WELCOME TO NO ONE. The 

cause of the interruption on this occasion probably infers a very minimum of blame to 
Eutychus. Some one has spoken to this ellect — that hours of sleep are rarely broken by 
devotion, often enough for light causes. But it may be added that hours of sleep are 
rarely forfeited, indeed, for hours of devotion, but hours of professed devotion are often 
broken by sleep, or by what in the long run is even more disastrous — by sleeMness. 
But as we are told more than once that Eutychus was " overpowered " by sleepiness' 
■ind that theie were even physical reasons stpaiate from his individual self to increase' 



OH. XX, 1—38.] THE A0T8 OF THE APOSTLES. 161 

the tendency, it is not necessary to fix any blame on him. Nor on Paul, Who did not 
wish him to prolong last words ? What a spirit moved him I What a message he had, 
and how much for years to come, for the souls of not a few, and for the collected 
disciples there, might depend on his not omitting to say, and to say at leisure, and to 
say touchingly, the word given him! Yes; we would think nothing of the small 
hours being reached, and the many lights in the upper chamber fading before the return 
of the sun, were it the converse of merely human affection that detained us — men and 
women and families together. The people at Troas had learnt the superior power and 
" o'ermastering attraction " of Divine affection and Divine discourse. 

III. How WITH BOVEBEIQN BASE ChBIST TRANSMUTES THE IfOST mOFPOBrOlTS 

CALAMITY INTO mebot'b CHOICE MEM0BIAL8. The Calamity no doubt seemed inop- 
portune. The disciples had already learned, of their own grateful will, to come together 
for religious exercises on " the first day of the week," and to " break bread " together. 
Paul and probably some of his companions, if not all of them (ver. 13), ha,d desired to 
stay with the believers for the service of praise and prayer, of exhortation and of the 
communion, and perhaps had strained a point to stay over that " first day of the 
week." And hearts were full that evening. There was not any general weariness. 
And Paul was speaking that same hour what the Spirit gave him to speak. Had 
ho spoken less, it would have been " the Spirit's course " that he was restraining, not 
his own vanity, not his own inconsiderateness. The confusion in that natural but 
solemn assembly, the disturbance to thought, and the pain of mind especially to some, 
— these were quite enough to unhin<:e the occasion. The peaceful stream of holy thought 
and of deep-flowing joy was checked. Yes ; but not long. The Master is again 
present, and " by the hands " of Paul works, all things considered, a " special miracle." 
And the service goes on. Thought sinks deeper, faith triumphs more proudly, and in 
many a glowing heart great was the joy. The meeting gattiers impulse from its pause, 
and, a bright morning dawning upon it, offered a dim type of the morning, brightest of 
the bright, when the calamity of the present life and the broken service of the lower 
Church, and even the deepest, fullest, purest joy of the now redeemed heart shall give 
way to a safety which no foe can surprise, a service that shall ask nia rest, and a joy 
that shall be supreme. — ^B. 

Vers. 17 — 36. — Mingled fidelity and tenderness : an eseamffie far Ohristian ministers. 
Perhaps there is no other place in which we have so much of the nature of personal 
detail respecting Paul from his own lips. For the most part in his Epistles, there is a 
singular abstinence on his part from personal references. They seem to abound here. 
Without doubting their bare justification, we desiderate some other and higher account 
of them. May not this be found in a twofold consideration? — (1) that Paul has 
designedly and probably also of Divine design treated Ephesus as the centre from which 
the light and truth of Christ and the typical order o^ his Church were to spread 
throughout a very wide district ; and (2) that Paul is divinely directed here to leave 
a forcible and a touching example to later generations. He examples the extent to 
which the fidelity and love of apostles, and of all spiritual successors of apostles, ought 
to be on the look out, and the limits within which also they ought to be restrained, 
in respect of those portions of the Church over which men may have had the leading 
oversight. The modern Church surely cries out for admonition, in these very senses 
supplied by this long passage — ^whether on the part of its members or of its ministers. 
The most sacred, most responsible love on earth is too often regarded as a relationship 
that may be lightly entered upon, and is treated as one that may he, not only lightly 
broken, but when broken perfunctorily forgotten. The study of this passage must 
help to inspire very different views. From this farewell address of Paul to those whom 
he had specially invited to meet him, lest it should be the last time, the chief impres- 
lions left on us are these. 

I. Paul's unmoved confidence in his mission. All that is spoken personal to him- 
self, and all that is spoken personal to the Ephesian elders, is spoken for the honour and 
glory and prospects of the gospel of Chrst. The "ministry ... of testifying the gospel 
of the grace of God" is his steadfast supreme thought. It appears in and through alL 

n, Paul's unmoved confidence as to wherein consists its exact operation 
UPON MEN. If it is his last exposition of the saving message of hi» " ministry " it shall 
ACTS — ^n, M 



162 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. xx. 1—34 

bo thus S'Jmmarized and thus repeated : " Eepentanoe toward God, and faith toward 
our Lord Jesus Christ." These two articles constitute the Christian magna charta. 
They clear the past, they give the key for the future and for all its hope and unfolding 
promise. " Repentance toward God" clears the very sky of human life, and with a 
glorious sky indeed overvaults the heart itself. While " faith toward our Lord Jesus 
Christ " will secure all else that can be wanted till the time comes for faith to turu 
to sight. 

IlL Paul's anxious outlook — the outlook op bpibitual love. He is not the 
man to feel he has done his work, and may leave all the rest. He feels he can't leave 
all the rest. Care and anxiety for the morrow, not of earthly good and personal gain, 
possess him, but for the morrow of the spiritual career and the very souls of those he 
had called and testified to and led by his example at Bphesus. That a people see this 
and feel this genuinely present in their spiritual teacher and pastor, is an influence of 
great effect upon them. And there is another way in which it acts to great advantage. 
As time flows on, and the hour of trial and tem|itation and darkness may come, men 
are wonderfully helped when they can recall the voice and look and earnestness of one 
who " told them of these things before they came to pass." 

IV. Paul's faith ik example and his eespeotful regard fob the " witness " 
OF those amonq whom he had laboured. Pride and priestly superciliousness never 
give expression to this side of the question. That the priest's eye is on the people is 
their haughty doctrine, and the so genuinely true other side of the matter, that the 
people's eyes are on the priest, to which Paul gives here such humble and kindly 
expression, is pushed into coldest shade by them. Without doubt, we are justified in 
thus regarding all that Paul here says of himself that might seem to be said in a self- 
commendatory style ; there is in very truth nothing of this in his spirit. He does but 
speak facts, and can say "ye know" (vers. 18, 34) about them. If the elders ol 
Ephesus do not know them, or know them to be not as Paul says, he has courted 
contradiction, not hidden himself away from it. Of what incalculable consequence 
example ever is ! Of what thrilling consequence it is in the career of the Christiar 
minister and pastor! What quiet rebuke it is, free from bitterness of tongue 1 Whai 
choicest stimulus and suggestion it is, full of life and movement as it is ! The leading 
items of conduct and example, in which the Ephesian elders had been able to take 
witness of Paul, are interesting to follow. 1. They had witnessed a long stretch of time 
and variety of state and temper. 2. They had witnessed an humility of mind that bended 
itself to circumstances, and endured aright what caused tears not idle and jeopardy of 
life many a time. 3. They had witnessed frankness of relations, plainness of speech, 
constancy of ministry, in public and in private. 4. They had witnessed a three years' 
continued impartial " warning of every one night and day with tears." 6. They had 
twt witnessed any self-seeking, any desire of " silver, or gold, or apparel." 6. They 
had, on the contrary, witnessed their chief pastor at manual labour, to supply his own 
temporal needs and to help his companions. And in reminding the Ephesian elders 
of these things, Paul has enshrined for all generations one of the sweetest words of 
Jesus, unrecorded elsewhere. Yes ; and whatever might come to be, there was no doubt 
that Paul had, by all these uncontradicted methods, become iinspeakably endeared to 
those whom he now addresses. 

V. Paul's use of appeal. Direct practical appeal is evidently one of the recognized 
gos|jel/orces. The preacher is not to forget it (vers. 28, 31). 

VI. Paul's final eebobt to prayer. The particularity with which even this 
testimony of Paul to prayer is recorded is worthy of remark, " And when he had thus 
spoken, be kneeled down, and prayed with them all." Prayer is the renunciation of 
self-confidence. Prayer is the authorized summons for higher help. Prayer is the 
sure signal of the approach of strength to weakness, continuance to uncertainty, and 
power to prevail in place of the temptation by which men should fall. 

VII. Lastly, Paul's mo vino tenderness of spirit m all. This tenderness and 
highly moved state of soul is betokened at every turn. If Paul speak of the relations 
that had subsisted between the Ephesians and himself (vers. 18 — 20) ; if he speak of 
his own future (vers. 22 — 25) or allude to his own past (vers. 31 — 35) ; if he introduce 
the names of the Lord Jesus (vers. 24, 35), of the Holy Ghost, and the Church (ver. 28), 
of God (ver. 32); — the touch is of the tenderest, the tone is of the warmest and softesii 



OH. XX, 1—38.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 16J 

the gn^gestion is sure to be of the most solemn and pathetic in equal proportiona 
And in every one of these respects it must be maintained that Paul is an example fol 
all Christian teachers and pastors, for all time. Whatever can be obtained by human 
instrumentality out of the mysterious mass of humanity will be best obtained thus. 
No force, no authority, no policy, will obtain souls. Nor will care, and love, and tender- 
ness, and foresight, and faithful " warning "tep all thit they shall seem to oblain. 
The " grievous wolves will enter in ; " " men out of "' tuat very number who listened 
and wept, and were both wept and prayed over, " will arise, speaking perverse things," 
and, drawn away themselves, " they will draw away others after them." " Offences wiU 
come 1 " But it is to be said that when Paul and the successors of Paul have done and 
said what Paul now did and said, and something in the same manner, the solemn 
damning " woe," wherever it fall, will not fall on one of them. They have saved their 
souls, and they are " pure from the blood of all men." — B. 

Vers. 37, 38. — S^tre tprings of affection. The great regard of the Ephesian elders 
to Paul was genuinely spoken in their great regret as now manifested. Farewells have 
a pathos all their own, and share it with nothing else. They legitimately exhibit 
what has been long years, perhaps, as legitimately concealed. They are often acts of 
pardon, and ought always to be such. They bring out better qualities than have been 
seen before or even suspected of existing. And sometimes they are the inauguration 
of a far higher love than all that had been, when love of the personal presence is super- 
seded by the love of souls. The farewells of an average human life, could their added 
effect be calculated, would in many instances be found to have constituted some of its 
most potent and its highest influences. Notice some of the leading causes of the deep 
affection recorded in this place. 

I. Thk acquaintance of the Bphbsians with Paul had been onb i» which 

THEY HAD KECEIVED THE NEW AND PRICELESS BLESSING OF HOLT TEAOHINa. 

II. The acquaintance had been one in the bube baceobound of which had 

BEEN ALWAYS A HOLY LIVINS EXAMPLE. 

III. The acquaintance had been one fab bemoved from all narrowness or 

LIMITBDNES8 OP AIM : IT HAD BEEN STAMPED WITH USEFULNESS. The behaviour of the 

sabbath and even of the Lord's day is far more easily taught than the behaviour of all 
life's " common days," and to teach this it is abuudantly plain Paul did not disdain. 

lY. The acquaintance was one all the memories of which were memories oi 
tkaffeoted kindliness and condescension. (1 Thess. iL 7, 8.) — B. 

Ver, 7. — The Lord^a day sahiath. This is the first allusion to distinctively Christian 
meetings as held on the first day of the week, the day which commemorates the resur- 
rection of the Lord Jesus. The grounds on which it pleased God to separate a regular, 
and a frequently recurring, portion of time from common worldly labour may be 
pointed out. Two things especially require notice. 1. Such a recurring period of rest 
is practically proved to be necessary for man's physical well-being. It is more and 
more clearly shown, that the recovering and restoring power of nightly sleep is not 
sufficient, and that the weekly prolonged rest is essential to the continued maintenance 
of the bodily powers. 2. A man is not chiefly a body. He is a composite being ; b 
he is, in the truest conception of him, a soul, having a body for his use. And it is 
the first importance that the soul should have its due and adequate opportunities 
culture. For the securing of such opportunities, the tension of bodily claims mu 
be at times relieved. The change of the day kept as the sabbath, from the seventh 
the firnt of the week, does not seem to have taken place by any revelation or any di 
tinct apostolic arrangement. It cume about in the natural course of events. Probabl 
at first the Jewish Christian disciples kept the Jewish sabbath in the usual way, an 
also had some special meeting of their own, in remembrance of the Lord's resurrection, 
on the evening of the first day of the week. As the gosuel won its way among the 
Gentiles, the distinctively Christian meetings would grow m importance ; and when St. 
Paul separated the disciples from the synagogue, Jewisa customs and rules ceased to have 
authority over them. As Judaism faded away, tie Christian day of rest took the place 
of the older sabbath; and the Christian forms of worship superseded the temple and the 
.-V- ^gogue ordinanses. We dwell on two points. 



164 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ch. ml 1—381 

L ThB ChRISTIAH sabbath was a BETENTION, in 8PIBIT, OF THE OLDER JeWISH 

SABBATH. What was essential in the original institution was the devotement to God ol 
«ne day in seven. No importance attached to its heing the first, or fourth, or seventh, 
as men may arbitrarily reckon the days of the week. The division of time into weeks 
is not a natural division, dependent on movements of earth or of moon. It is an arrange- 
ment made entirely in view of man's physical and spiritual interests. And the change 
of the precise day teaches us the important lesson that God cares for the essence oj 
obedience, for the spirit of service ; and while this finds its proper expression in minute 
and careful observance of his requirements, God is not limited by the mere formality of 
his commands, but graciously leaves the times, seasons, and modes of our obedience to 
our good will and judgment. Wherever there is the spirit of obedience, there need be 
little fear as to the finding of right modes. All that is essential in the Jewish sabbath 
holy souls jealously preserve in the Christian Sunday. 

II. The Chbistian sabbath is a pbecise sanctiftino of one dat m seven to 
THE EEMEMBBANOB OF THB LoBD Jesus Chbist. We are to " keep the sabbath day 
holy ; " that is, we are to fill it fully up with thoughts of God and work for God. But 
to us God has been " manifest in the flesh ; " " he was made flesh and dwelt among us." 
As with us here in our humanity, Jesus was the " Brightness of the Father's glory, and 
the express Image of his person." And so the keeping the Christian Sunday holy is 
filling it fully up with thoughts of Christ and work for him. And that they might be 
helped to such remembrances, the early disciples, every Sunday evening, broke bread 
together, this being the appointed means for recalling to their minds their Lord's broken 
body and shed blood. For our soul's life, the Sunday is a day for communion with 
Christ. For the world's salvation, Sunday is a day for witnessing of Christ and working 
for him. We may learn, then, in what lies the very essence of the rightly kept Chris- 
tian sabbath. It must have two things always in it. 1. Conscious communion with 
Christ. 2. Active co-operation with him in his sublime purpose to redeem and save 
the world.— R. T. 

Vers. 9, 10. — Sleepy Eutychm. Explain precisely what happened. The window was 
a lattice opening, and, for the sake of air to the crowded room, the lattices were put 
aside. How crowded the house was is intimated by the presence of some people in this 
third story. There they would be sure to feel oppressed by the heat of the house. 
Eutychus may have fallen into the street, but it is more likely that he fell into the 
liard paved courtyard. For a similar fall, see the account of the death of Ahaziah, 
King of Israel (2 Kings L 2, 17). The word that is translated " young man " implies 
that Eutychus was quite a youth, and not likely to be very directly interested in St. 
Paul's address. He very probably was a child of the house where the meeting was 
held. While the narrative does not positively say that Eutychus was killed by the fall, 
and indeed leaves it possible for us to assume that he was only badly stunned, the 
simplest reading of it—without prejudice in relation to the miraculous — certainly leaves 
the impression of a real death and restoration. We bend attention to the conduct ol 
St. Paul in relation to the matter, and inquire why he took the trouble thus to recover the 
fallea and dead youth. Dismissing, with a brief mention, the interest he would feel in 
such a calamity affecting the people of the house, and seeking for explanations having 
a more general application, we notice — 

I. St. Paul felt that Eutychus was not to blame. If any one was to blame it 
was the apostle himself, who had been led on to talk so long and keep the meetin' to 
unreasonable hours for young folk. Long services make too great a demand on °the 
physical strength of young people. They are trying even to the elder Christians, but 
their awakened spiritual interest will enable them to bear such fatigue of body. It was 
aot wrong for Eutychus to sleep. He was simply overborne by the heat of the place and 
the lateness of the hour. And still we need to distinguish between failings which come 
ont of human frailties, and sins that come out of human wilfulness. Too often the 
foung are punished for what is merely due to the influence of surrounding circum- 
itances and the undeveloped bodily conditions. The relation of public services to the 
young needs careful and judicious treatment. 1. Services for them are advisable and 
necessary. 2. Their share in the general service of the Church is important. 3. Such 
services may exert • gracious influence apart from the actual mental comprehension 



OH. XX. 1— 38.J THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 164 

of what is said and done. 4. Such semces need not be unduly limited or too easily' 
altered in character for the sake of the young. 5. Such services should take into 
due account, and deal considerately with, the physical infirmities of the young. It is 
possible, by securing variety in forms of worship, changing attitudes, and efficient 
illustration in preaching, to successfully resist the infirmities of the children. If we 
find OUT public services uninteresting, we may question whether we are not, like the 
apostle, ourselves to blame. 

II. St. Paul felt that the death or Butyohus worrLD be misundebbtood. Too 
easily the company would take up the notion that this was a judgment on inattention, 
and such an idea must be at once and fully corrected. In such a case as that of 
Ananias and Sapphiia, no apostle would feel impelled to put forth mii aoulous power ; 
the judgment of God on sin must stand. But the case of Eutychus belonged to what 
may fairly be called "accidents." A conjunction of circumstances brought it about — 
heat, sleepiness, the position in which Eutychus sat, the open window, etc. ; and this 
St. Paul may deal with in a way of miracle, just as Elijah and Elisha had done in cases 
of sudden death from disease (see 1 Kings xvii. 21 ; 2 Kings iv. 34). It is quite true 
that Christianity makes great demands on self-control and self-denial. It expects the 
spirit to master the borly ; but it makes its demands of the full-grown " man in Christ ; " 
and, only in appropriate measures and degrees, on those who are young in years and 
young in the faith. The restoration of Eutychus may be regarded as a prominent and 
interesting illustration of the " sweet reasonableness " of Christianity. — K. T. 

Vers. 9 — 11. — Earnestness in preaching and hearing. The subject is suggested by 
the conversation, or the address, being lengthened out by the mutual affection of St. 
Paul and his audience. They were unwilling for him to cease ; he was unwilling to 
keep back anything that might be a help and a blessing to them. That night there 
were just the conditions that made "long preaching" advisable, and prevented its being 
thought a weariness. The impulse of the preacher is such an audience ; the joy of the 
audience is such a preacher. Tell of the associations of St. Paul with Troas, and give 
illustrative instances of his singular power to draw out towards himself the affection of 
those whom he served for Christ's sake. A feeling of oppression and anxiety at this 
time rested on the apostle — he felt that his missionary labours were almost done, and 
this gave a peculiar urgency and tenderness and pathos to his preachings. They had 
the characteristics of " last utterances " and " farewells." 

I. The importance op cub HAvma pebsonal confidence is, and glowino affec- 
tion FOB, OUB TEAOHEBS. So far as mere truth is concerned, a stranger with competent 
knowledge can instruct us; but truth, in its personal relations with us, can only be 
taught by those who know us ; and our ability to receive such influence depends largely 
on OUT love for those who give it. Press the importance of settled ministries, of regular 
attendance at the same worship, and of coming into such relations with our " pastors 
and teachers " as may bring on us the power of their personal characters. Apply the 
principle, " Faithful are the wounds of a friend ; " and our pastors should be felt such 
friends that we can receive both reproof and comfort and instruction from them. 

II. The demands which tbust and affection make upon otiB teachers. These 
people would not let St. Paul go ; they kept him talking all night. He was compelled 
to respond to such love, and to pour forth his best treasures of knowledge and experience 
for their help. Trust and love still make the highest demands on our teachers, demands 
sometimes so great that ministers feel overwhelmed with the tremendous responsibility. 
Nothing draws out the best in a man like trusting him and loving him. Money can 
never buy a man's best ; duty can never compel a man's best ; love can always win a 
man's best, just as a pure love makes a man noble, and a babe's love calls a mother to 
sublime self-denials. The one condition of receiving the best spiritual blessings from 
a Christian teacher is that you must trust and love him as his disciples did St. Paul. 
His relations with his disciples are models, and happy are they who can give a like 
joy to their teacher and can win like blessings from him. 

In conclusion, deal practically with those things which constitute fitting preparation 
of hearers for receiving the best spiritual blessings through their teachers. Such prepa- 
rations are : 1. General, bearing upon good worshipping habits ; right relations with 
Church life ; and personal knowledge of, and affection for, the teacher. 2. Special t4 



X66 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [<>«• ^^ 1— ^ 

each particular occasion of intercourse or of worsliipping ; the value of all services 
depending directly upon a man's mood of soul, as won by home culture. The profit of 
a hearer depends first and chiefly upon Mmself. — B. T. 

Ven. 21, 24. — PanVs testimony. "Testifying . . . repentance toward God, and 
faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ." " To testify the gospel of the grace of God." The 
main lines of the apostle's work are nowhere given more simply or more clearly than 
in these sentences. Dean Plumptre suggestively says, " These," viz. repentance and 
faith, " under all varieties of form, formed the substance of the apostle's teaching. It 
Is obvious, however, that out of these might be developed a whole system of theo- 
logy — why repentance was needed, and what it was, and how it should show itself; 
what was involved in the statement that Jesus was the Christ, and why men should 
believe in him, and what works were the proper fruit of faith. All these were questions 
which had to be answered before even the most elementary truths could be rightly 
apprehended." St. Paul's ministry consisted in this, bearing witness, " especially as a 
living example of its power (1 Tim. i. 12 — 16), of the good tidings that God was not 
a harsh Judge, but a gracious Father, willing all men to be saved (1 Tim. ii. 4), that 
was the truth to the proclamation of which his life was to be devoted." As the 
subjects are familiar, only an outline of treatment is necessary. We take the latter 
expression first, as being the more general one. 

I. God's qeacb unto forgiveness. The gospel is precisely a message concerning 
God. It is : 1. A corrective message. God is not as men have thought. 2. A revealing 
message, bringing to light the fact that, by a sublime act of self-sacrifice, he has 
declared himself to be love, and has shown his grace. 3. A practical message, bearing 
directly on our »ins, and giving assurance o{ forgiveness, 

II. God's conditioks for the manifestation of his grace unto forgiveness. 
Without conditions we should set no value on the grace, the gift, or the forgiveness. 
The conditions are reasonable and necessary. They are : 1. Repentance. If we are 
not troubled about our sin, we shall not care about forgiveness. 2. Faith. If we do 
not open our hearts to God, lie cannot work his good work in us. These are gospel 
foundations ; but how much we have to build thereon 1 — R. T. 

Vers. 22 — 24. — The cheerful acceptance of a hard lot. Give illustrations showing 
how severe, trying, and anxious St. Paul's missionary life had been and was likely to 
be to the end, taking as a basis his own account given in 2 Cor. xi. 23 — 28. Additional 
" hardness " came out of St. Paul's peculiarly nervous and sensitive temperament. He 
felt both joys and sorrows so keenly. With the apostle's life compare that of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. Both were divided into two parts: (1) a working part, in which Gkid was 
served by active labours ; {'i) a sufl'ering part, in which God was served by bearing and 
enduring afflictions, persecutions, and troubles. By both doing and hearing God may 
still be served ; and in buth ways God tests the faithfulness of his people in our times. 
St. Paul was taught "how great things he must suffer for Christ's JS'ame's sake;" and in 
the passage before us we see him learning this lesson, and giving some expression to 
his feeling in regard to it. The Spirit said in St. Paul that the time was now near 
when a special testimony for Christ amid scenes of suHering would be required of him ; 
and the apostle received ihe revelation, not only calmly, but cheerfully, like the older 
apostles, counting it all joy that he was thought worthy to sufl'er for his Master's sake. 

I. Exactly what his lot was to be he did not know. The Spirit was only 
pleased to give general indications. Complete knowledge of what is about to happen 
can never be good for man, because (1) it takes away the simplicity and naturalness of 
his conduct; (2) it prevents the proper exercise of his will upon due consiileration of 
circumstances that arise ; (3) it stops the process of moral and spiritual culture ; and 
(4) it takes from him the call to a living, daily trust in God. The feeling that all is 
settled and known tends to prevent faith from keeping up a daily dependence. We 
cannot too thankfully rejoice that our future is wholly unknown to us, and that we are 
cast entirely upon the promise of " grace lor the day," and upon the assurance that the 
" Lord will provide." " I'd rather walk in the dark with God than go alone in the 
light." We ktow nothing. Nay, we know everything if we know our ever-present 
Guide. 



OH. n. 1—38.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLEa 167 

n. St. Paul was as trult moved to oo forward to suffering as he had been 
TO 00 FORWARD TO WORK. Recall the previous scene at Troas (ch. xvL), when the man 
of Macedonia called the apostle to hegin missionaiy labours in Europe. He had no 
doubt then that he was following the Divine lead; and he had no more doubt now that 
he was called to Jerusalem to suffer. We might think that God gave him notice of 
coming troubles only to warn him and guard him against them ; but we must under- 
stand that God may in this way test faithfulness. A plain path of duty may be before 
us, but we may come to know that suffering lies that way ; then we are tested 
whether we will do the duty or shrink back on account of the suffering. Tlie apobtle 
clearly knew his duty, so matters of personal suffering could be no serious concern to 
him. 

III. His loyalty and love to.Christ made him willino to serve him in what- 
soever WAY HE WILLED. Servicc to Christ, under the inspiration of his love, was 
St. Paul's simple and sublime idea. " To him to live was Christ." The place, or time, 
or way of service it was for his Master to settle; and what had to be borne in rendering 
the service he was willing to let his Master wholly arrange. He set before himself this 
aim, that he "might finish his course with joy." " It is required of stewards that they 
be found faithful." Apply to some of the suffering lots now given to God's people. 
They are spheres of service for Christ, and they lose all their " hardness " when they 
can be thus regarded. 

IV. His CHEERFUL OBEDIENCE MADE TRIUMPH OVER HIS AFFLICTIONS AN EASY THING. 

So much depends on the spirit in which our lot in life is taken up. The apostle is a 
beautiful example of cheei fulness and hopefulness. He will not let circumstances 
crush him, or opposition and adversity overwhelm him. He will not lose heart or hope. 
He sings in his own soul the song with which he has cheered thousands of the saints 
through the long Christian ages. "All things work together for good to them that 
love God." Sj the trials cannot hurt him. He is more than conqueror. He even finds 
how to look upoQ a " hard lot " as an opport'onity for rendering fuller and heartier 
witness for the Lord whom he serves. — R, T. 

"^er. 27. — God^s whole counsel. St. Paul is stating a fact which (1) was to the 
honour of the Ephesian elders, for they must have been receptive and willing hearers if 
the apostle found that he might even teach them the mysteries of the gospel ; an(i which 
(2) was to the honour of St. Paul as a teacher, who was so skilful in dividing the 
Word of truth that he could make the very mysteries plain. Compare his language in 
Eph. iii. 4, where he speaks of their being " able to understand his knowledge in the 
mj stery of 01)rist." It is right to declare the whole counsel of God; but it is wise only 
to declare 16 to those who are prepared to receive it. Compare St. Peter's counsel and 
reference to St. Paul in 2 Pet. iii 15, 16. The " whole counsel of God " may be 
regarded as including — 

L The complete circle of bbvealbd truth. This embraces (1) the Divine revela- 
tions made in different ages ; (2) in different forms ; (3) to different individuals. 
While the complete circle maybe regarded as contained in the Old and New Testament 
Scriptures, we may not absolutely limit Divine revelation to the written Word. The 
Spirit of God has full and free access to the minds and hearts of men, and can reveal 
his will directly to them if it shall please him so to do. To this circle there is a centre, 
but the repetition of this cannot be the Divine idea of " preaching the gospel." Every 
truth within the circle must be held by, and filled with the spirit of, the central truth. 
Everything within the circle is the gospel. Ministers may not, and they need not, 
shun to declare to men the very " mysteries '' of revelation, since by the consideration 
of such the higher culture of the soul is gained. Infanta take the milk of first prin- 
ciples ; strong men need to feed upon strong meat of difficult and advanced truth. 

II. The tkuth in its antagonistic phases. This side of the truth may not be left 
untouched by any teacher, but its treatment calls for much care and wisdom. There 
ire times when we are required to show how truth opposes error ; but usually it is far 
better to preach the positive truth, and let it by its own force gradually root out 
and destroy error Three points may here be illustrated. 1. Christ's truth seemed 
opposed to Judaism. It was not really opposed to the system as given by God to 
Moses. Tt was the natural »nd necessary outgrowth and completion of it. It was 



168 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xx. 1—38. 

epposed to the corrupt Judaism of the rabbis — a formal and ceremonial system out of 
which all spiritual life had gone. 2. Christ's truth was opposed to paganism, both in 
iti theories, principles, and practices. 3. Christ's truth is made to appear opposed to 
science, but only by the undue assumptions and prejudiced bias of some who really 
laisrepresent science. 4. Christ's truth ia always opposed to worldly maxims, because 
it demands the whole soul for Ood, while the world wants the whole soul for self. 

III. The truth m its pbaotioal phases. Illustrate from the Epistles how directly 
it bears : 1. On individual habits ; teaching us how to possess the vessels of our bodiei 
in sanctification and honour. 2. On family relations ; culturing good fatherhood and 
motherhood, and requiring honourable obedience from children, and service from depen- 
dents. 3. On social fellowships ; binding man to man in a gracious brotherhood of 
common helpfulness. 

IV. The tbuth with the pebsonal stamp on it. When uttered with the force of 
a man's own experience, persuasion, and conviction, the truth gains a new power ; but 
we must also recognize that it comes under limitations by getting apprehension and 
expression only through limited minds — limited by capacity and limited by education. 
Individuality is on one side power, but on the other side weakness. 

Conclude by fully unfolding what now may be thought of as included in the " whole 
counsel of God," especially pointing out that, whUe the field of revelation is the same 
that St Paul had, the field of speculation has marvellously grown and enlarged. But 
•till, what men have to preach to their feUow-men is not their tpeculation, but ffotf » 
revdation. — B. T. 

Ver. 28. — Blood purchased. This figure of speech is directly connected with a 
reference to the Church as a flock ; to the officers as overseers, or shepherds ; and to 
their duty as feeding the fl,ocTt. It is important to inquire how far the shepherd and 
sheep figure will explain the scriptural allusions to redemption, or salvation lyy hlood. 
The figure as used by our Lord in John x. should be compared with the expression in 
our text, "which he hath purchased with his own blood." The question which we 
have to consider is — How does a shepherd purchase his sheep with his blood? The 
answer takes two possible forms. 

I. The shephebb puts his life in pebil in defendino his sheep. This is the 
characteristic feature of the good shepherd as opposed to the hireling. The good shep- 
herd purchases their safety every day by his willingness to shed his blood in their 
defence. So a mother may be said to purchase the health of a sick child by her willing- 
ness to give her life for his, imperilling her own Ufe by her anxious watching and care. 

II. The shepherd mat actually give his life in fighting and killing the 
WOLVES. If he kills the wolves he saves the sheep, though he may himself die of his 
wounds ; and then he plainly purchases the safety of the flock with his blood. 

These figures may be applied to the work of the Lord Jesus Christ. He imperilled 
his life for our defence. He met our great foe in conflict. He overcame sin and death, 
and plucked death's sting away. He died indeed in the struggle, but he set us free ; 
and so he has purchased us by his own blood. He has won, by his great act of self- 
sacrifice, our love and life for ever. Compare the figure as employed by St. Peter 
(1 Pet. i. 18, 19).— B. T. 

Ver. 35. — The blessedness of giving. We have no other record of these words as 
ttttered by Christ. They must have been treasured in the memory of the apostles, and 
have been often mentioned by them, but never written down. There must be a great 
deal of Christ's teaching not preserved for us ; but we may be assured that the unre- 
corded was like the recorded, and we may gratefully receive what the Divine Spirit 
has been pleased to preserve for us. The truth of this statement, that it is " more 
blessed to give than to receive," is affirmed and illustrated by : 1. St. Paul's own life. 
2. Christ's teaching. 3. Christ's own life of giving. 4. All human experience. One 
of the best things said by the late George Peabody is this, spoken at a reunion at his 
native town : " It is sometimes hard for one who has devoted the best part of his life 
to the accumulation of money to spend it for others ; but practise it, and keep on 
practising it, and I assure you it comes to be a pleasure." It was a saying of Julius 
Cassar that no music wa» so charming in his ears as the requests of his friends, and the 



CH. Xil. 1 — 10. 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



169 



•upplications of those in want of his assistance. Our Lord did not say that there was 
no blessedness in receiving, only that it is more blessed to give. We may feel how 
true are his words in relation to^ 

L GiviNO PBESENTS. These not only win and keep our friends, but they greatly 
increase our love for them by finding it expression. 

IL Giving sympathy. This so greatly blesses us, because we have to fetch up the 
very best in us if we are to sympathize with sufferers and sinners. We want our 
holiest power. 

III. Giving knowledge. We cannot clear and complete our own knowledge better 
than by making the effort to impart it to others. 

IV. Giving love. It is very precious to be loved, but it is surely more precious to 
love, to give our love to another ; it is so ennobling and inspiring that we give our love 
to Christ. 

V. Giving pbayees. Intercessory prayers are the holiest kind, and the most 
directly and abundantly fruitful in blessings to ourselves. 

Let us beai- in mind that the blessedness of giving we all can win. All of us can 
give, and we all can give in the various possible ways of giving above referred to. 
Those even that seem to have nothing yet can give, if a comprehensive view of giving 
be taken. A poor widow who had only two mites could ^ive. Our Lord himself, 
though he had nothing, could give. Peter and John could say, " Silver and gold 
have we none, but such as we have we give thee." There are better things to give 
away than money ; and it is in such things that we find the best bleusedness of 
giving. — E. T. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XXL 



Ver. 1. — WJien it came to past that we 
were parted from, them, and had set sail for it 
came to pass, that after we were gotten from 
them, and had launched, A.V. ; Cos for Coos, 
A.V. and T.H. ; next day for day following, 
A.V. Parted from them (JijFQaTFaiT&evTas), 
"Non sine desiderio magno" (Bengel). 
"He shows the violence of the parting by 
saying, ' Having torn ourselves away ' " 
(Chrysostom). The word is properly applied 
to those who have been unwillingly torn 
away from their friends (Schleusner and 
Kuinoel); "denotes the painful separation 
wrung from them by necessity" (Meyer). 
In ch. XX. 30 it was used in the active voice 
of false teachers " drawing away " the 
disciples, t'.e. Christians, after them. In 
2 Maco. xii. 10 it means simply " withdrawn," 
anil so perhaps also in Luke xxii. 41, 
though Sleyer thinks that St. Luke chose 
the unusual word to denote the urgent 
emotion by which oar Lord was as it 
were compelled to leave the companionship 
of the apostles, and be alone. SirSy (whence 
spasm) and its derivatives, of which Luke 
uses four — two of which are peculiar to him 
— are much employed by medical writers, as 
Hippoeratea, Galen, Antseus, etc. (Hobart, 
on Luke xxii.). Had set sail (ivaxSwat 
fj/ias). The word means " to go up to the 
sea from the land," as Luke viii. 22 ; ch. 
ziii. 13; xvi. 11 ; xxvii. 12; just as, on the 
oontrary, Kariyuv »iid KoTcCyecrfioi are usea 



of coming down to land from the sea (see 
ver. 3 in the T.K., and ch. xxvii. 3 ; xxviii. 12). 
The same conception of putling out to sea 
being a going up, led to the phrase /itTfcapos 
(high up) being applied to ships out at 
sea. From ficTeapos comes, of course, our 
word "meteor." Cos, or Coos, for it ig 
written both ways, now called by the Turks 
Stanko {4s rw Kai), a beautiful island, nearly 
opposite the Gulf of Halicarnassus, and 
separated from Cnidus by a narrow strait, 
about six hours' sail from Miletus. There is 
a city of the same name on its eastern coast. 
It was one of the six Dorian colonies which 
formed the confederation called the Dorian 
Hexapolls. It was famous for its wine and 
its textile fabrics (Hnwson, and Lewin, and 
' Diet, of Geog.'). Rhodes ("PoSos) ; perhaps 
the " Isle of Rosea; " the well-known moun 
tainous island in the ^gean Sea, which 
lies nine or ten miles from the coast of Oaria. 
Its inhabitants were Dorians, and it was one 
of the places which claimed the honour of 
being the birthplace of Homer. The towns 
are all situated on the seacoast. " Rhodes 
was the last Christian city to make a stand 
against the Saracens" (Howson). Patara 
([tA] nirapa). A flourishing commercial city 
on the south-west coast of Lycia, with • 
good harbour. It was the port of Xanthus, 
the capital of Lycia. The name Patera is 
still attached to some extensive ruins on 
the seashore not far from the river Xanthus* 
Ver. 2. — Having found a ship crossing for 
finding a ship sailing, A.V.; fhceuicia for 



170 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. xxlI — 40k 



Phenieia, A-V. ; set $a{l tot set forth, A.V. 
Having found a ship. The ship in which 
St. Paul and his companions had hitherto 
sailed was probably a coasting-vessel, in- 
tending to continue its course all along the 
south coast of Asia Minor. But at Patara 
they found a ship on the point of sailing 
across the open sea direct to Tyre, by 
which the voyage would be shortened 
many days. They accordingly immediately 
took their passage by it, and put out to sea 
(oj/^X^li"^"! ver. 1, note). A glance at the 
map will show what a great corner was thus 
cut off. A stiaight line from Patara to 
Tyre leaves Cyprus just on the left. 

Ver. 3. — And for when, A.V. ; come in 
eight of for discovered, A.V. ', leaving it. . , 
we sailed for we left it . . . a/nd sailed, A.V. ; 
unto for into, A.V. Had oome in sight of ; 
literally, had been shown Cyprus; had had 
Cyprus made visible to us ; i.e. had sighted 
Cyprus. It is a nautical expression. Meyer 
compares the phrase iremo'Tevfiai rh euayye- 
\iov for the grammatical construction. The 
verb avatpaivj) is peculiar to St. Luke, oocur- 
ing elsewhere in the New Testament only 
in Luke xix. 11. It is, however, used 
repeatedly in the LXX. of Job. Landed ; 
KOTiJxflrj/iey, T.B., just the opposite to the 
a,i>rJxSrifi.ev of ver. 2; but the R.T. has 
KaTTJAeo/jej', with the same meaning, "we 
came to shore." At Tyre, which they may 
have reached in about forty-eight hours 
from Patara with a fair wind (Howson). 
Tyre at this time was still a city of some 
commercial importance, with two harbours, 
one north and one south of the causeway 
which connected the island with the main- 
land (see ch. xii. 20). Howson thinks the 
ship in which St. Paul sailed may have 
brought wheat from the Black Sea, and 
taken up Phoenician wares in exchange. 
The sight of Cyprus as he sailed by must 
have brought many and veiy various 
memories to the apostle's mind, of Barnabas, 
of Sergius Paulus, of Elymas, and many 
others. 

Ver. 4. — Having found the disciples for 
finding dixciples, A.V. and T.E. ; and these 
for who, A.V. ; set foot in for go up to, A.V. 
and T.E. Having found the disciples. If 
the B.T. is right, the meaning is that they 
liad sought out the Christians, apparently 
not a large body, scattered ir the city, and 
perhaps with some difBcultj found them 
and their place of meeting. This would 
look as if they were not Jews, as the 
synagogue was always known. He should 
not set foot in Jerusalem. The B.T. reads 
eiTi0alv€iv for avafialveiy. It Is true that, 
in the LXX. of Dent. i. 36, T^v jtjv, e>' 'hv 
Mfin means "The land that he hath 
trodden upon ; " and that in Josh. i. 3 again, 
nSi 4 t6wos i(p' itv o»' imfiriTe 7 f Ix"^^ '''"'' 



TtoSav i/iav means " Every place on which 
you shall tread with the sole of your feet; " 
but the phrase imPaheiv fls 'Upovtra\'lin 
must surely mean simply "to go to Jeru- 
salem." Through the Spirit. The Holy 
Spii'it revealed to them, as lie did to many 
otiiers (ver. 11 and ch. xx. 23), that bonds 
and afSiction awaited St. Paul at Jerusalem. 
The inference that he should not go to 
Jerusalem was their own. 

Ver. 5. — It came to pass that we had 
accomplished for we had accomplished, A. V. ; 
the days for those days, A.V. ; on ourjowney 
for our way, A.V. ; they all, with wives and 
children, brought us on our way for they all 
brought us on our way, with icioesand children, 
A.V. ; hneeling down on the beach we prayed 
for we kneeled down on the shore and prayed, 
A.V. and T.E. Accomplished the days. 
Tliere is no other example of this use of the 
word e^apTiCeiv, which always means " to 
fit out," " to equip thoroughly," as e.g. 
Josephus, 'Ant. Jud.,' iii. ii. 2, where he 
speaks of soldiers toJs anaai KaK&s i^tipncriie- 
vous, well equipped in all respects ; and 
in the only other passage in the New 
Testament where it occurs, 2 Tim. iii. 17, 
wliereit is rendered "thoroughly furnished," 
or " furnished completely," E.V. Hence 
some would render the passage here " when 
we had refitted (the ship) during these 
days." But this is a very harsh construc- 
tion, and it is better, with the glossaries, 
lexicons, the Vulgate, and most commen- 
tators, to take the word here in the unusual 
sense of "to complete," applied to time. 
Tlie days are the seven days mentioned 
in ver. 4, which were probably determined 
by the time it took to unlade the ship and 
get the new cargo on board. 

Ver. 6. — And bade each other farewell; 
and we went on board the ship, bui, etc., for 
and when wehad taken ourleaveone of another, 
we took ship ; and, etc., A.V. and T.B. The 
a.iraffircLC^ffiia.1 of the B.T. occurs nowhere 
else, except in Himerius in the fourth century 
after Christ. Went on board; iiri$^fi.is 
(is, tlie same phrase as imfiaivfiv els 
'UpoviTa\ii/i in ver. 5. 

Ver. 7. — The voyage for our course, A.V. ; 
arrived at for came to, A.V. ; we saluted 
for saluted, A.V. When we had finished; 
StavuaavTes, only found here in the New 
Testament, but not uncommon in classical 
Greek for finishing a voyage, or a journey, oi 
a race-course (Euripides, Hesiod, Xeuophon, 
etc.). St. Luke seems to indicate by the 
phrase that the sea-voyage ended here. 
Arrived at ; KaTrivT-^a-a/iev, a favourite word 
of St. Luke's for arriving at a place (oh. 
xvi. I; xviii. 19, 24; xx. 15; ixv. 13; 
xxvii. 12, etc.). Ptolemais. The ancient 
Accho of Judg. i. 31, then a Canaanite city 
in the tribe of Asher, but not subsequentl) 



JH. XXL 1 — 40.] 



THK ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



Ill 



mentioned in the Old Testament. In 1 
Maco. V. 15, 22 and elsewhere it is called, as 
here, Ptolemais, having received the name 
fiom one of the Ptolemies, probably either 
Sotor or Lagi ; but in the Middle Ages it 
appears as St. Jean d'Acie, and is now com- 
monly called Acre. It lies on the north 
side of the spacious bay of Oarmel, but is not 
in all weathers very safe harbourage. It is 
an easy day's sail, under thirty miles, from 
Tyre. When St. Paul was there it had 
recently been made a Roman colony by the 
Emperor Claudius, and was important as a 
commercial city. Saluted the brethren. 
The Christians there. We have no account 
of the evangelization of Ptolemais. Perhaps 
the gospel was first preached there to the 
Jewish colony by those who travelled "as 
far as Phoenice," after " the persecution that 
arose about Stephen" (oh. xi. 19); for 
Ptolemais was reckoned as belonging to 
Piicenicia (Ptol., v. 15 ; Strabo, xvi. p. 758 ; 
Pliuy, 'Nat. Hist.,' v. 17; all quoted by 
Meyer). 

Ver. 8. — On the morrow for the next day 
A. V. ; we for we that were of Paul't company, 
A.V. and T.B. ; entering . . . we for we 
entered . . . ond, A.V. ; who ioi which, A..Y. 
Unto Caesarea. They seem to have come 
from Ptolemais to Cseaarea by land, » two 
days' journey; the word i^e\e6vT(s, as 
llowson justly remarks, pointing to a land- 
journey. PhiUp the evangelist. When last 
we heard of him (ch. viii. 40) he had just 
readied Caesarea ; apparently he had been 
working there as an evangelist ever since. 
His old home at Jerusalem (oh. vi. 5) had 
been broken up by the persecution (eh. viii. 
5), and thus the deacon had become an 
evangelist (oh. viii. 12). Evangelista are 
mentioned by St. Paul(Eph. iv. 11) as one of 
the higher orders of the Christian ministry ; 
and Timothy is bid "do the work of an 
evangelist " (2 Tim. iv. 5). In later times 
the term was restricted to the four writers 
of the Gospels. Philip's old association with 
Stephen in the diaconate must have been 
keenly remembered by St. Paul. We abode 
with him. This seems to imply that Philip 
was well to do, and had a good house. 

Ver. 9. — Now this man for and the same 
man, A.V. Virgins. This certainly conveys 
the impression that they had dedicated their 
lives to the service of God (1 Cor. vii. 34 — 
38). Which did prophesy. The question arises 
— Did they exercise their gift of prophecy 
in the Church or in private ? Tlie passage 
1 Cor. xi. 5 seems to indicate tliat in the 
Church of Corinth women did pray and 
prophesy in the congregation, while, on 
the other hand, 1 Cor. xiv. 34, 35 seems per- 
emptorily to forbid women to speak or teach 
in Church, as does 1 Tim. ii. II, 12. How, 
then, is this apparent contradiction to be re- 



conciled? It must be either by supposing 
(1) that the gift of prophecy spoken of here 
and in 1 Cor. xi. 5 was exercised iu private 
only ; or (2) that the prohibition did not 
apply to the extraordinary operation of the 
Holy Spirit speaking by prophet or prophet- 
esses as the case might be. The latter 
seems the most probable (see ch. xiii. 1, 
note). On the ofiSoe of prophets in the early 
Church, see ch. xi. 27 ; xiii. 1 ; xv. 32 ; 
xix. 6 ; Rom. xii. 6 ; 1 Cor. xii. 10, 28, 29 ; 
xiii. 2, 8 ; xiv. 6, 29, etc. ; Eph. iii. 5 ; iv. 
11 ; 1 Thess. v. 20 (see Alford, on ch. xi. 
27). As regards these daughters of Philip, 
there are conflicting statements in early 
Church writers. Eusebius (' Eccl. Hist.,' iii 
30) quotes Clement of Alexandria as saying 
that both Peter and Philip among the 
apostles were married and had children, and 
that Philip moreover gave his daughters in 
marriage to husbands. But in the next 
chapter (31) he quotes Polycrates, Bishop 
of Ephesus at the end of the second century, 
as saying that Philip the apostle and his 
two daughters, who had grown old in their 
virginity, were buried at Hierapolis ; and 
that another daughter of his, " who had her 
conversation in the Holy Spirit," was buried 
at Ephesus. Eusebius himself thinks that 
these daughters of Philip the evangelist 
were meant. If they were, it does not 
necessarily follow that those who, according 
to Clemens Alexandrinus, were married were 
of the four mentioned here. They might be 
sisters. Polycrates seems to speak of three 
sisters who lived a religious life (in the 
technical sense) ; the fourth may have died 
young. But it is quite possible that Clemens 
may really be speaking of Philip the apostle, 
and Polycrates also ; the more so as Philip 
the apostle, according to the tradition 
recorded by Nicephorus, suffered martyrdom 
at Hierapolis. However, the confusion be- 
tween the two Philips is quite certain in the 
Men8eum(or Calendar) of the Greek Church, 
where we read, " On the 4th of September 
is the commemoration of Saint Hermlone, 
one of the four daughters of the Apoatle 
Philip, who baptized the eunuch of Candace. 
She and her sister Butychis came into Asia 
after the death of the Apostle John. She 
was buried at Ephesus." A fragment of 
Caius (in Eusebius, 'Eccl. Hist.,' iii. 31) 
increases the confusion by speaking of " the 
four daughters of Philip, prophetesses, who 
were buried in Hierapolis " (see Eouth's 
'Keliq. Sao.,' vol. i. pp. 378—380). 

Ver. 10.— Many days (^jnepas TfAffouj), In 
oh. xiii. 31 iirl iiufpas vKeiovs is applied to 
the forty days between the Resurrection and 
the Ascension. In ch. xviii. 20 irKiiova 
xpivov is a longer time — longer, viz. than he 
had intended. In ch. xxv. 6 ri/xepat irA.6(ous 
^ Sexa is " more than ten days " Here, there- 



172 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLBSu 



[oh. XXL 1 — 4a 



fore, it is too strong an ezpreBsion to gay 
"mauT days." According to Lewin's cal- 
cQlation, he was only five days at Csssarea 
— from May 10 to May 16, Howson's 
" some days," which is the rendering also in 
the margin of the B.T., is muoh better than 
" many." Benan has " quelques jours." 
Agabns (see ch. zi. 28). 

Ver. 11. — Coming to for when he was eome 
unto, A.V. ; and taking for he took, A.V. ; 
he bound for and bound, A.V. ; feet and hands 
for hands and feet, A.V. and T.R. Bound 
his own feet, etc. The B.T. has eauroO 
which leaves no doubt that Agabus bound 
his own hands and feet. The reading of the 
T.E., o»To5, would rather indicate Paul's 
hands and feet, as Grotlus, Hammond, and 
others take it, though less conformably to 
the context. (For similar symbolical actions 
of the old prophets, see Isa. xx. 2, 3 ; Jer. 
xiii. 1 — 7; 1 Kings xxii. 11; Ezek. iv. 
1—6 ; xii. 3—7 ; xxiv. 16—24, etc.) ShaU 
deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles. 
Kearly the same words as those in which 
our Lord foretold his own betrayal (Matt. 
II. 19 ; Mark x. 33 ; Luke xviii. 32). 

Ver. 12. — ^They of that place ; ot iDrSnioi, 
a word found only here in the New Testa- 
ment, and not found in the LXX. or the 
Apocrypha, but good classical Greek (for the 
sentiment, see ver. 4). 

Ver. 13. — Wliat do ye, weeping and break- 
ing my heart f for what mean ye to weep and 
to break mine hearti A.Y. (the same sense only 
a more modern idiom). Breaking. ^uvBpv- 
■KTovTis occurs only here in the New Testa- 
ment, or indeed in any Greek writer, tliough 
the simple form, epuVToj, is common in medi- 
cal writers, and airoBpJirTu occurs in Plato. It 
has the force of the Latin frangere animum, 
to crush and weaken the spirit. I am ready. 
Paul's answer reminds us of Peter's saying 
to our Lord, " Lord, I am ready to go with 
thee both into prison, and to death " (Luke 
xxii. 33). But Peter's resolve was made in 
his own strength, Paul's in the strength of 
the Holy Ghost ; and so the one was broken, 
and the other was kept. 

Ver. 14.— The will of the Lord, etc. A 
beautiful application of the petition in the 
Lord's prayer, " Tliy will be done in earth, 
as it is in heaven " (comp. Luke xxii. 42), 

Ver. 15.— These for those, A.V. ; baggage 
for carriages, A.V. We took up, etc. 'Eiri- 
criceuao-a/iei'oi is the reading of the E,T., as 
of Mill, Bengel, Griesbach, Lachmann, Ti- 
Bchendorf, Meyer, Alford, etc. It occurs 
only here in the New Testament, but is 
common in classical Greek, in the sense of 
" fitting out for a journey," " lading a ship " or 
" beasts of burden " with baggage, " collect- 
ing baggage," and the like. The Airoff/ceucf- 
(eaBai of the A.V. means " to unload," " to 
get rid of baggage," and thence generally 



"to remove," which givei no good ienae 
here. 

Ver. 16. — And there went for (here went, 
A.V. ; from for of, A.V. ; bringing for ond 
brouqht, A.V. ; early for old, A.V. Mnason 
of Cyprus ; only mentioned here. He may 
very probably be one of those Cypriots 
mentioned in oh. li. 19, 20, and so have 
been a disciple before the death of Stephen, 
and hence properly called an old or early 
disciple. If he had been one of St, Paul's 
converts in the visit to Cyprus recorded in 
ch. xiii., St. Paul would have needed no 
introduction to him. The construction of 
the sentence is involved, and the exact 
meaning consequently obscure. Kuinoel, 
Meyer, Howson (in 'Diet, of Bible'), and 
many more, translate it "conducting ns 
to Mnason," etc, which seems the better 
translation; not, however, so as to make 
417611' JUfdaai'i equivalent to iyeiv rphs 
Mi/iffaira, whicli Greek usage will not 
admit of, but explaining the dative by 
attraction of the relative ^, which is 
governed by vaph. If it had not been for the 
intervening irap* ^ ^eviffOa/M^v, the sentence 
would have run iyovres irphs rhv Mv&ffwva, 
K.T.\. If Mnason, who, consistently witli 
ch. xi. 19, had a house at Jerusalem, had 
been at Csesarea at this time, it would be 
quite unmeaning that disciples from CsBSarea 
shnuld bring Mnason with them. The 
sentence would rather have run "among 
whom was Mnason," etc. But if he was at 
Jerusalem, it was quite proper that any 
Christians of Ceesarea who knew him should 
conduct Paul to his house, and introduce 
him and his party to him. Mnason, like 
Philip (ver. 6, note), was evidently a man 
of substance. Should lodge ; should be hos 
pitably entertained (Heb. liii. 2 ; 1 Pet. iv. 
9 ; see oh. z. 6, 18). 

Ver. 18. — Went in with us unto James. 
Nothing can mark more distinctly the 
position of James as Bishop of Jerusalem 
thiin this visit of Paul to him, and the find- 
ing him surrounded with all the elders of 
Jerusalem. It is a most distinct evidence of 
the apostolic origin of the episcopal office. 

Ver. 19. — Rehearsed one by one (or declared 
particularly, A.V. ; the things which for what 
things, A.V. The things which 6od had 
wrought, etc. (comp. oh. xv. 12). It was a 
noble account to render. Since he had 
saluted the Church (oh. xviii. 22), when lie 
had probably seen James last, he had 
laboured at Antiooh, in Galatia and 
Phrygia, and had wrought a mighty revo- 
lution in Asia. He had consolidated his 
work in Macedonia and Achaia ; he had held 
his visitation of Gentile elders in Miletus ; 
he had visited Tyre, Ptolemais, and Ctesarea, 
great Gentile cities, and had seen every- 
where astonishing tokens of the grace of 



DH. XXL 1 — 40.] 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 



173 



God whiob 'was with him. And now he 
pours his tale into the ears of the chief 
pastor of the mother Church of Jerusalem, 
and those of the Jewish elders. A tale of 
wonder indeed I 

Ver. 20. — They, when they heard it for 
when fhey heard it, they, A. V. ; God for the 
Lord, A.V. and T.R. ; they said for said, 
A.V. ; there are among the Jews of them 
which have believed for of Jews there are 
which believe, A.V. and T.E. ; for the Law 
for of the Law, A.V. They . . . glorified 
God. There is not the slightest symptom 
on the part of James and the elders of un- 
friendliness towards St. Paul, or jealousy or 
opposition to his work among the Gentiles 
(comp. Gal. ii. 7 — 9). The appellation 
brother is another indication of friendly 
feeling. Thousands (Greek /ivptdSes, tens 
of thousands). These need not be deemed 
to be all Jerusalem Jews; if applied to the 
Church at Jerusalem only, such a word 
would be probably a gross exaggeration; 
but there were great numbers of Jews of 
the dispersion assembled at Jerusalem for 
Pentecost — probably all the Christian Jews 
of Judsea, and many from Syria, Galatia, 
' Pontus, and the various countries envune- 
rated in oh. ii. 9 — 11. So that there might 
be several myriads of converted Jews alto- 
gether. All zealous for the Law. This is 
a remarkable testimony to the unanimity 
of the Christian Jews in their attachment 
to the Law of Moses, and throws light upon 
the Epistle to the Galatians and many 
other passages in St. Paul's Epistles. It 
explains the great difSeulty experienced in 
the early Church in dealing with converts 
from Judaism. Zealous (fij^wTol). So the 
fierce sect of Zealots were called at the time 
of the Jewish wars (see Josephus, 'Bell. 
Jud.,' iv. vi. 1, and elsewhere). 

Ver. 21. — Have been for are, A.V. ; eon- 
eeming for of, A.V. ; telling them not for 
saying that they ought not, A.V. Have been 
informed (jcarrixfiSvirai') ; see ch. xviii. 25; 
Luke L 4; Bom. ii. 18, etc. The verb 
properly means to instruct by word of 
mouth, whence our " catechism." The cus- 
toms (toTs ideal) ; see ch. vi. 14, both for 
the phrase and the sentiment, and ch. XT. 
1, note; xxvi. 3; xxviii. 17. 'ESos is a 
favourite word of St. Luke's, occurring ten 
limes in his Gospel and in the Acts, and 
only twice in the New Testament elsewhere 
(John xix. 40 ; Heb. x. 25 ; see Hobart, on 
Luke ii. 27). 

Ver. 22. — The E.T. omits the clause in 
the T.R. rendered the multitude must needs 
come together in the A.V. ; they will certainly 
hear for they will hear, A.V. and T.E. The 
xivTws, which in the A.V. belongs to the 
omitted clause, ia rendered " certainly " -n 
theE.T. 



Ver. 23. — Which have a vow; meaning 
emphatically the vow of a Kazarite. 

Ver. 24. — These for them, A.V. ; for them 
for with them, A.V. ; shall know for may 
know, A.V. ; there it no truth in the things, 
etc., for those things . . . are nothing, A.V. ; 
fta»e been for were, A.V. ; keeping for and 
keepesl, A.V. As regards the transaction 
recommended by James, Kypke (quoted by 
Meyer) says, "It was a received thing 
among the Jews, and was reckoned an act 
of eminent piety, for a rich man to under- 
take to bear, on behalf of poor Nazarites, the 
expense of those saciificea which they had 
to offer when they shaved their heads at 
the expiration of their vow." Josephus 
seems to allude to the custom, and to speak 
of King Agrippa as acting in accordance 
with it, when he says of him that he ordered 
great numbers of Nazarites to be shaved 
('Ant. Jud.,' xix. vi. 1). The sacrifices 
were costly, consisting of " three beasts, one 
for a burnt offering, another for a sin offer- 
ing, and a third for a peace offering" 
(Lightfoot, vol. ix. p. 307). Alexander 
Jannssus is said to have contributed nine 
hundred victims for three hundred Naza- 
rites (' Diet, of Bible,' under " Nazavite ; " 
comp. 1 Maco. iii. 49). Purify thyself; 
ayvlffBiiTi, the word used in the LXX. of 
Numb, vl 2, 8, 8 (with its compound 
atpayvitratrOai, and co-derivatives ayvsia and 
iyios) for the corresponding Hebrew Ttn, to 
take the Nazarite vow. St. Paul, therefore, 
became a Nazarite of days for seven days, 
intending at the end of the time to offer 
the prescribed sacrifices for himself and his 
four companions (see, however, note on ver. 

26, at the end). Be at charges for them 
(^SaTtivriiroi' iv' avTois). Make the necessary 
expenditure on their account, that they may 
shave their heads, which they could not do 
till the prescribed sacrifices were offered. 

Ver. 25. — But as for as, A.V. ; have 
believed tot believe, A.V. ; wrote giving judg- 
ment for have written artd concluded, A.V. ; 
the B.T. omits the clause rendered that they 
observe no such thing, save only, in the A.V. ; 
should keep for keep, A.V. ; sacrificed for 
offered, A. V. ; what is strangled for strangled, 
A.V. As tonohing the OentUes, etc. What 
follows is, of course, a quotation from " the 
decrees that had been ordained of the 
apostles and elders that were at Jerusalem " 
(ch. xvi. 4), of which the text is given in ch. 
XV. 19, 20, 28. Observe the use of the 
identical words — Kpiva, in ch. xv. 19 ; xvi. 4 ; 
and in this verse ; and of iinaTeWa, in this 
verse and in ch. xv. 20, with its cognate 
Sie<rT€i\iiiie6a and ImeirTdXKafiei', ch. XV. 24, 

27. This reference on the part of James to 
the decrees was very important as a con- 
firmation of "the gospel which Paul 
preached among the Gentiles" (Gal, iL 2> 



174 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. XX.1. 1—40. 



It also marks distinctly the upright and 
honourahle conduct of James, and the con- 
cord of the apostles. 

Ver. 26. — Went for entered, A.V. ; de- 
elaring the fulfilment for to signify the ao- 
eompUshment, A. V. ; the offering wan for that 
an offering should be, A.y. Faol took the 
iii«a. St. Paul's acquiescence in James's 
advice is an instance of what he says of him- 
self (1 Cor. ix. 20), and is in accordance 
with his conduct in circumcising Timothy 
(ch. ivi. 3). But that he did not attach 
any intrinaio importance even to circum- 
cision, and much less to the minor Jewish 
ceremonies, is clear from such passages as 
Eom. i. 28, 29; 1 Cor. vii. 19; Gal. v. 6; vi. 
15; Phil. iii. 3, etc. Purifying himself 
with them, etc. (a-yytaBsls) ; see note on ver. 
24. James's advice had been Toirovs irapa- 
\a^&v ayciirflrjTi aiiv outojs : in obedience to 
that advice St. Paul now napoAa/Si;' roiis 
6.ySpas ffi/v avTots aypiffOels elff-tjet €is rh lep6u. 
What was the particular form by which a 
person who wished to associate himself with 
others under a Nazaritio vow (note on ver. 
24) did so is not known ; nor how long before 
the expiration of the vow such association 
must be made. But from the mention of 
"seven days" in ver. 27 (which is the 
number named in Numb. vi. 9, in case of an 
accidental un cleanness), it seems highly pro- 
bable that " seven days" was the term during 
which a person must have conformed to tlie 
Nazaritic vow to entitle him to " be at 
oliarges," as well, perhaps, as the time 
during which Nazarites, at the end of their 
vow, had to undergo special purification. 
Declaring the fulfilment, etc. Tlie vow of 
the four men had been for at least thirty 
days (the minimum period of such vow) ; 
but whatever length of time it had been for, 
■uch time would have expired by the end of 
the ieven days, and probably long before. 
We know not how long they might have 
been waiting for iome one to " be at charges " 
for them, and provide the sacrifices, without 
which they could not shave their heads and 
accomplish their vow. But it is obvious 
that some notice must be given to the priests 
in the temple of the day when one or more 
Nazarites would present themselves at " the 
door of the tabernacle of the congregation," 
to offer the prescribed oiferings. And this 
accordingly Paul and the four did. AmyyeK- 
Kwv means "notifying," or "declaring," 
to the priests (Exud. ix. 16 [LXX., answer- 
ing to the Hebrew ISD]; Eom. ix. 27; 
Josh, vi.9, LXX. [10, K.V., "bid"]). UntU 
the offering was offered, etc. This is in- 
terpreted in two ways. Meyer makes " until" 
depend upon " the fulfilment of the days," 
so as to define that fulfilment as not taking 
place till the offering was offered. Wieseler 
make* " until " depend upon " he entered 



into the temple,'' with the idea supplied, 
" and remained there," or " came there 
daily ; " supposing that it was the custom 
for Nazarites to finish up their time of 
separation by passing the last seven days, 
or at least beiug present daily, in "the 
court of the women, where was the apartment 
appropriated to the Nazarites" (Lewin, ii. 
p. 142). If, however, with Howson, Lewin 
and others, we understand the word ayvi- 
(ecrBai, in vers. 24 and 26, not generally of 
taking the Nazarite vow, but of certain 
special purifications at the close of a Naza- 
ritic vow, which lasted seven days immedi- 
ately before the offerings were made and 
the head shaven, then a very easy and 
natural remlering of the words follows : 
" Notifying their intention of now completing 
the seven days of their purification, until the 
offering for each of them was offered." Al- 
ford, in toe., justifies by examples the aorist 
inilicative vpotrw^x^Vi instead of the sub- 
junctive, which is more usual. Lewin thinks 
that St. Paul had taken a Nazaritio vow 
after his escape from death at Ephesus, or 
at Corinth ; but there is no evidence of this, 
and it is hardly consistent with James's ad- 
vice. Renan thinks it doubtful whether or 
no Paul took the Nazaritio vow at all, but 
inclines to this as the best interpretation 
(' St. Paul,' p. 518, note). 

Ver. 27. — Completed for ended, A.V. ;from 
for which were of, A.V. ; multitude for people, 
A.V. The seven days ; showing clearly that 
some customary tei m of preparation for the 
offerings and shaving of the head is meant. 
This shows also that " the days" in the pre- 
ceding verse meant the "seven days" of 
preparation rather than " the days " of the 
whole Nazaritic vow. The Jews from Asia r 
come up for Pentecost. How hostile the 
Asiatic Jews were appears from ch. xix. 9. 
When they saw him in the temple, whither 
he had come to complete the seven days of 
preparation. It was apparently the &fth 
day (see ch. xxiv. 11, note). How often the 
best meant attempts at conciliation fail 
through the uncharitable suspicions of a 
man's opponents 1 Tlie temple. It must be 
remembered throughout that it is rh lep6y 
that is spoken of, which embraces the temple 
courts, not the vaos, or house (see ch. iii. 2, 
note). Stirred up. Xvyxea is found only 
here in the New Testament. Properly " to 
confuse," like the kindred avyxiya (ch. ii. 6 ; 
xix. 32 ; xxi. 31) ; and <riyxua's, confusion 
(ch. xix. 29) ; hence " to stir up." It is of 
frequent use in medical wijters (Hobart, 
Ixxix.). 

Ver. 28. — Moreover he foi further brought, 
A.V. ; defiled for polluted, A.V. (For the ac- 
cusation, comp. ch. vi. 13, and above, ver. 21.) 
Brought Greeks also, etc. No uncircumcised 
person might go beyond the court of tha 



OH. XJU. 1 — 10.] 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



176 



Gentiles, which was not in the &ytoii. The 
hpiy, which is often used in a wider sense 
of the whole area, is here restricted to the 
iyiov (see ch. iii. 1, note). But the accusation 
was utterly false, the offspring of tliiir own 
fanatical suspicions. Defiled (iccKoiVuKf) ; 
litiirally, made common (see ch. x. 15 ; xi. 9). 

Ver. 29. — Before seen for teen before, A.V. ; 
Ifte Ephesian for an Ephesian, A.V. Tro- 
phimus (see ch.xx. 4). Having seen him with 
St Paul in the city, they concluded that 
be had come with him into tlie temple. 

Ver. 30. — Laid hold on for took, A.V. ; 
dragged for drew, A.V. ; etraigldway for 
forlhwilh, A.V. The doors were shut. The 
donrs of the gates which separated the 0710c, 
01 as Luke here styles it the Up6v, from the 
court of the Gentiles. They tuined Paul 
out of the Up6i>, intending to kill liim, and 
shut the doors, lest, in the con fusion and 
the Bwaylng to and fro of the crowd, the pre- 
cincts of the temple should chance to be 
defiled with blood, or even with the presence 
of any who were unclean (see the passages 
from JosephuB, quoted by Levvin, vol. ii. 
p. 142, note 11). 

Ver. 31. — Were leehing for went about, 
A.V. ; up to for unto, A.V. ; confusion for an 
uproar, A.V. Tidings ; (pdais, only here in 
the New Testament. The legal use of the 
word in Greek is an " information " against 
any one laid before a magistrate. Here it 
is the information conveyed to the tribune 
by the sentinels on guard (Lange ; see Hist, 
of Susanna 55). Came up ; viz. to the 
castle of Anton ia, to which steps led up from 
the temple area on the north-west side (see 
vers. 82 and 35). The chief captain; the 
chiliarch, or tribune ; liteially, the com- 
mander of a thousand men (see John xviii. 
12). Theband(T^s(rjr6^p7)s); the co/iori which 
formed the Boman garrison of Aiitonia (see 
ch. X, 1, note ; also vers. 82, 33, etc. ; ch. 
xxii. 24, 26, etc.). 

Ver. 82. — And forthwith he for who 
immediately, A.V. ; upon for unto, A.V. j 
and they, when, etc., left off for and when 
they, etc., they left, A.V. ; beating for beating 
of, A.V. Ban down upon {KariSpainv M). 
'KaTarpex" only occurs here in the New 
Testament, but is used in the LXX. of 1 
Kings xix. 20, followed by oviaa, to run after. 
In classical Greek it governs an accusative 
or genitive of the person or thing attacked. 
Here the force of Kara seems to be merely 
the running down from the castle of Antonia, 
and therefore the A.V. unto seems prefer- 
able to the K.V. upon. 

Ver. 33. — Laid hold on for took, A.V. ; 
inquired for demanded, A.V. Laid hold on 
(tVeAiijSfTo) ; see ch. xvii. 19, note. Bound 
with two chains ; as St. Peter was (ch. xii. 6). 
'AAu(r« means properly " a chain on the 
bauds" as opposed to ire'Sij, a feUer (Markv. 



4); and therefore the two chains are not to be 
understood of chains on his hands and feet, 
with Kuinoel, but, as in the case of Peter, 
of chains fastening him to a soldier on 
both hands. 

Ver. 34. — Shouted for cried, A.V. and 
T.R. ; crowd for muUiturle, A.V. ; uproar 
for tumult, A.V. ; brought for carried, A.V. 
The certainty. He could not get at tlie truth 
because of the tumult and the diflerent 
accounts given first by one and then by 
another. The Greek word rb a.a<j>a}\.is, and 
its kindred a(T<paKtia, cunpaKw^, aa'pafl.i^to, and 
iirta<pcA.Tis, are of frequent use by St. Luke 
(oh. ii. 36 ; V. 23 ; xvi. 23, 24 ; xxii. 80 ; xxv 
26 ; xxvii. 9 ; Liike i. 4). These words 
are all very much used by medical writers, 
and specially the last (e7rnr(|)a\-()s), which is 
used by St. Luke alone in the New Tesi a- 
ment. The castle (tV irape/iSoK-liv), " the 
camp or barracks attached to the tower of 
Antonia" (Alford); ch. xxii. 24; xxiii. 
10, 16, 32. It means the castle-yard within 
the fortifications, with whatever buildiagd 
were in it. 

Ver. 85. — Crowd for people, A.V. Borne 
of the soldiers. Lifted off his legs and 
carried up the steps. The stairs from the 
temple area at the north-west corner to the 
castle of Antonia (see ver. 31, note, and ver. 
82). Alford quotes the description of the 
fort Antonia in Josephus, ' Bell. Jud.,' v. v. 
8, in which he says (Traill's translation), 
" Its general appearance was that of a tow er 
with other towers at each of the lour 
comers. That at the south-east angle rose 
to an elevation of seventy cubits, so that 
from thence there was a complete view of 
the temple. Where it adjoined the colon- 
nades of the temple it had passages leading 
down to both, through which the guards— 
for in the fortress there always lay a Roman 
legion— descended and disposed themac Ives 
about the colonnades in arms at the festivals, 
to watch the people, and repress any 
insurrectionary movement" 

Ver. 36. — Crying out for erying, A.V. 
Away with him. The cry of those who 
thirsted for the blood of Jesus Christ (Luke 
xxiii. 18; see also ch. xxii. 22, where the 
sense comes out fully). 

Ver. 87. — About to he brovght for to be 
led, A.V. ; saith for eaid, A.V. ; eay some- 
thing for speak, A.V. ; and he for who, A.V. ; 
dost thou know for eanst thou speak, A.V. 
About to be brought into the castle. He had 
nearly reached the top of the stairs, and 
there was, perhaps, a brief halt while the 
gates of the castle-yard were being opened. 
Paul seized the opportunity to address 
Lysias in Greek. Dost thou know Greek) 
("EAAtjcio-tI ■Yiv<i(rK€ts ;). According to some, 
\a\e7v is to be understood, " Host thou know 
how to speak Greek? " after the analogy of 



17* 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. xsl 1 — 40. 



AaXovmt 'ACctriffrt, and OJk tMy iri- 
ya/JsHKotntt XaXfiv 'lovSaia-rl, in Neh. xiii. 24. 
Bnt others (Meyer, Alford, etc.) say that 
there is no ellipse of AaAcii/, but that 
'£AXi)i>i(rrl ytvdiriciti', Supio-rl iTurraiiiyovs 
(Xenophon)," Grseci nescire" (Cicero), mean 
to know or not to know the Greek and 
Syrian languages. 

Ver. 38. — Art thou not fhen (h« for art 
not thou that, A.V.; ttirred up to $edition 
for madett an uproar, A.Y. ; led for leddest, 
A.V. ; the four thoasand men of the 
A$$ateina for four Otoueand men that were 
murdereri, A.V. Art thou not then, etc. ? or 
81 Meyer, " Thou art not then ; " either way 
implying that Lysias bad concluded that 
he wa« the Egyptian, but had now discovered 
his mistake. The Egyptian, etc. He whom 
Josephus calls (' Bell. Jud.,' ii. xiii. 5) " the 
Egyptian false prophet," and relates that, 
having collected above thirty thousand 
followers, he advanced from the desert to 
the Mount of Olives, intending to overpower 
the Eoman garrison and make himself tyrant 
of Jerusalem, with the help of his iopv(p6pot, 
or body-guard, who might very probably be 
composed of the A ssassini or Sica Hi, mention- 
ed in the text. Stirred up to sedition {avatrra' 
Tcjiiras). The difference between the A.V. 
and the B.V. is that the former takes the verb 
in an intransitive sense, "to make an 
uproar," the latter in a transitive sense, 
governing the " four thousand men." In the 
only two other places were it occurs in the 
New Testament (ch. xvlL 6; Gal. v. 12) itia 
trantitive. It is not a classical word. The 
four thousand men. Josephus, in the above- 
cited passage, reckons the followers of the 
Egyptian impostor at above thirty thousand. 
But snch discrepancies are of no account, 
partly because of the known looseness with 
which numbers are stated, and Josephus'* 
disposition to exaggerate; partly because 
of tha real fluctuation in the numbers of in- 



surgents at different periods of an insurrec- 
tion ; and partly because it is very possible 
that a soldier like Lysias would take no count 
of the mere rabble, but only of the disciplined 
and armed soldiers such as these Sicarii were. 
It may be added that Josephus himself 
seems to distinguish between the rabble aud 
the fighting men, because, thoii«:ii in the 
'Bell. Jud.,' ii. xiii. 5 he says ihat Felix 
attacked or took prisoners "most of his fol- 
lowers," in the ' Ant. Jud.,' xx. viii. 6 he 
makes the number of slain " four hundred," 
and of prisoners " two hundred " — a very 
small proportion of thirty thousand. The 
Egyptian had promised his deluded followers 
that the walls of Jerusalem would fall down 
like those of Jericho. It is not known 
exactly in what year the insurrection took 
place, but it was, as Benan says, " peu de 
temps auparavant" ('St. Paul,' p. 525). 
The Egyptian himself contrived to run away 
and disappear; hence the thought that he 
was the author of this new tumult at 
Jerusalem. The Sicarii were a band of 
fanatical murderers, who, in the disturbed 
timespreceding the destruction of Jerusalem, 
went about armed with daggers, and in broad 
daylight and in the public throughfares 
murdered whoever was obnoxious to them. 
Among others they murdered the high priest 
Jonathan at the instigation of Felix (Jose- 
phus, ' Ant. Jud,,' XX. vi. 7 ; ' Bell. Jud.,' ii 
xiii. 3). 

Ver. 39. — I am a Jew for I am a man 
uihich am a Jew, A.V. ; in for a city in, A.V.; 
give me leave for suffer me, AV. A citizen 
of no mean city ; ou/c airiinov TrdAeoii, an elegant 
classical expression. Ouk &ariiios 'EWiivav 
no'Aij (Euripides, ' Ion.,* 8). 

Ver. iO.— Leave for licence, A.V. ; standing 
for stood . . . and, A.V. ; language for 
tongue. A.V. The Hebrew language ; t.«. 
the Syro-Chalilaio which was the vernacu- 
lar of the Hebrew Jews at that time. 



EOMILETICa. 

Vers. 1—14.^21^ steadfasf purpose. One of the most diflSoult problems of practical 
life is to know what are the fixed points on which we must not give way, and to which 
all other considerations must yield, and what are the points which may be yielded 
under the pressure of conflicting circumstances. A man may be very conscientious 
and yet most grievonsly mistaken, if by his obstinacy on indifferent matters he imperils 
or defeats great and important results which are incompatible with those smaller matters 
on which he insists. And again, a man may be very conscientious, and yet Inay do 
much practical mischief if he weakly gives way on vital points on which he ought to 
insist with inflexible steadfastness of purpose. Moreover, without steadfastness and 
persistence of purpose a man's course is so vacillating as to be practically useless. He 
is ever beginning and never finishing ; starting on his course and never reaching the end 
of it ; wasting time and energy on purposes which are never fulfilled ; incapable of 
joint action because he can never be depended upon — not fi-om insincerity and falseness 
but merely from weakness and instability of will and infirmity of judgment. It ia a 
Tery important function of true wisdom in the practical business of life io discern 



OH. XXL 1—40.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 177 

dearly what are the purposes that ought to yield to the pressnie of adverse circum- 
stonces, and what are those that must be carried out to their end at all risks and at any 
cost ; and it is the true test of manliness and Christian principle to adhere to these last 
in spite of the persuasions of friends or the vituperation of enemies. The section 
before us contains the successive steps by which St. Paul carried out the purpose 
which he had formed of going to Jerusalem and arriving there in time for the Feast of 
Pentecost. The first distinct announcement of this purpose is made in oh. xx. 16, but 
it had probably been formed before he left Corinth, as related in ch. xx. 3. Wliat were 
the exact reasons for it we are left to gather from scattered and incidental notices. It 
seems to have been connected with his deep love for the Jewish nation (Kom. ix. 1 — 5), 
and with the hope to which he clung that, by patience and continuance in well-doing, 
he should eventually overcome their obduracy of heart and win them to the faith of the 
gospel. The line which he had marked out for himself was to show himself a true 
Jew in all things; to respect the Law and the observances of the temple and the 
customs connected with it ; and to bind all the Gentile OhiKches to the mother Church 
of Jerusalem in bonds of filial love, of which the offerings collected from the Gentile 
converts and seat to the poor saints at Jerusalem were the token and the result. In 
this spirit he came up to Jerusalem " for to worship " (ch. xxiv. 11) ; in this spirit he 
brought " alms to his nation and offerings " (ch. xxiv. 17) ; and in this spirit he 
purified himself and entered into the temple (ch. xxiv. 18). If his hope wa« by these 
means to win his countrymen to Christ, and bring about the predicted salvation of all 
Israel, this was a purpose to which all else must yield. And so when the " Holy Ghost 
witnessed in every city that bonds and imprisonment abode him at Jerusalem," when 
he was warned by prophetic voices at Tyre and at Csesarea that every onward step 
was bringing him nearer to some great affliction, he never flinched one moment from 
his purpose, but went forward vidth a willing mind that "the will of the Lord might 
be done." Being deeply convinced, probably by the constraining voice of the Holy 
Ghost within him (ch. xx. 22), that it was the will of God that he should go to 
Jerusalem, and there witness to the Name of the Lord Jesus, he went, not careful 
whether he were going to bonds or to death ; he went, neither yielding to fear nor 
allowing his will to be broken by the tears and entreaties of those whom he loved best ; 
he went, to accomplish in prison, and at last under the tyrant's sword, the noblest 
mission that was ever committed to a son of man, and to win for himself a crown 
which will surely be one of the most bright and glorious that will glitter in the 
kingdom of heaven. And in doing so he has left us the priceless example of a stead- 
fast purpose. 

Vers. 15 — 40.— Z%e compromise. The introduction of Christianity into the world 
while the temple was still standing, and the Law of Moses with all its Levitical and 
ceremonial ordinances was stiU in force, might have issued in three ways. 1. All 
converts to the faith of Jesus Christ from among the Gentiles might have been forced 
to become Jews, as far as submission to the whole Law was concerned. 2. Or the Old 
Testament might then and there have been superseded by the New, and the Jewish 
believers as well as the Gentile converts have been brought at once into the possession 
of Christian liberty and immunity from the whole body of ceremonial observances. 3. Or 
it might have been provided that, while Jewish believers were still subject to the Law 
of Moses, those who believed from among the Gentiles should be whoUy free from the 
bondage of the Law, and only subject to the institutions and precepts of Christ. The 
first of these issues was that which was contended forby the bigoted Jews of Jerusalem. 
They wished that all Christians should be as it were proselytes to Moses, only with the 
addition of faith in Jesus as the promised and long looked-for Christ. The second 
seems to be that toward which St. Paul's own opinion gravitated, and which the 
inexorable logic of the forcible suppression of the Mosaic institutions by the destruction 
of Jerusalem confirmed as being according to the mind of God. The third was a com- 
piv>mise between the two former. And it was a compromise accepted by St. PauL In 
deference to the prejudices of the Jewish people, and in a charitable consideration for 
opinions and feelings which were almost a part of their being, he was willing that the 
Christian Jews should still observe the laws and cnstoms of their fathers, provided that 
the Gentile disciples were left absolutely free. And he was willing as a Jew himself 

ACTS — D. « 



178 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh, xxi, 1— 40. 

to conform to his brethren's practice in this matter. Whatever may have heea his 
speculative opinion, he was willing to give to the Jewish community the public proof 
asked for by St. James, that " he himself also walked orderly and kept the Law, and 
actually joined the four Ivazarites in their vow and was at charges with them, and went 
through the legal ceremonies in the temple with them (ver. 26, and ck. xxiv. 18 ; 
XXV. 8). The practical lesson, therefore, plainly is that compromises are lawful and 
right, provided no essential tmth is sacrificed. In the diversity of the human miiMl,and 
the diversity of influences to which different minds are subject, it frequently happens, 
as a matter of fact, that conscientious and upright men, who agree upon many vital and 
essential truths, disagree upon others which are less important, disagree sharply and 
pointedly. If both parties are to maintain their own views with unbending rigidity, 
there can be no common action, no harmony, no peace. A compromise by which both 
parties, without giving up their own belief, agree to keep the points of difference in the 
background, and to concede something to each other in practice, is the only possible 
way of preserving unity and concord. It is the way sanctioned and recommended by 
the great example of St. Paul. Only we must not forget to notice the further instruc- 
tive lesson conveyed by this section, that the most laudable and best-planned efforts at 
conciliation are often doomed to failure by the unreasonable and fanatical violence of 
those who are most in the wrong. Compromises imply a measure of humility and a 
sincere love of peace. Where there is an arrogant assumption of infallibility, and an 
overbearing spirit of domination, men prefer the forcing their own opinion upon others 
to an equitable compromise, and love subjugation more than peace. The highest 
wisdom and most exalted piety will propose concessions, which fanatical bigotry will 
fling back in their teetii. It is in religion as in politics. There will always be a party 
of irreconcilables. A St. Paul in the depth of his love may offer a compromise to' 
which the Jewish fanatic in his blind bigotry will reply by blows and conspiracies 
unto death. And yet in the end the love will triumph, and the violence will be laid in 
the dust. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 17. — Human affection and sabred tervice. God has so made us and so 
related us that we find ourselves closely and tenderly attached, one to another, in 
various bonds. It is impossible that these should not have great influence on our 
minds as the children and servants of Uod, great effect on our lives as co-workers 
with Christ, What is that effect ? 

L Human affection has a lakge conteibution to offee to saceed sebvice. 
We find -it inciting all the disciples, including "the wives and the children," to 
accompany Paul on his way, to pray with and for him, and thus to cheer and hearten 
him (ver. 5). We find it leading Philip (vers. 5 — 7), and afterwards Mnason (ver. 16) 
and " the brethren " (ver. 17), to entertain the ambassador of Christ with open-handed 
and full-hearted friendship. And we find it now constantly leading men and women 
(1) to educate and train, (2) to entertain, (3) to shelter, (4) to influence by example, 
(5) to evangelize the sons and daughters of men. 

II. Human affection sometimes foeciblt inteeposes between mbn and the 
BACBED SERVICE THEY WOULD SENDEE. It did SO here. Paul and his party had to 
tear themselves away from the elders of Ephesus (ver, 1). It required a very great 
effort to " get away," Clearly the entreaties of affection produced a very strong impres- 
sion indeed on the susceptible heart of the apostle, and called forth the tender and 
touching remonstrance of the text (ver. 13). It had a like effect on the mind of the 
Master himself, and evoked a rebuke of no ordinary strength (Matt. xvi. 21 — 23). 
When conjugal, or parental, or filial, or fraternal love lays its detaining hand on the 
•houlder and says, " Go not on this perilous mission ; stay with us in these pleasant 
places of •ffection," it U hard for the human soul to resist that gentle but powerful 
pressure. 

III. Human affection has often much to ubqb on its own bshalf. The 
disciples at Tyre claimed to found their counsels on communications which they had 
from God bimselt They said " through the Spirit " thai Paul " should uot go up," 



OH. XXI. l-s-40.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 179 

etc. (▼«. 4). Undoubtedly the disciples at Csesarea based their dissuaaiong on the 
announcements of Agabus (ver. 11), and they probably pleaded, with no little force, 
that the Divine intimation of danger was given on purpose that the impending evil 
might be averted. Often with us, now, human affection has much to say that ia 
plausible, and even powerful. It makes out a strong case why special spiritual faculty 
should refrain from sacrificing itself by presumptuous confidence, why it should 
" not tempt the Lord its God " by running into needless danger, why it should reserve 
itself for other paths of usefulness where it could walk with equal fruitfulness and with- 
out the threatening injury. 

IV. Chbistian dbvotbdnbss rises above the strono temptation. With Paul .t 
■" will not be persuaded " (ver. 14) ; with him it says, " I am ready not to be bound only, 
hut also to die . . . forthe Name of the Lord Jesus" (ver. 13). The Huguenot will not 
have the white ribbon bound round his arm even by the tender hand of the sweetest 
human love. Men will walk to the stake, and women to the open grave wherein their 
living bodies are to be enclosed, even though there are voices, gentle and strong, calling 
them to the home of affection. The will of the Divine Saviour has been found, and 
will be found to the end of time, mightier than even these forces of affection. 

V. Human affection will BBcoeNiZE its duty and accept the will of God. 
It still says, after a while, " The will of the Lord be done " (ver. 14). — C. 

Vers. 18 — 26. — Edations hetwten, disciples. Our Lord has said, " By this shall all 
men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another " (John xiii. 35). 
It was of the very last importance that, in the early days of Christianity, there should 
be inward harmony and outward concord among the disciples of Jesus. Division would 
have been grave disaster, if not irreparable defeat. But with the strongest reasons for 
desirincr unanimity and a complete understanding, we have to face — 

I. Great delicacy of position among Christian brethren, then as now. There 
is a great deal really contained in the simple statement, " Paul went in with us unto 
James ; and all the elders were present" (ver. 18). It was a meeting of two streams, 
differently composed. It was a meeting of those who believed in the Law with the 
addition of faith in Jesus Christ, and of those who believed in Jesus Christ with a high 
regard for the Law as a venerable but passing institution. Between these and those 
the Mosaic Law held a very different position, seriously affecting their views of doctrine, 
of religious activity, and of daily behaviour. It required the utmost charity and for- 
bearance on the part of both to maintain positively friendly relations. There must 
have been no little constraint, there was probably some discomfort in the opening 
interview. Thus is it now, and for a long time will be, between Christian disciples. 
Differences of social standing, of pecuniary position, of education and refinement, of 
ecclesiastical connection, of intellectual tendency (to liberalism on the one hand, or 
conservatism on tlie other), will interpose between Christian disciples and make their 
relations delicate, difficult, strained. 

II. The reconciling aspect. Very wisely indeed Paul passed immediately from 
the introductory salutation to a full narration of " all that God had wrought among the 
Gentiles by his ministry " (ver. 19). This was striking the true note, — the note that 
brought peace and concord ; " when they heard it, they glorified the Lord " (vei. 20). It 
is certain that if Paul had spoken in an argumentative strain they would not have been 
thus unanimous ; but they all rejoiced to know that through his instrumentality — 
though he had worked with different weapons trom those in their hands — men snd 
women had been turned from dumb idols to serve the living God. This is the recon- 
ciling aspect in which to present our cause. However our distinctive views may 
differ from those of the men whom we meet in conference, or before whom we lay our 
case. If we can relate a true and simple story of souls converted, of lives transformed, 
of families or tribes or islands altogether changed and renewed " in the spirit of their 
mind," we go a long way — if not all the way — to convince those who hear that we 
are " disciples of Christ indeed ; " tiiey will glorify God in us. 

III. Conformity and nonconformity. It remains in doubt whether the expedient 
of James and of his friends was wise or unwise (vers. 20 — 24). Certainly it failed in its 
object. It is also in doubt whether Paul, with his views, was right in yielding to the 
wish of the elders (ver. 26) ; certainly by doing so ne endangered his life »Dd lout hii 



180 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ot. xu. 1— 4a 

liberty ^rithout securing his end. But there are some certainties here. L That it is 
right to look at the question hefore us from our opponent's point of view. 2. That it 
is wise to conibrm as far as possible to our opponent's wishes. 3. That we should 
always be ready to offer or accept an honourable compromise (ver. 25). 4. That the 
utmost scrupulousness cannot prevent ill-natured or bigoted misunderstanding (ver. 21), 
5. That nonconformity may be as honourable and advantageous as conformity (Rom. 
Jdv, 4— 7).-C. 

Vers. 27 — 40. — FaTmtidtm and devotednest. It is impossible not to read thtu 
verses with a smile of contempt in view of the folly and guilt of fanaticism, and, at the 
same time, with a smile of satisfaction in view of the calmness and nobility of Christian 
zeal. 

I. The folly and thk guilt op fanaticism. 1. Its folly. (1) In the first place, 
it employs a weapon with which it is easily matched. It has recom'se to violence 
(ver. 31) ; but violence is a usage which others can easily adopt, and it may be with 
more effect (ver. 32). If religion calls in the aid of the sword, it is likely enough to 
find the sword directed, at the next turn of events, against itself. (2) It uses a weapon 
which is not at all fitted to its hand. Physical force is not the appointed method for 
regenerating the world ; " the weapons of our warfare are not carnal," but spiritnaL 
The " kingdom not of this world " does not want its servants to " fight " with steel and 
gunpowder. (3) It assails those who, if it would but consider, are its truest friends. 
Out of regard for the Law, these fanatical Jews " went about to kill " Paul. The 
multitude shouted " Away with him 1 " (ver. 36). But if they had known better they 
would, out of regard for the Law, have speeded Paul on his mission. For Judaism, 
pure and simple, would inevitably have perished ; but Judaism, as surviving in the 
truths and institutions of Christianity, is destined to last as long as time itself, and to 
be universal in its range. Had they thought more and looked further, they would have 
honoured him whom they were in such haste to kill. 2. Its guilt. (1) It charges a 
man with a crime of which he is absolutely innocent (vers. 28, 29). (2) It proceeds to 
punish without giving a chance of defending (vers. 30, 31). (S) It denies to a man 
that which God has bestowed, and which it claims for itself — a right to his convictions, 
(4) It dashes itself blindly and vehemently against the purposes of God. At this 
lime it was striking at Christ's chosen ambassador, and, without exception, the most 
useful servant of God then living. At many times since then, it has stricken the men 
who represented the truth of Christ, and has done sore evil to the Church, and so to 
the world. 

II. Thk bxobllenct of Christian devotednbss. How admirably the attitude of 
Paul contrasts with the movements of this excited, tumultuous, sanguinary mob 1 We 
admire (1) his courage in placing himself in the position ; (2) his calmness through- 
out (vers. 37— '39) ; (3) his readiness (ver. 40) — he was prepared at any emergency 
to speak the needful word. We admire it because we are sure that it all rested upon 
(4) his consecration to the cause, and his assurance of the presence of his Divine 
Master. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 16. — Incidenti hy the way. I. The powek of Christian lovb to bbino 
THE UNKNOWN NBAE. At Tyre Christian disciples, loving Christian hearts, are found. 
They warn Paul against possible coming dangers, they entertain the little band, and 
dismiss them with commendatory prayer. " The finding of disciples must have been 
a main feature in the diaries of the apostle." To meet with welcome, with hospitality, 
with congenial discourse upon journeys, — ^how refreshing I Well may it remind us of 
the universal providence, and the living love which is ever at work to overcome 
strangeness, and to bring the far-off near 1 Delays in business need be no delays in the 
work of the kingdom of God. While the departure from Tyre was delayed, Paul found 
time to instruct the disciples at Tyre. 

II. Philip the evangelist. The name is an excellent one for a true teacher. It 
means one who carries the good news. All that we know of him from ch. vi. 5; viii. 5 ; 
f&, 46, and his earnest preaching of Jesus, bears out this character. It seems to have 
Iweu his object and his peculiar gift to make clear from the Old Testament Scriptures 
that imxm was the Christ. The gift of his daughters seemed to bd a fulfilment of Joel'i 



OH. XXL 1— 40.J THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 181 

prophecy (iii. 1). They present the type of the calling of all Christian women to 
appropriate forms of Christian service. 

III. AoABTTS AND THE oiBDLB OF Paul. He giveg k symholic prophecy of coming 
trial. The girdle might he a symbol of complete dedication to the service of the Lord 
Jesus and of his gospel — of Christian duty. The loins once girt up must not be relaxed. 
Only when the will has been subdued to God and his service are we truly free ; and 
this even when others would use compulsion upon us. " Then the strong band encircles 
our life and girds us for eternity." It is a blessing when our eyes are opened to the 
coming trial, and our hearts are at the same time strengthened to meet it. This gives 
assurance that all that occurs is according to the blessed will, and must work together 
for good. 

IV. " The will of the Lobd be done." Often it is harder to contend with the 
weaknesses of others than with one's own. See Millais's touching picture of the 
' Huguenot.' Some silken band of dearest affection would detain us as we are pre- 
paring to march to the post of duty (of. Gen. xliii. 3, 4), Love means well, but does not 
always point in God's way (John ix. 17). When Luther was on his way to Worms, 
at place after place warning friends met him; and close to the town his beloved 
Spalatin sent to him to beg he would not venture into the scene of danger. " Were 
there as many devils in Worms as tiles on the roofs, I would go in," was his reply. 
Paul's heart is touched ; he feels the spring of manly strength giving way. But with 
a strong effort of faith and will he overcomes. " I am ready to die at Jerusalem for 
the Name of the Lord Jesus." " Not the cross for the cross's sake, but the cross for the 
sake of Christ ; " to be made like to his death (Phil. iii. 10) ; — these were the ideals of 
his life. And so the love of the Christian flock to the pastor must give way to th« 
pastor's love for Christ. " The will of the Lord be done I " It is the best concluding 
word of all our deliberations. It silences all objections to God's ways ; omr thoughts 
must be suppressed before the thought of the Only Wise, and our power bow before 
that of the Omnipotent. Our affection for others must withdraw its claims in favour 
of his, whose we are and whom we serve. This motto may well suit the servant of 
Gud in all the changes of his pilgrimage, against all the opposition of his foes, against 
the temptations of flesh and blood, of near and dear affection, and the weakness of his 
own heart. — J. 

Vers. 17—26. — Paul and tJie Levitical usages. Paul's gospel was that of salvation 
by Christ Jesus alone, as contrasted with the principle of salvation by legal obedience. 
But he did not contend against the Law and against Mosaism as such — only against 
the doctrine that the observance was indispensable to salvation. The spirit of evan- 
gelical freedom made him tolerant of the observance in the case of bom Jews, while at 
the same time he contended for the emancipation of the Gentile Christians from the 
claims of the Law (1 Cor. vii. 18, 19). 

I. An example or Christian pbudence or qenebal. It is necessary to study and 
consider human nature as it is. No acting as if in a vacuum, no trying to carry out 
abstract principles, regardless of men's habit of thinking and acting, can be either right 
or successful. The followers of Christ were to be " wise as serpents, yet harmless as 
doves." Want of tact is often a greater hindrance to success than want of greater gifts 
of head and heart. Men are repelled by disregard of their feelings, and often won over 
by trifling concessions, which cost nothing important to those who make them or to 
the cause of truth. But serious cases of conscience may arise under these conditions ; 
and prudence ceases to be a virtue whenever it is practised at the expense of truth 
or of truthfulness. 

IL An example of concession tu thk pbejitdioes of thb weak. In these 
difficult cases love must be the great guiding principle (Rom. xv. 1). Christian love 
" endureth all things." It has a delicate intelligence of the needs of the weak ; it 
practises a fine self-denial, condescenas to the lowlier in word and in deed. In such 
weakness there is true strength. It demands intellectual strength, to distinguish 
between form and contents, between the shell and the kernel ; and firmness of character, 
to hold fast to the main matter, while those of subordinate importance are given up ; 
constancy and faithfulness, not to deny the law of Christ, while promoting 1ot« 
amongst his disciples. In things indifferent we may take a part, provided we clearly 



182 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. xxi. 1— 4a 

see the way to promote the kingdom of God in so doing ; but at the same time, we must 
do nothing to favour the opinion that such things are necessary to salvation. In th« 
whole episode we may see the victory of love that " seeketh not her own " over bigotry 
and narrow-mindedness ; thus a forecast of the union of Israel and the heathen world 
in Christ, and a triumph of the Divine counsel in the extension of his kingdom and the 
diffusion of his thoughts of salvation. With reference to Paul, it illustrates his saying, 
" To the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews ; to those under the Law, 
as under the Law, that I might gain those under the Law." — J. 

Vers. 27 — 40. — Banger and deliverance at Jerusalem. I. The accusation aoadtst 
Paul. 1. He is repiesented as an enemy of the Law, like Stephen before him. He 
has to confront the blind and murderous storm of human passion, more dreadful than 
the waves of the sea, presently to be encountered. Now is the warning concerning the 
things to be expected in Jerusalem about to be fulfilled. The sinoerest friends of 
religion have often to incur the charge of being its enemies, the truest worshippers of 
God are denounced as atheists. 2. As a violator of the temple, he was said to have 
" made the holy place common." There is a close parallel between this mode of attack 
and that on Jesua. Gi^eat must have been his consolation to find himself treading in 
the footste|)8 of his Lord, as his great desire was to be conformable to him. The greatest 
honour lies in bearing the cross of Jesus, becoming partaker of his sufferings, being 
" as he was in the world." 

II. FUETHEB PARALLELS BETWEEN THE TBEATMENT OF HIM AND THAT OP THE 

Savioub. The whole city was in an uproar. He was rejected by his own countrymen 
— cast out of the temple. They desired to slay him, and yet not stain the sacred place ; 
straining at gnats and swallowing camels. They thought they would do God service 
in slaying him. At Ephesus, pagan superstition and the love of gain were against 
him ; here, Jewish bigotry and fanaticism. Both scenes are warnings against the mis- 
diiection of religious feeling. We need reflection and knowledge to purify the religious 
instinct, which is like fire, pernicious if not watched and kept under control. The 
murder of Jesus, and all judicial murders of teachers and leaders, are, considered from 
the human side, both crimes and blunders. 

III. The impeisonment of Paul. The light and shade mingle in the deed. On the 
one hand we see human passion, blind folly, wicked hatred, on the part of the Jews ; 
on the other, a bright picture of Christian heroic courage, self-possession, and sweet 
patience on the part of the apostle. And over and above all the light of Divine leading 
shines, like a pillar of fire by night. There is the power which protects the servants of 
God, the wisdom which employs even its adversaries to carry out its designs, the love 
which makes a centre of light and warmth within the man's "own clear breast." 
Man proposes, and God disposes. He guides the well-meant counsels of his friends to 
other ends than they supposed, and the designs of foes to other issues than they had 
calculated. 

IV. The DELtVEEANCE. Rejected by his own people, a friend is raised up for Paul in 
the person of a heathen. The Koman tribune stills the uproar, saves the apostle's life, 
gives him the opportunity of clearing himself firom the charge against him, affords him 
liberty of speech. How impressive is the scene with which this chapter closes ! There 
stands the preacher in chains. His pulpit the stairs of the Roman fortress ; instead of 
deacons surrounding and supporting him, rough Roman soldiers. Murderous cries 
instead of psalms precede his discourse. Instead of a calm audience before him, an 
enraged mob. But let us draw the veil and look within his heart. There is the spirit 
of faith and of love, of wisdom and of strength. There is that courage which the con- 
adousness of right and truth inspires, a "good conscience toward God." There was 
that whole devotion which ever makes its impression on the rudest hearts, and alone 
gives freedom and joy. Above all, the knowledge of a Saviour and a God, to whom in 
Ufe or death he belongi, from whom neither life nor death can separate.— J. 

Vers. 1—6. — Miletus to Tyre : the steadfastness of a holy mind. I. The trial of 
Paul's faith. In the separation from dear brethren and the prospects of suffering. 
The long d»ys of quiet thought, sailing through the Greek Archipelago to Cos, Rhodes, 
Tktara, and round the Bouth-west of Cyprus to Tyre, deepened tlte resolution of his 



3H.IXI.1— 40J THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 183 

heart and prepared him to encounter the temptations from weaker brethren. At Tyr« 
the great crisis of his faith came much nearer. Disciples said, "Set no foot in Jeru- 
salem." The conflict was between the voice of the Spirit in the purpose of his heart, 
and the prophetic warnings of coming danger which he could not doubt. It was not 
that one command contradicted another command ; but that, like Abraham, he had to 
obey, although to obey must be to suffer. Faith conquered. 

II. The trials that are borne in the spirit of humble confidence work out BLESsraa 
IN THE Ghbistian LIFE. Sympathy and affection. Prayer. Simplicity and reality. 
Mutual encouragement — Paul strengthened by the interview ; the Christians of Tyre 
helped to aim at a higher life by contact with such an example of spiritual heroism. 
Influence on the homes and families. Christianity was already accomplishing a great 
work in social life. Tyre was commercially decaying, but here was a new principle of 
prosperity, better than the worldly one. The position of such a port made its Christi- 
anity a blessing to the whole world. The visit of Paul would be remembered and 
spread abroad. — R, 

Vers. 7 — 14. — Tyre to Ocesarea: the wiU of God in (he heart of hit servant. As 
the days went on, the pressure upon the heart of Paul increased. The house of Philip 
the evangelist the scene of the last great test of his preparation for the future. The 
four virgin daughters, and Agabus from Jerusalem, repeated the prophetic warnings ; but 
no one said by the voice of the Spirit, " Go not." Human voices must sometimes be 
resisted. Weeping may break a heart, but it ought not to break a resolution formed in 
the sight of God and by his Spirit. 1. An example of lofty spiritual discernment. 
Distinguishing between human voices and Divine ; between a prospect of suffering and 
a prospect of defeat ; between being bound in body and being bound in spirit — Paul was 
rejoicing ?n the liberty of his soul, it was of "Jttle consequence to him what they might 
do with his limbs — between the plots and enmity of men and the victorious grace of 
God. 2. An encouragement to steadfastness in doing the Divine will. We must not 
listen to persuasions when God calls us on. We must be ready for all ; but, the course 
being once clearly opened to us, then a humble fixedness of heart is the best prepara- 
tion for the path of duty. 3. An instance of the controlling influence of character in 
the Christian Church. The weaker yield to the stronger if the stronger remain firm 
Those that think much of external difficulties and dangers have to be lifted out of 
their weakness by the words and example of the loftier and more heroic souls, — E. 

Vers, 15 — ^26, — Arrival and reception at Jerusalem,. Notice— 
I. The decided advance in the minds of the leading disciples among the Jews. 
1, They gladly welcomed Paxil, and heard his narrative of missionary work, which 
includeid labour among the Gentiles. They glorified God for it. 2. They made no 
demand upon Paul as to renouncing his advanced position, but acquiesced in it. 
3. They must have resisted the extreme Judaistic party in order to do so. 

n. The contrast between the timid policy of the James pabtv and Paul 
HIMSELF. They feared for him. He feared nothing for himself. Their advice was 
dictated by prudence, but it wrought more evil than good in result. 

III. The noble example of self-abnegation and conciliation. Paul yielded to 
their advice, to show that the reports about him were false, and that his free position 
allowed him both to observe the Law and not to observe it, as expediency might dictate, 
because he regarded it as no longer necessary to salvation. He became a Jew to the 
Jews, to save the Jews. The true firmness is not obstinacy, prejudice, self-assertion, 
bigotry, but distinguishes between the essential and non-essential. Perhaps it was 
the wiser way to let the weaker brethren be convinced by the facts how hopeless it was 
to save Judaism, 

IV, Great purposes of God are fulfilled through the ebbobb and niFiRMiTiEa 
OF HiB PEOPLE. Paul would meet Jewish accusations all the more firmly though hia 
appearance in the temple put the torch to the pile.— B. 

Vers. 27 — 36. — The prophecy fulfilled. "Bonds and imprisonment" 
I. The tumult excited by Ablatio Jews, probably seeking for Paul, with prede- 
terniinati m to destroy him. It wag his faithful missionary laboius, therefore, which 



W4 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xn. 1—40 

lay at the root of the trouble ; he knew it, and it helped him to he str'>ug in faith 
Christ would protect his own ambassador. 

II. The CHARaEs against hiu webe utterly false. He raised no opposition to 
the Law. He never defiled the temple. Trophimus the Gentile had not been brought 
there. The enemies of truth always depend on lies. False accusation has been always 
the resort of fanaticism and bigotry when it is afraid for itself. 

HI. Roman disoiplinb, as before, is called in to suppress mob violknob, and thus 
help the gospel. So in after times Soman law prepared the way for the spread of 
Christianity. (See Maurice's ' Lectures on the Religion of Rome,' delivered at Edin- 
burgh 1854, published 1855.) 

IV. The bpebdy result of the weak advice of the Jewish believers is seen in thd 
apostle within seven days, in imprisonment. The brave policy always the safest. 
Compromise is danger. — B. 

Vers. 37 — 40. — The Roman soldier face to face with the Christian a^tUe. Tha 
heathen, notwithstanding his ignorance, was more open to reason than the Jew, blinded 
by fanaticism and bigotry. Religion corrupted by priestcraft is worse than scepticism. 
Courtesy and chivalry may be made to serve higher purposes. The providential 
appiiintment of the history of Judaism opened the way for a free gospel. Jews were 
filling up their cup. — B. 

Ver. 5. — Widening ttreams of Christian love. The contents of this verse are almost 
unique for the day to which they belong. And at the same time they seem to link 
together some of the best of their own time with some of the best of modern time. 
The scene is familiar to us, which was once strange enough, and Tyre will be held in 
remembrance, wheresoever the gospel shall be preached, for one bright, redeeming 
trait. For we have here a significant token of what Christianity will avail to do, 
without any direct aim at it for the time being, in and with family life. 

I. It has baibbd women to share and share alike with men the benefits, the 

JOTS, THE SPONTANEODS OFFICES OF FRIENDSHIP OF WHICH CHRISTIAN LIFE AND CHA- 
EACTEB ARE THE SUBJECT. 

II. It has TET more SIQNIFIOANTLT brought into a NEW KIND OF PBOMINENCB A 
VERY OLD PRECEPT AS TO THE TRAINING UP OP CHILDREN. 

III. It HAS HALLOWED THE COMBINED EFFECT OF THE UNITED LIFE OF THE FAMILT. 

Nature itself does not make a whole family so really one as Christianity does. Many 
a time we read of a whole family being baptized, when presumably not only the wife 
but little children were embraced in the number. And now wives and children of the 
" disciples," in helpful company, cheer the steps of the departing Paul and his special 
fellow-labourers. True as we feel this was to nature, it is true to a nature that had 
long become disaccustomed to its better self, in those days of Tyre. And Christianity 
and Christian occasion have now begun to enable nature to " lift its head again." 

IV It has found a new way of linking family with family. How often 
is the family unit a wonderfiilly selfish unit! It is truly something larger than the 
individual, and so is the selfishness somewhat larger also — larger in its sphere of 
exposure, and larger In its spreading mischief, and larger in its shame. There are not 
a few who would be astonished to think they could be taxed with selfishness as 
individuals, who nevertheless may be powerful factors in making, sanctioning, keeping, 
the selfishness of the family. This latter covers itself also under many a more sacred 
name. And because the family should be the very shrine of one affection, those who 
compose it " do this," but mournfully " leave the other undone." But now family with 
family attended the departing steps of Paul. And had they never caught the idea 
before, now they see or begin to see that it takes many a family of men to number up 
the one family of the " Father," " from whom every family in heaven and earth is 
named " (Eph. iii. 14, 15, see Eevised Version). 

V, It finds the genuine larger family circle in prayer. They all "kneeled 
down on the shore, and prayed." It was a prayer of pilgrim apostles, pilgrim fathers 
and mothera, and young pilgrim children. 1. Well did they kneel on the sands. 
2. Well did they pray in sight of life's sea. 3. Well did all lift their eyes and 
' thou{;ht8 from sand and sea to heaven in prayer : but meantime forgot selves awhile, 



OH. XXL 1—40.3 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 186 

that all might pray for others. Paul prayed for them of Tyre, fathers and mothers 
and children, that they might love aud do and keep the faith. And if no tongue 
spoke it, who can douht that the loving, regretful group, who so grudged losing Paul 
into the midst of the dangers that were waiting for liim at Jerusalem, commended 
him also to God and the Word of his grace ? and commended that Word itself to 
Godt— B. 

Ver. 13. — A tender heart to a strong conscience. It might he thought that Paul had 
already sufiBciently run the gauntlet of warnings touching the consequences of going to 
Jerusaleni (oh. xix. 21 ; xx. 16, 22, 23 ; xxi. 4, 11). If his resolution could have been 
altered, or his conscience stilled an hour, this was the hour. But, instead of showing 
any symptom of being " in a strait betwixt two," even in an hour of such tenderness, 
it is now that "his heart is fixed." The needle points -unerringly and without a 
quivering deflection, and moral resolution touches the point of moral sublimity. And 
we may justly sound here the praise of conscience ; for in advancing degrees, we see — 

I. The praise of conscience, in its attitude m the presence of danger. 

II. The gbeatbb praise op conscience, in its attitude in the presence op 
affection, 

III. The greatest praise of conscience, in its attitude of ooMPtETB sur- 
render to the Spirit of perfect truth and perfect guidance. 

IV. The PEEFBCTiOiT of the conscience in itself, when it owns to no trem- 
BLiNO, NO wavering. There was no coldness, no hardness, no unrelentingness of 
heart, in that grand hour, when Paul's heart was ready to break for human affec- 
tion's sake, but was a very tower of strength toward Christ as in him. — ^B. 

Ver. 16. — A hiography of honour, written in a name and title only. The sli^t 
obscurity attaching to the rendering of this verse diminishes in nothing its interest 
and instructiveness. Whether the verse purports to say that the disciples of Caesarea 
journeying with Paul and his companions brought them to Mnason as their host, when 
they arrived at Jerusalem ; or that, picking up Mnason himself at G»sarea, who after- 
wards became the host of Paul at Jerusalem, they rendered him also the help of their 
escort thither, — does not alter its special significance. This lies in the fact that Mnason's 
name, as soon as mentioned, is despatched with two remarks, never again to be referred 
to in the sacred history ; and yet those two remarks are felt to he worth more than 
two volumes. Wherein, then, we may ask, does their special significance hide ? 

I. Thet are tidings of a man who has received Christian light, and has 

BEEN FAITHFUL TO IT "EVEN TO OLD AGE." 

II. They are tidings of a man who received Christian light at the mght 

TIME to receive IT — SO SOON A8 IT CAME, ANB WHEN HE WAS TOUNO. 

III. Thet therefore fix the description of a man who must in consequence 

HAVE now stores OF THE BEST KIND OF EXPERIENCE AND STRENGTH. 

IV. Thet proclaim a man whose character has a certain and an indisput- 

ABLK VALUE, A8 A SPEAKING TESTIMONY TO OhRIST HIMSELF AND HIS TRUTH. 

V. They make a certain promise both for the Church and the world— 

THE FEOMISE of A MAN WHOSE COMPANY, FRIENDSHIP, HOSPITALITY, AND VEBY COUN- 
TENANCE GIVEN TO A FELLOW-CBEATUBE WILL BE A HUNDREDFOLD PROFITABLE. B. 

Vers. 18 — 20. — The advocate of the Gentiles. With great determination Paul had 
made his way to Jerusalem. The public ways terminating in the city were frequented, 
and the city itself would soon be filled with visitors. Paul knew well in the spirit that 
stern conflicts and no imaginary dangers awaited him. But before he encountered these 
he had to count with some other dangers, and which were in some aspects justly more 
formidable. Paul does not shirk them. He had not come up to desert his colours at 
the last, nor to prove his faithfulness gone. That a disunited Church should meet th« 
crowd of the world, and even of various ecclesiastical parties, was a thing not to be 
thought of, certainly not to be allowed. It is the very thing that, times without 
number^ since Paul showed the illustrious example to the contrary now, has been the 
weakness of the Church and the strength of the great foe. It is evident from the 
passage now before us that Paul's course was a course that meant practically that so 



186 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [on. xxi. 1- -10 

far things should be " en regie," and that nothing should be wanting on his part in order U 
secure a firm and united front. How many throw the hindrances of sell-will and of 
crotchets into the way at moments the most critical, most inopportune I It is with 
some particularity that we are here shown how Paul did the opposite. Let us notice— 

I. The formal visit of Paul to thb coNSTirnTBD Church. It is a visit to the 
Church as represented by James (who was evidently at present acting as its chief 
pastor in Jerusalem) and by the elders. There might have been plausible excuse for 
it if Paul had not thus reported himself to the Church, but he does not put any to the 
peed of searching for its warrant. He comes to the Church ; recognizes its reality as a 
power ; recognizes its unity ; recognizes it as the source and the depository of much 
possible future knowledge and wisdom ; and recognizes it as the one earthly bar of 
judgment (so far as there can be one at all) before which either Christian disciple or 
Christian apostle may stand without infringing the allegiance due either to individual 
conscience or to the great bar of judgment above, invisible, but ever open and effective. 

II. The salutation of Paul. What this salutation was we may gather 
sufficiently from a comparison of the instances, in all about seventy, in which 
reference is made to it in the New Testament. In the English Version the thiiiji; 
intended appears under the description of " saluting," " greeting," " embracing," and 
" taking leave." There can be little doubt that, in the case of persons present with one 
another, the outward act of recognition, whether of a more or less intimate kind, was 
accompanied by some expression of Christian wish, or prayer, or gratitude ; while in the 
case of messages, so many of which are found conveyed in the Epistles, the essence of 
the salutation consisted generally in the ever-grateful significance that lay in the fact 
of the remembrance of the absent. All the rest. Christian wish, prayer, or thanks- 
giving, would be readily taken as " understood." In the present instance the special 
mention of the salutation reminds us justly of the humane and inartificial character- 
istics of Cliristianity. In sketches of its history of the most solemn import, nothing 
forbids, conceals, or even obscures their entering in as constituent elements of the whole 
scene. Even prominence is given to them, and they are not unfrequently the light 
and colour of the history. The unmeasured steadfastness of Christian principle and 
truth, is a thing utterly different from imfeeling severity and the expression of the 
natural instincts of human hearts. 

ni. The address of Paul. It consisted of a faithful — we might almost call it also 
a dutiful — report of his own mission to the Gentile world. We can see, but, perhaps, 
can scarcely enter into, the exceeding interest of the subject at Jerusalem. So much 
hinged on exactly what had taken place, and upon the exact statement by one com- 
petent and trustworthy of what had taken place. Hence we may observe the par- 
ticularity with which even the history rehearses and repeats it. 1. Paul gives God 
indeed, the glory of what had been done, but probably also means to make a veri 
pronounced afBrmation before the Church at Jerusalem, that the work was indeed thf 
work of God, to stop the unbelieving mouth or mind. 2. Paul speaks of the work o 
his own ministry. It is no hearsay, no impression, no hopefulness with which he 
entertains the listeners. There was not a statement he made, nor an incident he 
described " particularly," for the full weight and force of which he was not prepared to 
become guarantor. 3. Paul's subject of address was specially kept to the things that 
had been accomplished among the Gentiles. Yet we very well know how much of 
thrilling interest he had met with in his associations with his own people, in addition 
to the occasions when their fortunes were inevitably linked with the things that haji- 
pened to the Gentiles. Throughout it is evident what the returned ambassador of 
Jesus Christ had in his eye and on his heart. In a sense, he staked all on accrediting 
the Gentiles as heirs of the grace of God, and to be acknowledged as fellow-heira wilb 
himself and the Church he was addressing. His own singleness of eye and purity cl 
mind and fidelity to his original call appear in bright and bold relief in all this. 

IV. The reception acooeded to Paul's report. Paul's character was no longer the 
thing It was when, some years ago, he had first visited the Church at Jerusalem as a 
convert. This is his fifth visit since his conversion. Now for him to testify, and to 
testify " particularly," was to secure a ready hearing and a trusted attention. 1. They 
believe him. 2. And they " glorify " God. Envy, and bigotry, and pride, and 
cxclusiveness are falling away from that typical Church, " the mother of na all.'' 



OH. xn. 1—40.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 187 

Length and breadth are seen and are acknowleclged in the gospel of Christ. Th« 
world's day has dawned, and the light of it, refused by so many, is entering into tti 
eyes of that meeting of the chief pastor at the time at Jerusalem, and the elders. And 
they did well to " glorify the Lord " because of it. — B. 

Vers. 20 — 39. — The pastor and elden of the Church not infallible. There may be 
considered to be some uncertainty as to the exact merits of the remarkable case which 
the history reproduces in this passage, but without rendering any verdict, pronouncing 
any opinion, or even offering any suggestion. In the room that is accordingly allowed 
for option, it is believed that the following positions, as they are certainly maintainable 
in themselves, are also to be impressed on us by the present history : — 

I. The advice of the bbst-intbntioned policy, on the lips of the leaders of a 
Christian Church, is distant from the advice of clear Christian PEiNcirLB and 
truth, as the poles are distant from one another. There was not a little in the 
exact tone of those who urged on Paul a certain course (ver. L'O) and in the exact time 
which they used for pressing their suit, which invests it with suspicion, and which may 
very possibly have done so with Paul. 

II. The pressure of the advice of many, and those many the known leaders of 
THE Church, will not absolve the individual conscience ob judgment. It is quite 
possible that the present was an occasion which Paul would have described as one oi 
those when he would make himself all things to all men. It is also quite possibla 
that this was a right occasion of observing that practice. And lastly, for that very 
reason the more, it may seem quite possible, that Paul's judgment was in no degree 
hoodwinked, nor his conscience eclipsed, when he yielded to the advice urged upon 
him. As no whisper of censure seems breathed upon him, the providence of God, nay, 
the Spirit himself, may have been his Guide now, to the end that facts should teach 
those who were responsible for the advice, while Paul would feel, ay, genuinely feel, that 
the compensation that was given to him for his sufferings consisted in the audience of 
Jew and Gentile of all sorts, of Koman governors and officers and soldiers, which he 
had in consequence the opportunity of addressing (ver. 39). If Paul were mistaken 
and at fault now, he reaps his punishment, though still he rescues some advantage out 
of all for Christ and the gospel. And he is taught that not even the kindness of his 
heart and willingness " to be persuaded " by the skilful representations in affection's 
hour of others, can be a substitute for the individual, steady, regulated judgment and 
conscience of the Christian. If he were not mistaken, the same lesson is taught, 
though by a very different route. He himself held and acted upon the conviction that 
his individual judgment, under the guidance of the Divine Spirit, should have its way — 
that judgment going to this that, though himself suffered, the leaders of the Church 
and " many thousands of zealots of the Law " should be effectually taught. 

III. The Divine purpose and work through all error of human judgment, 
through all uncertainty of fidelity, even in human consciencbs, triumph and 
vindicate their own rights. 1. The intended short way out of an apprehended 
difficulty and danger, suggested with coaxing tones and words (ver. 20, " Thou seest, 
brother "), proves a very long and painful way. Who can tell what must hav« been the 
excited apprehensions of James and the elders as the riot went on, nor stopped in a 
sense, till Paul set off for Borne itself? 2. For Paul, whose is both the active work and 
the keen suffering, " the beginning of the end " dates from this very Church meeting 
at Jerusalem. The road is opened to Bome and to Csesar and to " the palace and all 
other places " left for Paul's ministry. And the goal of his career comes into sight for 
the racer of keen vision as well as of keen energy. So the gospel gains fresh wings, 
and that grace of God which lovingly overrules where perhaps it was not allowed tu 
rule, is made known to vaster numbers, and amongst them to some whom it might not 
have reached in any other way. — B. 

Vers. 4, 11. — 27ie Spirit in Paid, and the Spirit in othen. The narrative given of 
the apostle's progiass toward Jerusalem suggests some serious and difBcult questions. 
We now consider one of them. Once and again it appears as if the Divine Spirit sent 
messages which should have stopped the apostle, and prevented his going on to the holy 
city ; and St Paul evidently resisted these attempted hindraD<n8. Then was h» right 



188 fiJB ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ch. xii. 1— 4ft 



in so doing? 71 o'i 'fs .Hght, how can we explain his conduct? The circumstancei 
may be cyjof-Jlv oompCiTed with those narrated concerning the prophet who was 
unfaithful to tne 'jom/Dission distinctly entrusted to himself (see 1 Kings xiii. 1 — 25), 
" It seeriLs u S;-8t .[.oinowhat startling that St. Paul should reject what is described as an 
inspired orunsel ; rjt^ if we believe him also to have been guided by the Spirit, thtit the 
two inspiratJona sho'ild thus clash. We remember, however, that men received the 
Spirit 'by measure,' and the prophets of the CJhurches at Tyre, as elsewhere, though 
foreseeing the danger to which the apostle was exposed, might yet be lacking in that 
higher inspiration which guided the decision of the apostle." This explanation is given 
in a simpler form in the ' Speaker's Commentary.' " The foreknowled:^e was inspired ; 
the advice based upon it was merely a human inference. St. Paul accepted the 
information, but did not yield to the warning. Christ's approval of his conduct is 
implied in ch. xxiii. 11." This suggestion in explanation of the difficulty may be fully 
considered and illustrated. 

I. St. PADii HAD DISTINCT LEADINGS OF THE SpiMT. He had (1) those which were 
genn'ol to his apostolic work ; and (2) those which were special to particular occasions, 
as e.g. at Troas (ch. xvi. 9). We may, therefore, be quite sure that he knew perfectly well 
when he was under Divine lead ; and, on this occasion, we have evidence that he knew 
what God's will for him was, and that he was taking the path of duty in going up to 
Jeiusalem. In ch. xx. 22 he distinctly says, " Now I go bound in the spirit unto 
Jerusalem." No doubts or questions disturbed his own mind. He knew that Gud led ; 
and he knew that, regardless of consequences, it was his simple duty to follow. It 
may be shown that still, in our day, a man may have a full and clear knowledge of 
God's will for him, and then he is bound to do that will, however men's prophecies 
and advice and warnings may entice him aside. When a man has inward conviction 
of what is right for him, all prophesying of consequences becomes temptation to be 
resisted. 

II. Others had intimations of facts that would occitb. These came by the 
Spirit. But carefully note the distinction — no one was commanded, in the Name of 
the Lord, to tell St. Paul that he must not go up to Jerusalem. We have only the fact 
noticed that certain persons, in the exercise of their prophetic gift, foresaw the con- 
sequences of his so going, and stated what they anticipated. This comes out plainly 
in the fuller account of what Agabus did and said (ver. 11). His intimation was simply 
of facta. Agabus does not seem to have felt entitled to add any personal persuasions. 
This distinction between the leadings of the Spirit in St, Paul and the leadings of the 
Spirit in the prophets and prophetesses, removes all difficulty of antagonistic inspiratinus. 
In the apostle the leadings concerned duti/ ; in the prophets it concerned only facts. 
What relation the knowledge of the facts had to the doing of duty we shall presently 
see. 

III. Othbbs added pebsttabions based on theib own prophetic knowledoe. But 
the persuasions were their own, not the inspiration of God's Sjiirit, and St. Paul was in 
no sense bound to follow them. No conceivable authority could lie in them. Tl.e 
character of the attempts to hinder the apostle are clearly seen in ver. 12 : " And when 
we heard these things, both we [St. Paul's companions], and they of that place, besought 
him not to go up to Jerusalem." Manifestly the apostle would have been altogether 
wrong if he had yielded to these kind friends, and resisted the inward monitions and 
leadings of God's Spirit. Oftentimes in Christian life we find that our most anxious 
work is to resist the importunities and affectionate entreaties of those who would keep 
IB from the work to which God plainly calls us. Illustration : keeping men back from 
consecration to ministerial and missionary life. 

IV. Such persuasions tested St. Paul's lotaltt to the Spibit's inwaed lbadinob. 
And this is the reason why the prophetic intimations of coming facts were given. How 
deeply the apostle felt both the prophecies and the persuasions is seen in ver. 13. 
Would he be drawn aside from the plain path of duty by them ? They made it hard 
to be faithful to God's will as he knew it ; but he did not yield. Well he knew that 
mere consequences resulting from action, as men see them, never can decide the right 
or the wrong of the action. A man must always act upon the light and lead which 
God gives bun, and accept the issues which Divine providence is pleased to brini' out 
d hi* coiidust, A man is always right who is true to the witness that Clod malus ii 



OH. XXL 1—40.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLEa IM 



his own heart. Show how much of Christian failure is really due to yielding ander 
the temptations that would remove us from following out our convictions. So St. Petej" 
tried to hinder his Lord and Master, and received this severe answer, " Get thee behind 
me, Satan." Distinguish, however, very clearly between mere self-willedness and the 
conviction of an inward Divine leading such as open and trusting hearts need never 
fail to recognize. 

This example of the great apostle should impress upon us that, if we distinctly knciw 
what God would have us do, then no kind of peril of circumstances or fear of con- 
sequences may be permitted to lead us aside from the plain path of duty. We mubt 
ever be loyal to the " inward lead." — ^B. T. 

Ver. 5. — The influence of personal affection on Christian minister ». The scene 
described here may be compared with that at Miletus (ch. xx. 26, 27). The impression 
that it was the last time they would see the great apostle among them intensified the 
expression of feeling, but it could hardly be said to increase the affection which the 
disciples cherished towards St. Paul. That strong personal attachment the apostle won 
whSrever he went. Some men are remarkable for the power of drawing forth the 
affection and love of those whom they seek to serve for Christ's sake. Some men 
are never more or other than officials, valued and trusted only for " their work's sake." 
Others are beloved " for their own sakes," and the work they do is glorified by the beauty 
which, to men's eyes, they put upon it in the doing of it. Some think that personal 
affection for a pastor or a teacher is rather a hindrance to him, as the truth he teaches 
may come to be valued for his sake, and not for its own. Others urge that truth 
never really reaches them and sways them untU it comes with the persuasions of one 
whom they wholly trust and whom they intensely love. Every true pastor will dread 
putting himself in any sense between souls and Christ ; but every pastor will rejoice if, 
by winning the love of men, he can bring them to love Christ. Picturing the scene ol 
out text. Canon Farrar says, " When the week was over St. Paul left them ; and so 
deeply in that brief period had he won their affections, that all the members of the 
little community, with their wives and children, started with him to conduct him on 
his way. Before they reached the vessel, they knelt down side by side, men and 
women and little ones, somewhere on the surf-beat rocks near which the vessel was 
moored, to pray together — he for them, and they for him — before they returned to their 
homes ; and he went once more on board for the last stage of the voyage from Tyre to 
Ptolemais, the modern Acre." We dwell on the following points : — 

I. St. Paul's power to command and to win affection. This was a part of 
his natural gifts. It belonged to his disposition and character. But we may especially 
note two things : (1) he freely gave love to others, and only those who can love can win 
love ; (2) he had a singular power of spiritual insight, and wherever that is foimd men 
have unusual charm to the view of others. 

II. The kind of farewell brouoht out the expressions of affbctfion. All 
farewells test friendship and love. This was peculiar, (1) as being a last farewell ; (2) 
as taken immediately before anticipated scenes of sorrow and afSiction. Compare oui 
Lord's view of Mary's act, anointing his feet with nard. It was a preparatory anoint- 
\a% for burial, and so an unusual expression of love. 

III. The influence of such manifested affection oh the minister himself. 
Especially (1) its power to constrain him to do his very best ; (2) the gracious and 
tender tone which it puts on all his teaching and relations; (3) the adaptations it 
enables him to make of the truth to individuals, since love is the greatest revealer of 
men to their fellows ; and (4) the hopefulness it leads him to cherish concerning those 
for whom he labours. 

IV. The influence which such affection has on those who feel rr. Especi- 
ally notice that it opens their hearts to receive instruction and counsel as nothing else 
c«n ; and it constantly acts as an inspiring force, moving them to be worthy of those 
whom they love. 

The minister's great appeal is to men's hearts. If he can win their love, he will not 
f/til to instruct their minds and sway their wills. — B. T. 

Ter. 13. — St. Peter and St. Paid compared in boasting. This strong declaration, 



190 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. xxi. 1— 4a 

" I am ready not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the Name of the 
Lord Jesus," sounds very much like the language of St. Peter to his Master. " Lord, 
why cannot 1 follow thee now ? I will lay down my life for thy sake." And yet there 
is the most vital distinction between the spirit and tone and temper of the two sayings, 
and the difference comes fuUy out in the actions that followed. Self-trusting Peter 
failed in the testing hour. Christ-trusting Paul went on to win the martyr's crown. 
This is the subject before us ; but in introducing it there should be some estimate of 
tlie blended strength and weakness of Peter's character before his fall. The buldness 
and forwardness were valuable qualities for one who was to be a lea^ling gospel witness 
and missionary ; but before the humbling experience of his fall, Peter's forwardness 
meant undue self-reliance. So our Lord had on one occasion to speak more sternly to 
him than to any other of his disciples, even saying, " Get thee behind me, Satan." 
There should be also a due estimate of the highly wrought condition of Paul's feeling 
when he uttered the seemingly boastful words (if our text. " The intense sensitiveness 
of St. Paul's nature shows itself in every syllable. It was with no Stoic hardness that 
he resisted their entreaties, 'i'hey were positively crushing to him. He adhered to his 
Durpose, but it was as with a broken heart. In spite of this, however, his martyr-lilje, 
Luther-like nature carried him forward. Bonds and imprisonment! — these he had 
heard of when he was yet at Corinth and Ephesus, before he had started on his 
journey ; but what were they to one who was ready to face death?" The comparison 
may take three forms. 

I. St. Peter's boasting was that of inexperiencb. He talked about dying 
with Jesus, but he did not know what dying was. He had not suffered much in his 
discipleship. Persecutions nor shame had yet touched him. He talked about dying -is 
we all do until God has taken us and set us down at the very edge of the border-laud. 
Many of us feel very confident that we can master temptation, endure affliction, and 
lace death ; while the truth may be that we know nothing of the force or the subtlety 
of either, and may well be humble, and look on to untried scenes saying, "Lead thou 
me on." 

II. St. Paul's boasting was that of bxperienob. He had fully proved what he 
could do, and what he could bear, for Christ's sake. He had been sick and iU ; he had 
faced death by shipwreck ; he had been stoned by the mob, and left for dead. He was 
always bearing about in the body the "dying of the Lord Jesus." He might speak 
strongly and confidently ; for there could be nothing in his coming lot that had not been 
represented in his past experiences. He knew well that he laboured day by day with 
his life, as it were, in his hands. There is all the difference between his words and St. 
Peter's that we find between the confident utterance of a youth and the calm expres- 
sions of the aged. And St. Paul's has really no boastfulness in it. It is but the fixefi 
and settled purpose of his life pressed out into intense language. 

III. St. Peter's boastino was that of passionate peeling. He did love the 
Master, and was sincere in expressing his love ; but he did not thinh about hie words 
before speaking, so they bear the character of the impulsive man that St. Peter was. 
Under excitement we may easily promise too much. Under self-restraint we shall find 
that what we would and what we can seriously differ from each other. When fealing 
is calmed, judgment will not always support what feeling has said. 

IV. St. Paul's BOASTLtJG was that op settled conviction. The result, not ol 
resolve alone, but of resolve tested, renewed, and established. Sober, settled conviction 
breathes in that first chapter of the Epistle to the Philippians. It is quiet, calm 
writing. And it reads thus : " With all boldness, as always, so now also Christ shall 
be magnified in my body, whether it be by life or by death. For to me to live is Christ, 
and to die is gain." The same tone of settled conviction is on his glowing words so 
simply written in his letter to Timothy : " I am now ready to be offered, and the time 
of my departure is at hand. I have fought a sood fight, I have finished my course, I 
have kept the faith : henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness." 
Such expressions can never be mistaken for boasting ; they are only signs of a soul that 
is sublimely uplifted in the strength of its faith, and in the fulness of its experience. 

v. St. Peter's boasting was that of SBLP-coNFroENCB. This being the more 
familiar view taken of St. Peter's words, the mode of treating it may be left. The 
point to impress is that he spoke relying on himself, and with no question of his owic 



on. xxul— 40.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 191 

ability to carry out what he said. He that leaneth on himself leaneth on a reed that 
will too surely bend beneath his weight. " It is not in man that walketh to direct his 
steps." And St. Peter'i own Master thus solemnly warned both him and his fellow- 
disciples : " Without me ye can do nothing." Then and now, self-confidence is only 
vain confidence. 

VI. St. Paul's boastino was that op FXJhh submission. St. Peter thought of 
" dying with Christ " as something to do. St. Paul thought of it as something to bear. 
Christ did not ask St. Peter to die with him. He pushed himself into the place. 
Christ did ask St. Paul to suffer and to die for him, and the tender grace of his seeming 
boasting lies in its being his full acceptance of G-od's will for him, and his assurance 
that, however hard to flesh and blood, his will is love. St. Paul's spirit took his 
confidence altogether away from self, and made it rest altogether on Christ. St. Peter 
said, " I can do all things." St. Paul said, " I can do all things through him that 
Etrengtheneth me," After his humiliation, St. Peter was converted to the better mind ; 
and illustration of his humble and trustful spirit may be taken from his Epistles. 
Especially notice 1 Pet. v. 6, 7, " Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty 
hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time : casting all your care upon him ; for 
he careth for you." — R. T. 

Ver. 16. — Old disciples. There must have been some peculiarity in the case ot 
Mnason for St. Luke to remark that he was an " old disciple," which may mean that he 
was an " old man and a disciple," or that he was one of the earliest disciples, possibly 
one who was led to accept Christ as the Messiah on the day of Pentecost. He was 
a " man of Cyprus," but he may have been visiting Jerusalem at Pentecost. Mention 
is made of him in connection with St. Paul's journey to explain the care which the 
Christian disciples took to secure the apostle's safety and comfort in the holy city. 
The crowd at the feast-times was so immense that the ordinary stranger might fail ta 
find accommodation. Mnason had a house at Jerusalem, and there St. Paul was sheltered. 
There are two senses in which a man may be spoken of as an " old disciple : " (1) he 
may be old in years ; (2) he may be old in experience. No Christian disciple could at 
that time have been very old in experience of Christian life. There are four possible 
suppositions concerning the discipleship of Mnason. (1) He may have been, like Simeon, 
one of those who looked for redemption in Israel, and so was prepared at once to welcome 
Christ. (2) He may have been one of the disciples who attached themselves to Christ 
whUe he was with men in the flesh. (3) He may have been converted at the day of 
Pentecost. (4) He may have been a firstfruit of St. Paul's missionary labours in Cyprus. 
The subject suggested by the reference to Mnason is — the mission in the Church o/ 
old disciples ; and three points may receive full treatment and illustration. 

L Old disciples may prove what Divine grace can do in keeping us unspotted from 
the world. 

IL Old disciples may illustrate " patient continuance in well-doing." 

IIL Old disciples may exert a gracious influence by the tone and character of their 
religious experience, as corrective of the mistakes and practical errors that may prevail, 
and as guiding to the solution of practical difficulties in doctrine and in conduct. 
The Church has often good reason to rejoice in the wisdom and prudence of her " old 
disciples."— E. T. 

Vere. 20 — 25. — The perils of over-caution. For the details ot these verses, reftrence 
must be made to the exegetical portion of this Commentary. We shovdd fully under- 
stand : 1. The intense enmity of the Judaizing party against St. Paul. 2. The opportunity 
of increasing that enmity found in the fact that many of St. Paul's enemies from 
Asia and Europe were present in Jerusalem at this time, attending the feast. 3. The 
difficulty of the Christian leaders, who had not openly broken with rabbinical Mosaism, 
and consequently found St. Paul's presence in the city a source of extreme anxiety. 
They could hot openly condemn him ; and indeed this they were not prepared to ^o. 
They could not openly approve him, for this would be sure to rouse dissension, and it 
would certainly put St. Paul's life in peril. 4, The spirit and temper of the apostle 
himself, who was lather bold than cautious, and had on several important occasions 
(as, «^. ch. six. 30, 31) to be actually held back from courses of action that were 



1»2 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xxi. 1— 40. 

hardly prudent. The leaders of the Church at Jerusalem tried to master the difficultiei 
of the position hy compromise, which is usually a sign of conscious weakness, and often 
rather mahes than settles the difficulty with which it deals. " The heads of the Church 
in Jerusalem dreaded nothing but an uproar, if St. Paul's presence in the city should 
become known. In order, therefore, to appease the multitude, they proposed to the 
apostle to observe the sacred usages publicly in the temple, with four men who were 
paying their vows, and to present an oflfering for himself — a proposal which he willingly 
adopted. But although the concession of the apostles to the weak brethren proceeded 
from a good intention, yet it turned out disastrously. The furious enemies of St. Paul 
were only the more exasperated by it" (Olshausen). It was a case of "over-caution," 
and it well illustrates the weakness and the peril that usually lie in over-cautious 
schemes. 

I. Thb place fob comfbouibb. Which is the practical expression of extreme 
caution, and the constant resort of cautious dispositions. It is useful : 1. When the 
matter in dispute cannot have a fuU and final adjustment. 2. When such serious 
interests ate at stake that it is important not to keep open the dispute. 3. When both 
parties have a measure of right on their sides, and the claim of each must be moderated 
to admit the right of the others. 4. When the intense feeling of the disputants prevents 
the acceptance of any positive settlement. These may be illustrated both from worldly 
and from Christian spheres. 

n. The pebils op compromise. They arise from the fact that, as a rule, 1. Com- 
promise settles nothing, but really leaves the old difficulty to find a new expression. 
2. It keeps in relation parties who would be much better apart. 3. It gives those who 
are in the wrong, an impression of weakness in those who suggest the compromise, and so 
encourages them in the wrong and leads thera to take advantage of the weakness ; as 
is illustrated in the case before us of the Judaizing party. 

IIL The pbactioal importance of taking a firm stand upon what is bioht. 
Nothing disarms opposition as this does, and nothing settles disputes as a firm and 
wise decision. If the apostolic council had simply and firmly accepted St. Paul, given 
their public testimony to their confidence in him, and explained the relation in which 
the Gentile Churches and their teacher stood to the Jewish Churches and their teachers, 
mistakes would have been corrected, opposition would have been checked, and St. 
Paul's enemies would have failed to make a party. All the calamities that followed, 
though foreordained of God, are, on their human side, traceable to the over-caution and 
weak compromise of the Jerusalem apostles. Learn the value of prudence and caution 
in the practical concerns of life, but learn also the perils of the exaggeration of caution, 
and the adoption of compromises whtn we have before us questions of right and wrong. 
Bight is right, and we must stand to it whatever may be the peril, — B. T. 

Vers. 27 — 30. — Party prejudices. Explain the points of view of the Judaizing 
party. Zeal for the purity of Mosaism can be commended. The binding character 
of Mosaic Law on all born Jews may be recognized. We cannot wonder that many of 
the Jews should regard Christianity as a reform of Judaism, rather than what such men 
as St. Paul saw it to be — the completion and perfection of Judaism. Eegarding it as 
reformed Judaism, they would plead that its claims rested on all Gentiles who became 
Christian Jews. The first indications of the existence of this Judaizing party within 
the Christian community we find in ch. xv. 1. Then the matter occasioned so much 
dispute that the advice of the apostolic council had to be sought. Their judgment was 
virtually against the Judaizing party, and this intensified their opposition, made 
them cling even more closely to their party prejudices, and led them to regard St. Paul 
more distinctly as the leader of the more liberal views which they hated. They 
followed the apostle everywhere; they tried to undermine his influence and destroy 
his work ; and it even seems that they resolved not to rest until they had secured his 
death. They are striking examples of the worst phases of the sectarian spirit, which 
blinds to tnith, hardens from conviction, destroys a man's tenderness, and makes cruelty 
and crime possible to him. Scarcely any evil force has exerted in history so baneful an 
influence as that of the party spirit. It was an ideal time which the poetical historian 
describes, " when none was lor a party, but all were for the state." Still the sectarian 
ftnd party spirit is the gravest trouble afilicting Christ's Church, and the most serkiui 



OH. xxa. 1 — 30.] 



THE AOTS OF THE AFOSTLEa 



193 



hindrance to the perfecting of Christ's kingdom. Bnt we need to make a careful 
distinction between party spirit and party action. Sectional action may be an impor- 
tant element in working. More can be accomplished by sections devoting their 
attention to parts. But party spirit, which means jealous feeling separating the 
sections, Is always bad, for those who feel the jealousy and for those who suffer from 
its schemes. Taking illustration from what is narrated of these Judaizing teachers, we 
notice that party prejudice — 

L Blinds to fact and truth. If the party has a piece of truth, it is but a piece, 
and yet it often prevents the apprehension of any other related or higher trutli. And 
even worse is its power to distort or deny facts. The party man will see or admit 
nothing that does not tell for his party. Show that St. Paul had facts and truths, but 
these opponents would give him no calm consideration. They really shouted him 
down, as did the excited Ephesians, who cried all day, "Great is Diana of the 
Ephesians." If we find an unwillingness to admit facts or to calmly consider phases 
of truth presented for our consideration, then we may gravely fear lest we be giving 
place to party prejudices. 

IL Involves injustice. In dealing with individuals. For the partisan associates 
the holder of an objectionable theory with the theory, and is easily led to vent his 
annoyance at the theory upon the holder and propo under of it. The sectional and party 
spirit is at the root of all religious persecution. Men are not unjust when they contend 
for God's truth, but only when they contend for some ism of their own, which they 
persuade themselves is God's truth. Christ says to all who think of using external 
forces for him, " Put up thy sword into its sheath." 

nL Party peejudiobs abb most difficult to remove. Seen in the difficulty of 
correcting the mistakes on which sects now divide from each other. The " common 
ground " is little regarded, and the points of difference are unduly exaggerated, and men 
vtand to their little peculiarities and special points as if the whole gospel gathered up 
joto their side and piece of doctrine. And if any try to free them from their prejudice, 
and let in on them a little generous light, they only retire further in and hold their 
party sentiment tighter than ever. Surely the full warning of these Judaizers in St. 
Paul's time has not been sufficiently recognized in these days of a divided Church and 
unduly magnified theological and ecclesiastical differences. — R. X. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XXn. 



^er. 1. — Brethren for men, brethren, A.V. 
(ch. vli. 2, note) ; the for my, A.V. ; rune make 
lor make now, A.V. The defence ; inroKayia. 
This is tl\e technical word in classical Greek 
for a defence In answer to an accusation. 
Thus e.g. the oration of Gorgias entitled, 
r-irip UoKan-liSovs airoXoylo, begins, 'H fi^y icar 
Tiiyopla icai i) luToKoyia Kpliris oil irepl Savirou 
■yl-fv^Ta.. And Demosthenes opposes Korr^yo- 
peiii, to accuse, to oiroXirieiaBai, to make one's 
ilefenoo. And an 010X07(0 Si/co(o /col oirX^ 
is to prove that rtt Karrtyopriiifva, " the things 
of which tlie person is accused," were never 
vione. But it is probably from St. Paul's use 
of the word here that it became common to 
call the defences of the Christian religion 
by the term airo^oyla. Thus we have the 
'Apologies ' of Justin Martyr, of 'Tertullian, 
of Minutius Felix, among the ancients ; the 
' Apologia Ecoleeiffl AnglioansB,' by Bishop 
Jewel, and many others. 

Ver. 2. — Unto them in the Hebrew language 
for *> the Bebrew tongue to them, A.V. ; were 

ACIN— H 



the more qutet for hept Oie more eilenee, A.T. 
When they heara, etc. This trait is wonder- 
fully true to nature, and exhibits also Sfc 
Paul's admirable tact and self-possession. 
It was strikingly in harmony with bis ad- 
dressing them as " brethren " that he should 
speak to them in their own mother tongue. 
There is a living reality in such touches 
which seems at once to refute Benan's sus- 
picion that St. Luke invented this and other 
of St. Paul's speeches in the later chapters of 
the Acts. The full report of these later 
speeches is abundantly accounted for by the 
fact that through this time St. Luke was 
with St. Paul, and heard the speeches. 

Ver. 3. — A Jew for verily a man which am 
a Jew, A.V. and T.E. ; of Cilicia for a city 
in Cilicia, A.V. ; but for yet, A.V. ; instructed 
for and taught, A.V. ; strict for prrfect,A.Y.; 
our for the, A.V. ; being for and was, A.V. ; 
for for towards, A.V. ; even at for as, A.V, 
Born in Tarsus, etc. (see oh. xxi. 39). St. 
Paul was evidently proud of his native city, 
" the famous capital of a Koman province," 
watered by the "swift stream of the Cydnu*," 



1»4 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. xxn. 1— 30 



and looked down upon by the snowy sum- 
mits of Mount Taurus ; " a centf e of busy com- 
mercial enterprise and political power ; " "a 
free city, Zihera et immunis" (Parrar, 'Life 
of St. Paul,' vol. i, ch. ii.). St. Paul's express 
Bssertion that he was " boiu at Tarsus " 
directly refutes the tradition handed down 
by St. Jerome that he was born at Giscala, 
and carried thence to Tarsus by his parents 
when Giscala was taken by the Komans 
(Farrar, ibid.). Brought up ; ava.TiSpa.ixnivos, 
a classical word, only found in the New 
Testament in the Acts (ch. vii. 20, 21, and 
here). It Is found also iu Wisd. vii. 4. It 
implies early education. At the feet of. 
The scholar sits or stands humbly beneath 
the raised seat of the teacher (comp. Luke 
X. 39). The stop is rightly placed after 
Vaji-aKAiK. Some, however, put the stop after 
Taiirj), and connect vapa roiis irSSas Ta/iaAiTjA 
w itli ireiraiSeufieVos. Gamaliel (see ch. 4, v. 3, 
note). Instructed according to the strict 
manner of the Law of our fathers ; comp. 
Gal. i. 14, "I profited in the Jews' religion 
above many my equals in mine own nation, 
being more exceedingly zealous of the tradi- 
tioufl of my fathers," where for rod varpcfuv 
v6^o^ we read tuv iraTptKwv fiov 'jrapad6a'€aif. 
Under the irm-pi^as vd/ios Paul probably in- 
cluded the traditions, as well as the written 
Law, which the Pharisees so rigidly observed 
(comp. ch. XX vi. 5, where the axpi^ecrTdTni/ a'lpe- 
iTiyrrisiiniTfpas BprjaKtias corresponds with the 
aKpi^iio.v Tov irarpt^ov v6fj.Qv). The strict man- 
ner ; Kara ciKpi^eiav, found only here in the 
New Testament ; but a word of repeated use 
in this sense in Ecolesiasticus and Wisdom, 
anil alio, with the adjective &Kpi$ris and the 
adverb a/tpi;8ais,much used by medical writers. 
'AicpiffeaTepos and iKpi^earaTos are used by St. 
Luke only (oh. xviii. 26 ; xxiii. 15, 20 ; xxiv. 
22 ; xxvi. 5), and aKpifim six times to tliree 
in the rest of the New Testament. Zealous 
for God (ffjAoirV TOV SeoD) ; see eh. xxi. 20, 
note. 

Ver. 4. — I persecuted (see 1 Cor. xv. 9; 
1 Tim. i. 13 ; and ch. xxvi. 11). This Way 
(see ch. ix. 2 ; xviii. 25 ; xix. 9, 23). Unto 
the death (comp. oh. ix. 1). Binding, etc. 
(comp. oh. viii. 3 ; ix. 2). 

Ver. 5. — Journeyed for went, A.V. ; them 
alio for them, A.V. ; wito Jerusalem in hands 
fsr hound unto Jerusalem, A.V. The high 
priest. Ananias, the present high priest, 
who may have been one of St. Paul's hearers 
included among the " fathers," and who had 
probably been already a member of the San- 
hedrim at tlie time of St. Paul's conversion 
(see ch. xxiii. 2 ; xxiv. 1). Others, however, 
understand " the high priest " to mean him 
who was higli priest at the time of St. 
Paul's journey to Damascus, viz. Theo- 
phllus, who was still alive. The brethren. 
Mie Jews at Damascus. St. Paul speaks to 



his hearers emphatically as a Jew. To be 

punished (W Tiixup-newaw") ; whether by rods 
or by death. The word occurs in the New 
Testament only here and ch. xxvi. 11, but 
is not un frequent in the LXX, and in 
classical writers; rmaipitv is common in me- 
dical language in the sense of " to treat me- 
dically," to " correct " by medical treatment. 
Ver. 6. — Drew nigh for was come nigh, 
A.V. The phraseology of the following 
narrative is nearly identical with that of 
ch. ix. 3—6 (whore see notes). 

Ver. 9.— Beheld for saw, A.V. Beheld 
Indeed the light [and were afraid, A.V.]. 
This corresponds with the statement in 
oh. ix. 7, that the men who journeyed 
with Saul "stood speechless." They 
were dazzled and amazeil at the sudden 
brightness. But they heard not the Toioe. 
This at first sight seems inconsistent 
with the statement in ch. ix. 7, "hearing 
the voice." But the apparent incon- 
sistency disappears wiien we observe 
that here St. Paul wished to impress 
upon his hearers that, though his com- 
panions had seen the light, they had not 
heard the words which were addressed to 
him by the Lord Jesus (see ver. 14) ; where- 
as St. Luke, in the narrative in ch. ix., 
wished rather to insist upon the fact that 
though the men had seen the light and 
heard the sound of the voice, they had not 
seen Jesus. To see and hear the risen 
Christ was a privilege given to St. Panl 
alone. 

Ver. 11. — When I could not Be* (comp. oh. 
ix. 8, and note). Them that were with me 
(ruf (rvv6vTojv ^oi). ^vvelvai occurs only here 
and Luke ix. 18, but is used several times by 
the LXX. It is very common in medical 
writers for the accompanying symptoms of 
a disease. 

Ver. 12. — WeU reported of hy for haeing a 
good report of, A.V. ; that for which, A.V. 
Well reported of (jxapTvpoiin^vos) ; see ch. vi. 
3, note. 

Ver. Id. —Standing hy me for itood, and, 
A.V. ; in tliat very for the same, A.V. ; on 
for upon, A.V. 

Ver. 14. — Appointed for chosen, A.V. j to 
know for that thou shouldest know, A.V. ; to 
see the Bighteous One for see that Just One, 
A.V. ; to hear a voice from for sliouldest hear 
the voice of, A.V. Hath appointed thee; 
trpoexeipiaard ae, a word found in the New 
Testament only here and in ch. xxvi. 16, 
and in ch. iii. 20 (E.T.). In classical Greek 
it means mostly " to get anything ready 
beforehand ; " to cause anything to be 
irpcfxeipos, reaily to hand. And in the 
LXX. it means " to choose," or "appoint," 
as Josh. iii. 12; Exod. iv. 13, where it it 
not a translation of nW, but a paraphrase 
of the sentence, "Appoint one by whom 



OH. Txn. 1— so.] 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



195 



thoB wilt lend." Here it may be rendered 
Indifferently either "choose" or "appoint." 
The Bighteous One. The designation of 
Messiah in such passages as Isa. liii. 11 ; 
Pi. Ixxii. 2, etc. (see in the New Testament 
Luke xxiii. 47; 1 John ii. 1 ; Rev. xiz. 11, 
etc.). A voice from his mouth is a very 
awkward though literal rendering. The 
A.V. expresses the sense much better. 

Ver. 15. — A vntness for him for his witnesi, 
A.V. A witness. An essential attribute of 
an apostle (see eh. i. 8, 22, notes). Seen 
and heard (com p. 1 John 1. 1 — 3). 

Ver. 16. — His Name for the Name of the 
Lord, A.V. and T.E. Wash away thy sins ; 
a.Tr6xou(rat, only here and in 1 Cor. vl. 11, 
where it is found in exactly the same 
sense of " washing away sins " (see vers. 9, 
10) in holy baptism. Hence the Xovrphf 
Tra\tyyeve<rias, "the washing of regenera- 
tion " (Titus iii. 5 ; comp. Eph. v. 26 ; and 
see eh. ii. 38, note). Calling on his Name 
(^J^lKa\e(^!Jfle^'os); see ch. it 21; vii. 59, 
note; ii. 14, 21; Kom. x. 12, 13, 14; 

1 Cor. i. 2 ; 2 Tim. ii. 22 ; 1 Pet. i. 17,— 
all texts distinctly justifying prayer to the 
Lord Jesus. 

Ver. 17. — Bad returned for was come 
again, A.V. ; and for even, A.V. ; fell into 
for was in, A.V. Into a trance (^iy eKtrriffei) ; 
see ch. x. 10, note. 

Ver. 18. — Because for for, A.V. ; of thee 
testimony for thy testimony, A.V. and T.E. 
Get thee quickly, etc. The narrative in 
ch. Ix. 28 — 30 does not mention the vision, 
but gives the murderous opposition of the 
Hellenist Jews as the reason of Saul's 
departure from Jerusalem to Tarsus. 
Possibly, if it had not been for the Divine 
warning, the apostle would have braved the 
danger and lost his life. 

Ver. 19. — They themselves for (hey, A.V. 
In (Tery synagogue. It appears from 
Matt. X. 18 that offenders were beaten in 
the synagogue, and doubtless by command 
of the synagogue authorities. A delation 
to any synagogue that any member of it 
was a blasphemer (i.e. a Christian) would 
lead to such a punishment. But probably 
the meaning hen rather ia that he went or 
sent to every synagogue to find out who 
there was among them that believed in 
Jesus, and then had them punished at 
Jerusalem (ch. ix. 2). 

Ver. 20.— Stephen thy witness for thy 
martyr Stephen, A.V. ; consenting for con- 
eenting unto his death, A.V. and T.B. ; keep- 
ing the garments for kept the raiment, A.V. 
Consentuig ; ffwevSoKuy (above, ch. viii. 1 ; 
Luke xi. 48; Kom. i. 32 ; 1 Cor. vii. 12, 
13). It is also found in 1 Mace. i. 60; 

2 Maco. xi. 34, 35. Of them that slew him 
(rajy avaifoliv tav ahuiv). 'Avatpiu, ia the 
senaa of "to kill," ii a favourite word of 



St. Luke's (Luke xxii. 2 ; xxiii. 32 ; oh. ii. 
23; v. 33, 36; viL 28; ix. 23, 24, 29; 
X. 39; xii. 2; xiii. 28; xvi. 27; xxii. 20 
xxiii. 15, 21, 27; xxv. 3; xxvi. 10); but 
elsewhere in the New ■Testament only 
Matt. ii. 16 and 2 Thess. ii. 8, E.T. It is 
frequent in the LXX. and also in medical 
writers in the sense of " taking away " or 
" removing." " 

Ver. 21. — Send thee forth for send thee, 
A.V. The natural understanding of the 
preceding dialogue is that Saul, when bid 
depart quickly out of Jerusalem because the 
Jews would not receive his testimony, was 
unwilling to obey, and pleaded that surely 
tlie Jews must listen to him and be con- 
vinced, since they were well aware how hot 
and zealous a partisan of the Jews he had 
been, and must see that nothing but a great 
miracle could have converted liim. It was 
the argument of u young and impetuous 
man, with little experience of the head- 
strong obstinacy of bigoted men. The 
Lord cut him short with a peremptory 
" Depart I " but with the gracious addition, 
"I will send thee unto the Gentiles" — a 
commission which is more fully given in 
ch. xxvi. 17, 18, and which was carried out 
in his whole life. 

Ver. 22. — They for then, A.V. ; voice for 
voices, A.V. Unto this word. They could 
not bear the idea of the Gentiles being 
admitted into the kingdom of God. It was 
a blow to their pride of exclnsiveness. The 
levelling-up of the Gentiles seemed to be as 
intolerable as the levelling-down of them- 
selves, as spoken of e.g. Isa. i. 10 ; Ezek. 
xvi. 45, etc. 

Ver. 23. — Threw off their garments for east 
off their clothes, A.V. ; cast for threw, A.V. 
Threw off their garments. Either " wild 
signs of fury, gestures by which they gave 
to understand that they would gladly ac- 
complish the cry, 'Away with him from 
the earth I ' " (Lange), tokens of applause 
and consent at the sentiment of the cry (see 
the passages quoted by Kuinoel, Tii» i<rerjTa 
avaffeiay • . . ixpSreL The Tlpoaipeiriop, " The 
proconsul applauded Proairesius the rhe- 
torician by shaking his purple robe," 
Eunapiua, ' Life of the Emperor Julian ; ' 
"The whole theatre raved together, and 
leaped, and shouted, and threw off their 
garments (rcks ^o-flflroj OTre^^iVTow)," Lucian, 
' De Salt,'); or (so Meyer) signifying that 
they were ready to stone the culprit (see 
ver. 20). 

Ver. 24. — Bidding for and bade, AV.; 
for what cause for wherefore, A.V. ; so 
shouted for cried so, A.V. The chief captain 
(see ch. xxi. 31, note). The castle (see ch. 
xxi. 34, note). Examined; iyeriiiiaeni 
only here and in ver. 29. In Judj;. vi. 29 
(Codex Alerandrinus) and in the Hist, r-' 



196 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. xxa. 1 — 30 



Susaniuk 14 the verb has the eimple 
sense of "inquiring." The olaBsioal word 
for "examining" and espeoially by torture, 
io iieriCdv. By scourging (;ii{rrTi|ii/). The 
lii(rTii was in Latin the flagellum, the 
most severe implement of flogging, though 
even with the lighter virga, the rod of 
the lictor, slavea and others were beaten to 
death {ueque ad necem). It was not lawful 
to beat a Boman citizen even with the virga 
(pdeSos); ch. xvi. 22, 35, 37j notes. The 
liiart^, or scourge, was that with which our 
Lord was scourged at the bidding of Pilate 
(Matt, xxvii. 26, where ippayeX^xiiras is from 
the Latin flagellum; Mark x. 84; Luke 
xviii. 33; John xix. 1). Doubtless Lysias 
had not understood Paul's Hebrew speech, 
and BO had not known what it was which 
provoked so fierce an uproar among the 
people. 

Ver. 25. — When they had tied him up with 
the fhongt for ae they bound him with thongs, 
A.Y. When they had tied him up, etc. 
This does not seem to be a right rendering. 
UpoTeCpa can only mean "to stretch out 
before," or " expose to the action," of any- 
thing, when taken in a literal sense; lyua;, 
again, more naturally means the " thong " 
or "lash" of a whip or scourge than a 
thong to bind a man with; indeed, it is 
thought to be etymologically connected with 
/ioi»TiJ. . Meyer, therefore, rightly under- 
stands the passage to mean when they had 
stretched him on the stake ready to receive 
the scourging. Is it lawful, etc.? Paul 
now pleads his privileges as a Boman 
citizen, just in time to stop the outrage, 
remembering, no doubt, the terror inspired 
in the Philippian magistrates when they 
found they had beaten with rods an uncon- 
demned Roman citizen (see ch. xvi. 88). 
TTnoondemned (oucaTaKpfTovi)! ^^ ^^- 37. 
Only found in these two passages in the 
New Testament, and nowhere else. 

Ver. 86. — And when for when, A.y. ; it 



for that, A.V. ; to for and told, .A.V. ; and 
told him, saying for saying, A.V. ; What art 
thou dbiyui to dof tov Take heed what thou 
doest, A.V. 

Ver. 27.— And for then, A.V.; andhe$aid 
for he said, A.V. 

Ver. 28. — Citizenship for freedom, A.V. ; 
am a Boman for was free, A.V. A great 
sum (ttoWoS Ke<l>a\alov). The word is only 
found here in the New Testament in the 
sense of a " sum of money," but is so used 
in classical writers. Citizenship; wo\iTela, 
for " freedom of the city," ia Xenophon, 
iEliim, Polybius, Dion Oassius, etc., and 3 
Maoo. iii 21. Dion Cassius (Ix. 17) relates 
tliat Messalina, the wife of the Emperor 
Claudius, used to sell the freedom of the 
city, and that at first she sold it (juyiAair 
Xprif-aTav) for a very high price, but that 
afterwards it became very cheap. In all 
probability Lysias had so purchased it, and 
in consequence took the name of Claudins 
(Eenan, ' St Paul,' p. 524). I am a Boman 
Dom. It is not known how St. Paul's 
family acquired the Boman citizenship. 

Ver. 29. — They then which were about to 
examine him straightway departed from him 
for then straightway they departed from him 
which should have examined him, A.V. ; when 
for after, A.V. Had bound him (Jjy airby 
SiSfK^is), as related in ch. xxi 33. 'E,K4\ivat 
SeeTJvai '. " Facinus est vinciri eivem Bo- 
manum," Cicero, in 'Verrem,' t. 6€ 
(quoted by Meyer). 

Ver. 30. — But on for on, A.V. ; desiring to 
know for because he would have knoten, A. V. ; 
loosed him for loosed him from his bands, A.V. 
and T.B. ; the council for their council, 
A.V. and T.B. ; to come together for to appear, 
A.V. and T.B. Brought Paul down; from 
the castle to the council-room below, either 
to the hall Gazith or to some other place of 
meeting. Lysias probably still kept Paul 
a prisoner through the night, on acoonnt o( 
the excited state of the peoplo. 



HOMILETICS. 

VeM. 1 — 30. — The apolofy. It was a very remarkable promise which our Lord made 
to ids apostles, when, forewarning them that they should be delivered up to councilB, 
and brought before kings and rulers for his sake, he added, " But when they so deliver 
you up, take no thought beforehand what ye shall speak, neither do ye premeditate : 
but whatsoever shall be given you in that hour, that speak ye ; for it is not ye that 
speak, but the Holy Ghost " (Mark xiii. 9—11). It is impossible not to see a fulfil- 
ment of this promise in St. Paul's apology delivered from the castle stairs at Jerusalem 
to an infuriated and bloodthirsty mob. A Jewish riot had something terrific in it, 
something dreaded even by the iron-minded Bomans. The features all contorted with 
passion, the large eyes starting out of their sockets, the savage grinding of the teeth, 
the fierce cries, the wild throwing of Lanafuls of dust into the air, the tosung and 
waving of their garments with an unbridled violence, gave a demoniac aspect to aucb 
rioters (Renan, p. 524). Paul had just come out of the thick of such a mob. H« had 



OH. xxn. 1—30.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLBa 191 

barely escaped with his life, but not without many blows. He had heard bis name 
given to execration, held up to detestation as the author of blasphemies and sacrilege, 
and as the enemy of his race. And now he was a prisoner in the hands of the heathen 
masters of his unhappy country. His hands were loaded with chains, and he k lew not 
what dangers were before him. And yet, when he had scarce recovered breath after 
the struggle for lite, we find him with the chains on his wrists, but with unruffled spirit, 
and admirable composure and self-possession, delivering to his enemies and would-be 
murdurers a speech as gentle, as firm, as calm, as collected, and as logical, as if he had 
composed and prepared it at leisure in the stillness of his own study, and was addressing 
it to a congregation of friends and admirers. Must it not have been given to him in 
that hour what to speak, and how to say it ? The great force of this defence lay in its 
simple statement of facts. The apostle's conduct at each successive stage had flowed 
naturally and almost inevitably from the circumstances which surrounded him. He 
had nothing to conceal. Indeed, the circumstances of his early life were well known to 
his hearers. If his statement was true, how could he have acted differently? He 
iilipciileii to his fellow-countrymen, his fathers and brothers of the Jewish people, to 
hear with impartiality the apology which he made. Had he stopped here, maybe his 
defence would have been accepted. His Hebrew speech, his thoroughly Jewish attitude, 
his high-minded earnestness, his splendid courage, seem to have wrought to some 
extant upon his volatile and mobile hearers. But he could not stop there. He had a 
further message to deliver, and it must be delivered at Jerusalem, the mother Church, 
not only of the circumcision, but of the whole Gentile world. That message was that 
(Jhi ist was to be preached to the Gentiles, and that Jews and Gentiles were to be hence- 
forth one in Christ. And that message he delivered with chains on his arms, from the 
midst of a Roman cohort, to the angry crowd beneath him, having obviously one single 
purpose — to speak the truth, and to do his duty both to God and man. One other 
remark is called for by this apology. The nature of the case, a defence under false accu- 
sation, made it absolutely necessary that the defendant should speak of himself. But 
in the course of the twenty verses in which he details the several passages in the history 
of his life which bore upon the accusation, it is impossible to detect one particle of vain- 
glory or of egotism. There are no boastings, nor are there any expressions of an affected 
humility. There is absolute simplicity. He speaks of himself because he must. And 
in the same spirit of genuine humility, when it was not necessary, he did not speak of 
himself. In the remarkable absence of details in all those parts of the Acts of the 
Apostles where St. Luke does not write as an eye-witness, we have strong evidence 
that St. Paul did not make his own doings the subject of his conversation with his 
familiar friends. Had he done so, St. Luke's narrative might have been richer and fuller, 
but St. Paul greatness would have been diminished, as that of all vain men is, by the 
desire to appear great. As it is, the apology enables us to enumerate the great apostle's 
virtues as combining in an extraordinary degree, courage, gentleness, calmness, vigour, 
humility, high-mindedness, determination, honesty, truth, patriotism, self-forgetfulness, 
wisdom, eloquence, and a passionate zeal for the glory of Christ and for the salvation of 
men. (For an illustration of some of these features in the apostle's character, see also 
2 Cor. xi. ; xii. ; Gal. ii. 5, H ; Eph. iii. 7, 8 ; 1 Tim. L 12, 13, 16 j and throughout the 
Acts of the Apostles.) 



HOMILIES BY VAEI0U8 AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 22. — Argtmient and prejudice. We have here — 

L An asmibable ABauMEiiiT. Paul, at the inspiration of the moment, made a 
powerful defence of his position. He showed : 1. That no one could enter into their 
feelings more perfectly than himself. Was he not a Jew by birth (ver. 3) ? Had he 
not received a thoroughly Jewish education, at the feet of a Jewish master (ver. 3)? 
3ad he not been absolutely possessed by a devotedness to the Law, and a corresponding 
hatred of the new " Way " (ver. 4) ? Had they not the evidence in their own hands of 
the bitter and unrelenting persecution of which he had been the eager and active agent 
(ver. 6) ? If, then, he was found advocating this hated " Way," it waa not because he did 
not understand Jewish sympaihies, nor oecause he had always been one of its votaries ; 



-193 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES [oh. xxn. 1— 30 

quite the contrary. 2. That no one could possibly have weightier rcnsons for changing 
his mind than he had. First came a heavenly vision, arresting him in his path of 
persecution, and forbidding him to continue (vers. 6 — 11). Then camn a powerful 
eonfirmation, in a miracle of healing of which he himself was the subject and of which 
a most honourable and estimable Jew was the instrument (vers. 12, 13) ; and a further 
confirmation in the message with which he was charged (vers. 14 — 16). Then came • 
third influence of a powerful character in the shape of another manifestation, and a 
command, against which he vainly strove, to go out and work amoug the Gentilei 
(vers. 18—21). 

II. A SENSELESS AND smciDAL BXA8PBEATI0N. (Vers. 22, 23.) Such was the violent 
antipathy in the minds of his audience to any fellowship with the Gentile world, that 
all Paul's arguments went for nothing. This was such an opportunity as was little 
likely to recur, of having the facts of the case placed plainly and forcibly before their 
minds ; it was a day of grace to them. But so utterly prejudiced were they that one 
word filled them with a senseless exasperation which stole from them the golden chance 
they had of learning the truth, and which riveted the chains of error and exclusiveness 
they wore upon their souls. 

This defence of the apostle and this exasperation of his audience may suggest to us : 
1. The fulness of the Divine argument. God " reasons with " us. He does so (1) in 
proof of his own presence and providence in the world ; (2) in proof of the heavenly 
origin of the gospel of his grace ; and (3) in furtherfince of our personal acceptance of 
Jesus Christ as Lord and Saviour of our soul. The Divine arguments and inducements 
are very strong, and they are very varied. They include the miraculous and the 
ordinary; they appeal to the human consciousness, to history, and to daily obser- 
vation; they are based on well-attested facts; they appeal to our hopes and to our 
fears, to our sense of what is due to our Creator and of what we owe to ourselves, of 
obligation and of wisdom. They are mighty, urgent, convincing, one would say — but 
for sad facts which argue to the contrary — overwhelming. 2. Thefoolish and fatal anger 
which it sometimes excites. There are those who, when God speaks to theiu in nature, 
providence, or privilege, instead of lending their ear to his word and bowing their spirit 
to his will, are only angered and exasperated ; they go still further away from him in 
increased alienation, in still more determined rebelliousness of soul. But so doing (1) 
the}' aggravate their guilt ; and (2) they cut down the bridge by which they might cross 
to the heavenly kingdom. — 0. 

Vers. 14, 15. — " The will of Oodin Christ Jesus concerning us." I. Divine election. 
" The God of our fathers hath chosen thee " (ver. 14). It will always be a diflSculty 
to know what to think of the electing grace of God. But we are on safe ground when 
we say : 1. That God desires the well-being of every member of his human family. We 
may surely argue that it must be so ; we may boldly affirm that it is so. Is it not 
written that God is one " who will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the 
knowledge of the truth " (1 Tim ii. 4 ; see Ezek. xviii. 23 ; xxxiii. 11 ; 2 Pet. iii. 9). 
2. That he bestows special favours and privileges on some men ; to some as not to others 
he gives intellectual faculty, material resources, educational advantages, domestic 
influences, providential guidance, knowledge of Christian truth in its purity and 
integrity, etc. These he " elects," or " chooses ; " on them he confers distinguishing 
goodness. 

II. A VISION OF THE RIGHTEOUS Saviottr. " That thou shouMcst ... see that Just 
One, and shonldest hear the voice of his mouth " (ver. 14). To Saul there was vouch- 
safed a very special and peculiar manifestation of the risen Lord. In such wise as we 
do not, he saw the Just One himself and heard his voice. But Christ does present 
himself now to the sons of men, and he manifests himself as the Just One, as the Lord 
of righteousness. By a spiritual act we recognize Jesus Christ as : 1. 'i'hat Being who 
is in himself the Holy and Righteous One, in whom is no trace of sin. 2. That Divine 
One who summons us to a new life of holiness and sacred service. 3. That Just One 
who, by his atoning death, has made the way open to our immediate justification, who 
has made it possible for us to attain to " the righteousness which is of God by faith" 
(Phil. iii. 9). In the presence of him, the Just One, we are filled with shame ; but by 
faith in his finished work we have acceptance with God and are accounted righteoua (or, 



OH. xxn. 1—30.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 199 

just) in his sight ; and we yield ourselves to Um and his service that his righteousnesi 
may be reproduced in us and in our human lives. Thus we come to do — 

IIL That work of man which is the will of God. Paul was to " know his will " 
(ver. 14), and was to do that will by the accomplishment of his life-work, viz. by 
" being his witness unto all men." This, too, in our way and measure is to be our life- 
work, even as it was our Lord's (John xviii. 37). We are to bear witness of Christian 
truth by (1) exemplary behaviour ; (2) a devout and generous spirit ; (3) the word of 
testimony and exhortation, — this latter is to be experimental, such as is suggested by 
our own actual experience. Every Christian life is a failure if it be not an epistle read 
and known of all who are there to read it. — 0. 

Vers. 23 — 30. — ITie earthly and the heavenly citizenship. The most interesting and 
the most distinctively Christian truth contained in this passage is that which we gain 
by contrasting the citizenship of ancient Rome with that of the kingdom of Christ. But 
we may also let these verses remind us of — 

I. The inhumanity of heathenism. " The chief captain . . . bade that he should 
be examined by scourging ; that he might know," etc. (ver. 24). What an inhuman and 
brutal procedure to extract evidence or confession by scourging — by cruel, relentless lace- 
ration of the body ! It is painful to think how, in this as in many another respect, 
departure from God meant distance from all justice and benignity. It is, indeed, all 
too true that pagan law passed on many of its usages to Christian legislature, and that 
down to even recent times harsh and stem things have dishonoured the statute-books of 
Christian lands ; but these have been (1) diametrically opposed to the spirit of Jesus 
Christ, (2) implicitly condemned by his words, and (3) have been (or are being) 
disowned and disestablished by his followers. 

II. The excellency op human la w and disciplinb. Utterly defective as Boman 
laiv was, it shone in brilliant contrast with Jewish frenzy. How pitiable, not to say 
Cf ntemptible, the crowd crying out, rending their clothes, flinging dust in the air, in 
their uncontrollable passion (ver. 23) 1 Excellent, indeed, as compared with this, the 
safe custody of the Roman soldiery (ver. 24), the immediate regard paid to his claim of 
citizenship (vers. 26 — 29), the determination of the chief captain to bring Paul before the 
council in a legitimate and orderly way (ver. 30). With all defects and severities, law 
and discipline are immeasurably superior to the violent excitements of an incensate and 
ungovernable mob. 

III. The kectitudb of oLAnrwo individual eightb. The man who is perpetually 
asserting his rights is a man as far, in spirit, from the likeness of Jesus Christ as he is 
far, in fact, from the enjoyment of the esteem of man. God blesses him as little as man 
loves him. But obviously there are times when it is not only our right bnt our duty 
to assert our claims. Paul did so here (ver. 25), and most justifiably ; there was no 
reason why he should suffer and be weakened by suffering when he could escape by 
making a lawful claim. We do well to be self-assertive so long as we do not acquire 
the spirit of selfishness and do not give the impression of being self-centred. We do 
well, when we act thus with a distinct view to the benefit of others, to our own 
spiritual well-being, or to the extension of the kingdom of Christ. 

IV. The earthly and heavenly citizenship. (Vers. 27, 28.) Paul acceded to 
the citizenship in virtue of his birth ; he was free bom. The chief captain obtained it 
by purchase. Others gained it by valuable military or civil service, or by favour of 
some illustrious man. Entrance into the kingdom of God cannot be gained thus. (I) 
Not by birth (John i. 13), (2) nor by purchase (oh. viii. 20), (3) nor by the favour of 
nian (John i. 13), (4) nor by meritorious behaviour (Bph. ii. 9), do we become citizens 
of the spiritual kingdom and heirs of eternal life. It is rather by the influence of the 
Spirit of God upon and within us (John iii. 5), and by our appropriate and correspond- 
ing action in response — ^by penitence of spirit and humble faith in a Divine Saviour 
^ch. XX. 21), that we become tme subjects of the great King, and have our names 
entered on that blessed roll which is the Book of Life. — 0. 

Vers. 1 — 21. — Paul's self-defence before the Jews. " Brothers and fathers I " These 
words fell from his lips in the Hebrew tongue, and a hush fell upon them. If we desirt 
to lie listened to with attention, we must speak to the people " in their own tongue." 



200 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. xxn. 1—30, 

L The pbeiod before conversion. (Vers. 3 — 5.) He speaks throughout of him- 
■df ; but in the background of his thought is the providence and the grace of Him who 
httA called him out from darkness into hia marvellous light, tie was a Jew, strictly 
educated in the Law, and a zealot for God. And yet a persecutor. A lesson for as all 
Against the over-valuation of learning and of orthodoxy. He hud tried the way ol 
zealotry and persecution, as Luther had tried that of monkery, sincerely seeking salva- 
tion, but without success. The memory of his earlier time is one mingled with thank- 
fulness and penitence, as indeed all our memories must be. In his good education and 
in his unhappy errors he could trace the hand of God. Boasting is in every case excluded. 

IL His oonvbhsion. (Vers. 6 — 15.) 1. The great light from heaven on the way 
to Damascus. It disclosed the dark ways of sin and error in which the heart had been 
wandering ; and at the same time lighted up the ways of Divine grace by which the 
convinced soul was to be led, and the path of duty the new-born soul was to follow. 
He is led by the hand, as into a mystery, which only the Divine wisdom shall gradually 
wnfold. Jesus, still lead on 1 Like led children ever we enter the kingdom of heaven 
2. The ordination by the hands of Ananias. A pious man according to the Law. God 
knows all his servants, and the work for which each is best fitted. Here is a mirror for 
all preachers. They should bring to the office knowledge and experience of the 
working of God's grace upon the heart. They must in their ofBce be like St. Paul- 
witnesses before all men, by word and conversation, of that which they have seen and 
heard. And their comfort may in like manner be that he who has called will strengthen, 
•dify, and support them in their calling. 

III. HiB COMMISSION. (Vers. 17 — 21.) He is praying in the temple, his soul over- 
whelmed by the weight of those Divine communications. The voice says, " Hasten, 
and go quickly out of Jerusalem 1 " Paul meets the call with reluctance. This struggle 
is among the incidents of the strife of the Spirit of God with our spirit. We would 
•tay when he bids to go. " Lord, I will follow thee, but ■ ■" Sometimes it is fear, as 
in Jonah's case ; sometimes it is modesty, as with Moses and Jeremiah ; or conscientious- 
ness, as with Peter (ch. x. 14) ; or compassion, as with Abraham at Sodom, and Paul 
with Israel. Over against all our huts stands the firm command of God, " Go hence I " 
Only he who overcomes his hesitation in full trust in the perfect right and wisdom ot 
that command will be enabled by-and-by to say, " He has done all things weU."— J. 

Vers. 22 — 29. — Banger and deliverance. At length the latent envy of the Jewish 
•udlence breaks forth. " Away with such a man from the earth 1 " 

L Dangbb inoueebd in witness foe the truth, (Vers. 22 — 27.) The wild force 
of fanaticism has to be encountered again and again. These scenes are a warning 
against fostering it. It dishonours God, under the pretext of jealousy for his honour ; 
ill treats the innocent ; disgraces itself, turning men into wild beasts. 

IL DiviNB DELTVBRANOE OF THE SERVANT OP GoD. 1. It is brought about by the 
right feeling of the Roman captain, together with the civil privileges of the apostle. 
And he obtains a new opportunity for self-justification. 2. It tends to illustrate his 
character. The violence offered to him elicits a gentle and lowly reply (ver. 25 ; John 
xviii. 23). Outwardly ill treated, he remains inwardly unhurt. Momentarily trodden 
Id the dust, he rises to eternal honours. 

III. The NOBUiiTY of the children of God. It is acquired by the new birth. It 
is sealed by the Spirit of God. It is proved by trial, conflict, and affliction. It appears 
■1 full glory in the heavenly state. Their privileges are — exemption from fear 'ti the 
presence of the powers of this world ; inviolate safety from the violence of evil men ; 
independence of the judgment of the world, " Now are we the sons of God, and it 
doth not yet appear what we shall be^" — J. 

Ver. 80— ch. xxiii. 11. — Paul he/ore the high council. L The simplicity and bin- 
OBRITT OF A GOOD CONSCIENCE. 1. This gives manly courage and confidence. 2. It acts 
as a touchstone upon his foes, exposing their injustice, bringing those passionate and 
unfair in spirit to light Ananias's answer to Paul's dignified statement is a blow on 
tbe mouth. 3. At the same time, it imparts childlike humility. Great was the provo- 
cation to a high spirit like that of Paul. His first passionate answer contrasts with 
th*t of Jesus ou the same occasion (John lilL 23). But on th» remonstrance ot tht 



OH. xin. 1— 30.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 201 

bystanders, he apologizes for the exclamation. Either he did not recognize Ananias 
for the prcsi'ling high priest; or, recognizing, he meant to intimate that, wliile he had 
all respect for the office, he had none for the person who thus abused it. " If Paul," 
says Luther, " thus assails the priest who was ordained according to the Law of Moses, 
why should I dread to assail the painted bishops and ghosts who come from the pope, 
without any command from God and man ? " 4. Self-possession and prudence, with 
sincerity (ver. 6). Paul is the sheep among the wolves (Matt. x. 16). There was both 
tact and truih in this confession. He was a Pharisee by birth and education, and also 
by present po>ition, as he upheld the authority of the Divine Law in opposition to the 
frivolity of the Sadducees. That was the common ground on which he and the Phari- 
sees stood. Paul says what is simply true. It is only self-control, sincerity, and sim- 
plicity which can give true firmness and consistency. 

II. 'J HE INCONSISTENCIES OF DISHONESTY. (Vers. 7, stc.) There was a split in the 
assembly, occasioned by Paul's confession. It is a picture of what is ever going on in 
the world. Sects and parties fall asunder, and make free space and passage for the 
truth of God. Party spirit drew the Pharisees over to Paul ; yet God's wisdom reaches 
its end by this means. He makes the wrath of man to praise him. The Roman officer 
takes, as usual, the part of an indifferentist, and orders the removal of the prisoner. 
Thus the contending parties are silenced, and their objects are defeated by their own 
passion and violence, while the cause of right prevails. 

ill. The voice feom heaven. Great need brings great comfort. God is content 
with the witness he has borne. Greater than the trials from foes are those which arise 
from the self-doubts of a sensitive conscience. Have we said and done our best ? The 
disappointment of the result reflects itself in the trouble of the conscience. But the 
resnlts are not of our command ; the purpose is. We cannot command success ; but we 
may deserve it, and enjoy the testimony of a good conscience. The "comfort where- 
with I am comforted of God." It compensates for the unjust judgment of the world ; 
for the insults to one's office ; for the griefs of self-condemnation. Above all, it 
strengthens for the conflicts of the future. It is a laurel on the brow of the hero of 
God, the word : " Thou shalt bear witness again." Henceforward the apostolic history 
turns upon the witness which Paul is to fulfil at Home. Lessons : The true Christian 
witness must have, first of all, the good conscience within his breast. The violence of 
the foes of truth will then be a certificate in his favour ; he will enjoy the sympathy 
of the honest and unprejudiced on earth, and the assurance of the Divine Judge in 
heaven. — J. 

Vers. 1 — 21. — Paul's defence of himself to the people. L The oiboumstancbs. 1. 
On the castle stairs. 2. Addressed to a tumultuous mob, full of passionate, murderous 
feeling, quelled for the moment by Paul's self-control and the captain's influence, 
showing that they feared Eome, though they feared not God, and had no desire to 
know the truth. 3. The magic of the Hebrew tongue, that is, the Syriao or Aramaic 
Hebrew, which touched their national sympathies, and at once laid to rest any sus- 
picions that Paul was a foreigner desecrating the temple. 

II. The substance of the speech. Pacts speak for themselves. Once I was blind 
aa you ; now I see. The convert relating his experience. Power of such testimonies 
when simply and faithfnlly narrated. The evidence that Jesus was the Christ. The 
reason for Paul's mission to the Gentiles. 

III. The doom of Jerusalem fobeshadowbd. " They will not receive of thy testi- 
mcQy concerning me." Resistance to the Holy Ghost. Stephen's blood was crying out, 
and now they would have Paul's. The messenger sent from heaven unto the Gentiles 
betokened the Divine judgments about to be poured out on Jerusalem, and the blessing 
taken from them and given to those who would return faithfully the fruits of the 
vineyard. 

IV. The holt boldness of thb man who could speak thus to an infuriated mob. 
His confidence in truth, in his own mission, in the works of the Spirit, in the future 
of the Christian Church ; and his fearlessness of man. — E. 

Vers. 22 — 80. — Rescue of the prisoner and reference of his cause to the Jewish San- 
hedrim. Notice— 



202 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLE& [oh. xxa 1— 3a 

L The poweb or prejudice. The very word " Gentile " exasperates Jews. Y«t they 
were separated from Gentiles, not to hate them, but to save them. 

II. I'he close connection between ignorance and violenob. Knowledge helpi 
patience ; patience promotes knowledge. 

III. The cruelty of power when it is exercised without righteouBness. Torture 
was at once a confession of weakness and a violation of the rights of man. Law can 
need no cruelty to supymri ii. li most be based upon trutli and benevolence, or it is 
not righteous law. While the noisy tumult of the mob showed the corrupt state of 
the Jewish nation, the scene in the castle revealed the imperfection and worthlessness 
of mere human rule. Both facts were the cries of the world for the kingdom of God. 

IV. The influence of true religion in enlightening the mind, calming the feelings, 
strengthening the will, and preparing the man for trials. The example of Paul one of 
exalted self-possession and heroism, together with astonishing intelligence and discern- 
ment of character. The thought of using his Roman citizenship at that moment was 
doubtless a suggestion of God's Spirit. 

V. Providenob in the government of the world. The Roman state needed to prepare 
the way for the gospel. The two citizenships — of the earthly kingdom, of the heavenly, 
compared in the two men, Lysias and Paul. Little the parents of the apostle could 
have anticipated how that Roman privilege would work into his history. We should 
give our children all we can to prepare them for future life. Grace and providence 
work together. The world's alarm opens the way for the gospel. 

VI. The beal conflict, not between Christianity and political power, but between 
true and false religion. The chief priests and the council face to face with the represen- 
tative of Christ. A corrupted Judaism must be swept out of the way. After that ia 
done, then Christianity will be ready for its still greater mission to evangelize the whole 
world, beginning with the Roman empire. The three parties represented — the Chris- 
tian, the rabbinical, the heathen. — 'R. 

Ver. 1. — A model self-defence. We enter in this chapter on matter which is to some 
degree repetition (ch. ix.). The repetition is valuable for several reasons. It both adds 
and omits some particulars. It gives us Paul's own version in his own words, instead 
of what must still have been essentially his own version, but which was probably 
rehearsed in the historian's words. It gives us the advantage also of comparison in 
those parts which exhibit slight differences, and we gain a fuller impression of Paul's 
experience. We may imagine that Paul had been almost tremblingly anxious the past 
hour or two for this opportunity; and the moment that the lashed and angry waves 
were hushed was a proud moment for him had he been merely the human orator, but 
much rather a prized moment as he was the Christian orator. He has heard wild and 
baseless accusations passionately hurled at him, and just so long as might were right, 
he might be supposed to hold himself answerable to unjust earthly judges, as well as 
to the one true Judge and one merciful Master. But beyond a doubt something else 
than personal defence was in his heart, and his eye 'scried a grand opportunity. For 
this " defence " it may be claimed that it is — 

I. The defence of a man. For: 1. It must he held to be the outcome of, not craven 
fear, but the rising spirit of a true man. Very certain it is that not one out of • 
hundred would have risen to the occasion. Disheaitennient, despair, perhaps disdain, 
would have locked close the lips of most men. But Paul does not consent to " give up," 
or to show anything in the shape of temper answering to the intolerant spirit of the 
multitude. 2. It was the acknowledgment j^'iowever undeserved in the individual 
case) of the respect naturally due in the society of human life from one man to his 
fellows. Such respect is all the more to be honoured in the observance by the man 
who, whether Paul or Galileo, may be confessedly making a " new departure " of widt 
significance. History shows that it has been the lot of such men, not in religion only, 
to be made sufferers. The noblest examples of martyrs have been of those who have 
done nothing to bring it upon themselves by any manifestation of the defiant spirit. 
3. Every word of it was the utterance of conscious rectitude. 4. It was a noble, 
typical example of the strength " in its glory " of the individual conscience ag^nst the 
senseless strength and intolerance of a mob. 

IL The defenor or a Chbistiah. For : 1. This defence was through the whole 



«H.xxn. 1-30] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 



length of it a connected confession to a change wrought by Christ. The change was a 
great one. The pride of man offered every conceivable hindrance to it. The surrender 
was one that meant the profoundest acknowledgment of the opponent's victory. And 
Christ was the victor's Name. When Paul, therefore, defends his altered self and his 
altered course of life, his altered faith and hopes and methods, there is not an aspect 
of the defence which can be described as other than Christian. 2. The derence of 
himself was forthwith transmuted by Paul into a testimony for Christ. This was the 
mark and very stamp of both Christian design and Christian method. With manifest 
fire of zeal, he seizes the favourable and welcomed opportunity. He gives us the 
impression that this is the thing that has been in his eye of late. Paul may have been 
answerable in some degree for the commotion of the day. If so, now his task, 
embraced with all the energy that the very spirit of fidelity can throw into it, is to 
proclaim Christ. And when a man will so even vindicate himself as yet more to testify 
Christ, his self-vindication merits at least the title of the defence of a true Christian man, 
3. This defence was perfect in its temper, and free from all betrayal of irritation; it 
makes its statement of facts with the utmost simplicity, but with unwavering confi- 
dence. 4. Lastly, at the point of supreme danger, it does not turn aside. The fact 
which Paul well knew was intolerable to the ears of his hearers, but vital to the truth, 
is steadily pursued, is arrived at, and then is distinctly announced, without an attempt 
at qualifying it or softening its effect. This was "not shunning to declare the whole 
counsel of God." And it marked the quality of the Chiistian hero; it spoke the firmness 
of the Christian martyr ; perliaps best of all it established conclusively the title of Paul 
to the name of the true Chiistiau man. — B. 

Vers. 1 — 22. — The testimony of religious experience. Not now dwelling upon the 
details of Saul's conversion, treated of for the most part under the consideration of the 
ninth chapter, we may observe that we have here Paul's own account of it, that is to 
say, we have his own rehearsal of his conversion, and so far forth religious experience. 
Wo may use the opportunity for the purpose of illustrating the right occasion and use 
of the individual declaring to the world " what the Lord has done for his soul. This is 
in some cases an undoubted duty, and the neglect of it an undoubted dereliction of 
duty. Many, no doubt, are the occasions that lie on the border-line of expediency, and 
even of duty. And, as in many, many other things, it is then that the solemn claims 
of individual responsibility are either seen and honoured or dishonoured. We may, 
therefore, observe some of the facts involved in a man's confession of his own religious 
experience before the Cliurch and the world. 

I. It amounts to a forcible testifyino to the fact of the woeking and force 
OF God's prbsknoe in human life. 

II. It 18 A STIMULUS OR OTHERWISE AN ABIDIXn TiEBUKE TO OTHER MEN WHO OWN TO 
NO LIVINO CONSCIOUSNESS OF THAT PRESENCE OR CU-lil'I'UIATlON WITH IT. 

III. It IS HELPFUL QUIDANC3E IN UANY DIRECTIONS TO THOSB " WHO BELIEVB " IN 
THEIR OWN RELIGIOUS COURSE. 

IV. It FREQUENTLY OFFERS AMAZING INSTANCES OP THE GOODNESS, LOVE, AND FOWEB 
OF GOD AND OF ChRIST AND OF THE SPIRIT. 

v. It abounds in exemplifications of human nature under CERTAIN MOST 
SPECIAL 0IE0UMSTANCB8 AND TREATMENT, AND OF ITS BEHAVIOUB UNDER SUCH TREAT- 
MENT, 

VI. It IS NOT ONLY HONOURINO TO GOD AND A GLORIFYING OF HIM, BUT IT IS USEFUL 
TO MEN, TO BIND THEMSELVES N SOLEMN OBLIGATION OF FUBLIO PROFESSION BEFOBB 
MEN. — ^B, 

Ver. 14. — " That Just One." Paul here quotes from Ananias a term used to desig- 
nate Jesus Christ. Its Scripture history as applied to Christ, and its significance as 
touching some of the deepest aspects of Christ's relations to humanity, are very worthy 
of some fixed attention. Notice — 

I. The Scripture history of the epithet, "that Just One," as applied to 
Christ. Six occasions in the historical portions of the New Testament illustrate its 
use, namely, when it comes from the lips of Pilate's wife and afterwards of Pilate 
(Matt, xxvii, 19, 24); from the lips of the Boman centurion (Luke xxiii. 47) ; of Peter 



204 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLEa [oh. xiii. 1— 3a 

(ch. iii. 14) ; of Stephen (ch. vii. 52) ; and of Ananias in the special quotation of 
Paul now (ver. 14). These testimonies are noticeable for the directness of their 
language, for the special identification of Christ as " this just Man," or " that just 
Man," or " the Just One," and for the character in each case of those who uttered 
them. 

II. The deeper significance of the same epithet as applied to Cheist. 1. Christ 
is the perfectly " righteous " One, and the only perfectly righteous One. All others 
have sinned and fallen short of God's glory. No other has kept the Law entirely — 
kept it in deed, in word, in thousht, in affection, in zeal. 2. Christ's perfect righteou»- 
ness is the qualification of the Mediator, that real, solemn, thrilling relationship which 
he sustained as between God and man. 3. Christ's perfect righteousness constituted 
the essential qualification of the propitiatory sacrifice. He " suffered for sins, the just 
for the unjust" (1 Pet. iii. 18). The " Advocate with the Father, and the Propitiation 
for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the whole world, is Jesus Christ the 
Eighteous" (1 John iL 2). 4, Christ's perfect righteousness constitutes the per- 
fection of his fitness to be Teacher and Exemplar to men on earth, 5. Christ's perfect 
righteousness is the stability of his tlirone of judgment, to be ere very long beheld 
and approached by every man who is or ever has been. He i* "the Lord, the 
righteous Judge" (2 Tim. iv. 8). — B. 

Vers. 14, 15. — 7%e calling and the gifts of Ood. The apostle himself elsewhere 
speaks (Rom. xi. 29) of " the gifts and the calling of God ; " and of them he says that 
they "are without repentance." The glorious occasion to which he gives prominence 
in the words of these verses exhibits the " calling " first, and the " gifts " next. At 
the game time, this same passage describes the calling of God (separate and sovereign 
act though it be in itself) as introductory to responsibilities, privileges, and gifts that 
followed upon it. There is not such a thing as a calling of God;, to lie dormant. 
There is not such • thing as a calling of God, to terminate in the mere use or enjoy- 
ment of the person called. A calling of God infers a commission consequent upon 
it — nay, nothing less than involved in it under any circumstances. Here, however, 
it is not implied only, it is expressed as well, and that in a very significant mode. For 
immediate upon the mention of the calling or choosing comes that of — 

I. A great qualification. 1. The Christian apostle, minister, teacher, must be 
one who " knows the will " of God. 2. He must be one who knows it very directly 
from the fountain-head. Hearsay will not suffice, imagination will not suffice, reason 
will not suffice. 

II. A GRAND PRIVILEGE IN CONNiOTION WITH THAT QUALIFICATION. ThoUgh Paul 

" was as one born out of due season," these things are vouchsafed to him, namely, to 
" see " and to " hear " the " Just One." Some think Saul had seen Christ in the flesh. 
This passage may contribute something confessedly inconclusive to the disadvantage of 
the supposition. It is oveiwhelmingly improbable, in that Paul never speaks of it, as 
surely he would have done if it had been the case, even as he speaks of having seen 
Stephen and assisted at his martyrdom. This great grace, however, is now vouch- 
safed to Saul, that with vision of thousandfold force he is given to see the very Jesut 
ascended, and that with a keenness to hear beyond anything that he had experienced 
before he is granted to hear the own voice of the glorified Man Jesus. It is not that 
Saul had earned the gift — nay, it is not that to the end of a devoted life of fullest self- 
surrender he will ever be able to earn the gift. Paul is the disclaimer of merit. Nor 
is all the grace for Paul. How many lesser successors to him have taken their share 
of benefit, and the whole Church its share, when these have recalled that Jesus 
teaches : 1. How near a connection is necessary between himself and his servant- 
pioneers of the truth and heralds of salvation. 2. To this end how near he is willing 
to condescend to come to those servants. 3. And how he would embolden them to 
draw near to him in most believing; faith and most loving trust of the heart, when the 
times should be such that he would no longer come in vision to them. 

IIL A VAST RESPONSIBILITY. It ueods an angel intellect and an archangel heart to 
set an estimate at all equal to the truth upon the work committed into human hands 
when the ministry of Christ is accepted by them. They are then " witnesses for Christ 
to men." And three features of their great responsibility are here shadowed forth. 1. 



9H. xxn. 1— 30.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 205 

They are witnesses to a living One, a Personage, and not to a mere truth. 2. They are 
witnesses to him of the things that they know of " tho Word of life " (1 John L 1), 
through having seen him, heard him, looked upon him, and handled him, all in the 
deepest sense. 3. They are witnesses " to all men," as far as they can possibly in any 
way reach all men, and under any circumstances to all impartially. Deep was the 
impression that these communications (unmentioned elsewhere) had made on the mind 
of Paul. The words of Ananias, inspired most freshly as he was from the source, had 
dwelt deep-stored in his memory. And now, some twenty-five years afterwards, at a 
crisis most opportune, they come to the surface , they are full-charged with their own 
vitality ; and are practically commended by Faul as embodying the charter of all who 
should be " witnesses for Christ." — B. 

Vers. 18 — 21. — Men's past sins often the unknown determiners of their future life, 
its opportunities, and its disqualifications It is possible to take different views of the 
drift and the intended tenor of this passiige. The language of Saul (which Paul now 
quotes), as found in vers. 19, 20, will be very far from powerless, vmether read as a 
view humbly offered in harmony with the command just laid upon him, or as perhaps 
is the more probable, in deprecation of it. The passage, however, reminds us, amid 
high associations of great truths, of solemn far-reaching principles in human life. The 
retribution which it enwraps is not that of the severity of judgment to the sinner, but 
of the inevitableness of that cause and effect which speak a Creator-God of infinite 
wisdom, and a creature-man of reason, of moral capabilities, and of a certain freedom of 
action, that lies at the root of moral responsibility and final accountability. Notice, 
then — 

L A OARBEB OF UNTOLD POSSIBILITIES OP USEFULNESS AND HONOUB IN THE MOTHELi 

OITT Jebusalem OUT SHORT FOB Paul. 1. We could imagine reasons why Paul would 
have felt his highest ambition fired by testifying, working, suffering, and dying for Jesus 
in Jerusalem, as . (1) The mother city of the land and of God's favoured people, renowned 
with ancient and special renown (2) The place at the very heart of Jewish life, where 
he woald have longed to recant most publicly his one-time errors of creed, and retrieve 
whatever it were possible to retrieve of the effects of those errors. This would have 
been of what was most noble among the characteristics of PauL (3) The place which 
held the same relation to the religious world that Borne did to the heathen world. 
(4) The place where the Master bore the grandest testimony of all his course, and 
suffered and died. 2. It needs little imagination to see that, let alone any sense of a 
noble ambition, Paul would feel that it would be one of the grandest opportunities of 
usefulness, at the very centre of typical and peculiar risk and danger. From all this 
Paul is interdicted by a voice of sovereign authority, and on the plain ground of his 
own past of error. 

XL A BEMEDY IN ChBIBT AGAINST ABJECT HOPELESSNKSS, AGAINST SETTLED DIBPAIB, 
AGAINST BEMOBSBFUL THBOWINO UP OF ENDEAVOUB, IN THE PEE8EN0B OF THE BETBI- 

BurrvB ASPECTS OF HUMAN LIFE. The veto of Jesus Christ, spoken with authority to 
Paul, is nothing else than linked with a summons to other work and another sphere, 
that may turn into all equal usefulness and probably usefulness far greater. Notice the 
method of that summons. 1. Though to state the ground of it might be pain and 
might give pain, it is not wrapt in vague mystery and unsatisfying innuendo. It is, on 
the other hand, a grand instance of " Faithful are the wounds of a friend." 2. The 
summons exhibits a very distinct and emphatic value set upon the life and the useful 
employment of the servant somewhere or other. Twice, nay, thrice repeated is the 
direction to depart with " haste," " quickly," and nnquestioningly. Men may depart 
like Jonah. But also they may depart for (1) Christ's own command, announced in 
the individual conscience or by the living Spirit ; and (2) for greater toil and exposure, 
instead of for ease and hiding from work. 3. The summons announces, by a most 
gracious anticipation, an highly important substitute career. The man who has 
incapacitated himself by follies, by errors, even by sins, for some of the noblest of 
Christian service shall still not be cast away as useless. He is still good to do some- 
thing; yes, to do much. The Master does not rel'use the love or the service of the 
fallen, when they return. Nor does he consent to treat with tliem only through otheis. 
First he saves them and protects them, and suggests his care and love of them. Then 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [ch. xxn. 1— 30 



he gives them their work, though " far hence.* And lastly, he does not withhold froiD 
their ear to ht^ar his own voice, " I will send thee." What trust, what love, what 
forgivingnesa, and what streams of hope Jesus has to give — and gives to his own I — B. 

Ver. 3. — The sincerity of St. PauVs Juilaism. " I am verily a man which am a Jew." 
This remarkable speech was addressed to a particular audience, under particular circum- 
stances, and it was precisely adapted to that audience. It took careful account of their 
knowledge and of their prejudices. It was conciliatory in tone, but firm to the truth and 
manly in spirit. It is impossible for us to admire too highly the calmness and the self- 
command of the apostle under such perilous circumstances. Instances may be given 
from political life of the power of a skilful orator to sway an excited mob, such as that 
of Lamartine in times of the French Eevolution. The introduction of this homily should 
deal with (1) the scene ; (2) the audience ; (3) the orator. 1. The scene. Dean 
Plumptre has the following suggestive note : — " The position was one which raised him 
(St. Paul) above the people, and the characteristic gesture commanded instant atten- 
tion. And he spoke, not as they expected, in the Greek, which belonged to one who 
fraternized with the Qentiles, but in the Hebrew, or Aramaic, which he had studied at 
the feet of G^amaliel. It was a strange scene for that Feast of Pentecost. The face and 
form of the speaker may have been seen from time to time by some during his 
passing visits to Jerusalem ; but there must have been many who had not beard him 
take part in public action since the day when, twenty-five years before, he had kept 
the garments of those who were stoning Stephen. And now he was there, accused of 
the selfsame crimes, making his defence before a crowd as wild and frenzied as that of 
which he had then been the leader." 2. The audience. Notice that it was largely composed 
of foreign Jews, who were present at the feast ; and that those foreign Jews were often 
more intensely bigoted than the Jerusalem Jews, — they would certainly have more know- 
ledge of St. Paul, and more personally antagonistic feelings against him. Some of them 
had recognized him, and raised the excitement which nearly led to his death. Show how 
utterly unreasonable such a mob becomes ; no appeal can be made to their intelligence ; 
usually they can only be dispersed by force, or their excitement must be allowed to spend 
itself and wear itself out. 3. The orator ; a weak, frail man, with a personal presence 
which men called contemptible, but with the natural gift for swaying an audience. As 
soon as he spoke men were hushed to listen, as they always are when the born orator 
stands before them. Perhaps St. Paul's gifts as a writer have filled our thought, so that we 
have not duly recognized what a splendid " command of men " he had in his great gift 
of speech. The point which he sought to impress on his audience on this occasion was 
the " sincerity of his Judaism." That was the tlung impugned. He was declared to 
be such an unworthy Jew that he had defiled the temple by bringing an Ephesian 
Gentile into it. The proper answer was a full declaration of his honest and complete 
loyalty to Judaism. This he made — 

L Br ADDBEssiNG THEM IN THE Hbbbew tongdk. Not in Gentile Greek. " It might 
be that he did this simply because they understood it better, but it may have been also 
because, as the language showed him to he a countryman of their own, they were dis- 
posed to think him less guilty than the Asian Jews had represented him to be " (F. 
Bungener). " One who spoke in Hebrew was not likely to blaspheme the sacred 
Hebrew books." 

IL By ASSUEIN8 THEM OP HIS LIFELONG LOYALTY TO HbBEEW PBINCIPLE8. Hig 

birth was unquestionably Jewish. His education was most distinctly Jewish ; for he 
was even educated at Jerusalem, and by their most honoured teacher. His Judaism 
was so sincere and so intense that he had been the most active and energetic persecutor 
of the Nazarenes. And Ananias, the well-known devout Jew, had brought Ood'a 
commands to him (ver. 12). 

III. Br AFFIRMING THAT, IF HE SEEMED TO HAVE TAKEN A NEW LINE, HE HAD ONLY 

OBEYED Jeuovah, THE GoD OF THEiE Hebeew FATHERS. This is the point of St. Paul'i 
advance. Jehovah had appeared to him, had given him special directions, and, as a 
loyal Jew, he could only obey those directions. Jehovah had shown him that Jesus 
was Messiah. Jehovah had sent him forth on his mission among the Gentiles. He 
had never dishonoured Judaism, never broken with it. He was still the same " bom 
Jew " a» ever (ver. 14). — ^B. T. 



<m. xxn. 1—30.1 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. tCl 

Vers. 6 — 10. — The claims of a personal Divine revelation. The Incidents hers 
narrated have been previously considered in their bearing on St. Paul's conversion. 
The apostle iiovf repeats the story, with a definite purpose. He is on his defence, and 
he is striving to show that throughout his life be had been loyal to Judaism, and in the 
matters which men misrepresented he had but followed and obeyed special Divine 
directions given to him. He had visions and commands direct from God, and, as a Jew, 
he "dared not be disobedient unto the heavenly vision." Such a defence was most 
effective fur his audience, as no true Jew would deny that Jehovah might choose any 
of his people for special service, and give them immediate visions and directions. So 
we find the people heard the apostle patiently until he referred to the " Gentiles," and 
then national jealousy and religious bigotry were aroused, and uncontrolled passion put 
St. Paul's life again in peril. 

I. Pbbsonal Divine revelations have comb in every aob. Distinguibh between 
the ordinary inspirations which may direct a man's preaching and writing, and the 
special occasions on which God may tell his mind and purpose, or give some trust and 
some work to an individual. Such personal revelations do not necessarily affirm the 
superiority in character, or in Divine favour, of the person communicated with ; but 
they always declare the Divine recognition of a special fitness and adaptation for the 
work assigned ; and our attention should be fixed on the fitness and the work rather 
than on the privilege that may be involved in having such a trust. Illustrations of 
personal revelations may be taken from (1) the patriarchal age; (2) the times of the 
judges ; (3) the prophets. It should be shown how well the selection of individuals, 
and direct communication with them, fits in with the idea of a theocracy. God, as 
actual and ever-present Sovereign of the nation, has the right to ask for any man's 
service, and to address himself directly to whomsoever he pleases. And nothing is more 
reasonable than to expect he will do so. Coming; to later times, we get illustration (4) 
from John the Baptist ; (5) from the Lord Jesus Christ regarded as a man called to a 
special mission ; and (6) from the apostles, e.g. St. Peter in the matter of Cornelius. 
What is called the conversion of St. Paul, but is more properly his call, is a case in 
perfect harmony with all that had gone before in the history of the nation. The God 
of the fathers, Jehovah, the theocratic King, had, by a gracious manifestation of him- 
self and of his will, called the apostle to his service. This was the sole and all- 
sufficient explanation of his life and conduct ; and this became his entire defence — " A 
revelation from frod, the God of my fathers, has come to me, and I must obey it." 
Compare the main argument of Stephen's speech, which is this — God has not only spoken 
to our own nation in the Mosaic system, he has spoken directly to individuals age after 
age, but it has always been characteristic of the Jewish nation that they have resisted 
these prophet-revealers of God's will. Theoretically, they would admit that God migh t 
send messages directly to individuals ; practically, they refused to recognize such 
messengers. This was proved once again in the case of St. Paul. 

II. Personal Divine revelations mat comb now. This truth it may be difficult 
for us to receive; and, indeed, it needs to be stated with careful limitations and qualifi- 
cations. Under the ministration of the Spirit, and with the Spirit actually witnessing 
in our hearts, it would seem that we can expect no direct Divine communications. Yet 
they do surely come to open hearts. It may be shown that they are granted : 1. In 
the spheres of truth. We cannot conceive of finality in the written revelation we have, 
but we may be sure that all further revelations will be in perfect harmony with that 
we have. We may, however, rather look for new apprehensions of truth than new 
truth. 2. In the spheres of duty. In the perplexing circumstances of life, hearts that 
are really open to God, and dependent on him, do receive direct Divine guidance. 3. 
In the spheres of work. God still speaks directly to the souls of his servants, calling 
some to the missionary field, some to the ministry, some to service for the children, and 
some to philanthropic labours. And, still, none of us may be " disobedient unto the 
heavenly vision." — E. T. 

Ver. 21. — Paul's commission to the Oentiles. " I will send thee far hence unto the 
Gentiles." In the narrative given in ch. ix. 16 this command is said to have come 
direct to Ananias, and to have been by him communicated to St. PauL Of the direct 
message to St. Paul himself subsequently, at Jerusalem, this appears to be our onl 



208 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLEa [oh. xxn. 1— 30, 

account (comp. the narrative in ch. xxvi. 17). It it to be noticed that, though St. 
Paul thus distinctly knew what his mission was, he waited patiently until Divine 
directions or Divine providence clearly opened the way for him. And, while he waited, 
he cheerfully did the work which came to his hand. We proceed to dwell on three 
points : (1) the sphere to which St. Paul was sent ; (2) the fitness of St. Paul for work 
in this particular sphere ; and (3) the infiuence which work in this sphere had upon 
St. Paul's own apprehensions of the truth. Noticing first what a strain upon his own 
Jewish feelings it must have involved for him to undertake this work, and how his 
doing so proves the sincerity and completeness of his conversion. 

I. The sphere to which the apostle was sent. " The Gentiles." Jews divided 
the whole world into Jews and Gentiles ; so St. Paul's mission was to all outside the 
Jewish nation. Illustrate how the prevalence of the Greek tongue, and the wide 
supremacy of the Boman rule, at this time opened the whole world to the gospel. 
Illustrate what vaiiety of classes and of people the apostle met with in travelling, as 
he did, from Jerusalem and round about unto lUyricum. Becall the circumstances 
under which the apostle came to leave the synagogues and devote himself exclusively 
to the Gentile populations. And show what preparation there was for the gospel in 
Gentile spheres, (1) in the common religious wants of men ; and (2) in the senpe of 
dissatisfaction with idolatry which then so widely prevailed. As representative of the 
various Gentile spheres, give some account of Lystra, Ephesus, Corinth, and Rome. 

n. The fitness of the apostle foe wobk in this pakticulak spheee. Find 
the fitnesses in : 1. His birth as a Grecian Jew. 2. His knowledge of the Greek 
language, and partial Greek education. All the other apostles were Aramaic Jews. 
St. Paul's early associations prepared him to take larger and more comprehensive views 
of Christian truth, when once his strong Jewish prejudices were overcome. 3. His 
unquestioning sense of a Divine call. 4. The permanent influence exerted on him by 
Stephen's death, and probably by Stephen's teachings. 5. The clear apprehension he 
had of Christian truth, in its distinction from, but full harmony with, the principles of 
Judaism. 6. Further fitness may be found on a careful estimate of St. Paul's 
peculiarities of mind, disposition, and character. 

III. The influence which work in his sphere had upon the apostle's own 
apprehensions of the truth. This is a difficult subject to treat, and involves a very 
close study of St. Paul's doctrinal position at different points of his ministry. To open 
it out wisely, the Epistles must be chronologically arranged and fitted into the record 
in the Acts, and compared with the apostle's speeches. An illustration may be taken 
from the Epistle to the Ephesians, which clearly shows that the mystical and super- 
stitious people of Ephesus exercised such an influence on St. Paul as led him to 
consider some great speculative questions, and, we may say, tended to exercise and 
develop his mystical faculty. The influence of work among the Gentiles may be illus- 
trated in 1 elation : L To doctrine. It led to the first attempts at a philosophy of the 
Christian religion. 2. To practical Qhristian life. St. Paul had to find out how to 
adjust Christian principles to Gentile life and manners, and so he was led to develop a 
system of Christian ethics. Impress that the work to which God calls u* will also be 
(1) our service to others ; and (2) our own personal culture. — E. T. 

Vers. 22, 23. — The imreasoning excitement of crowds. The action of this crowd is 
in most respects similar to that of crowds in all ages and in all districts ; but in some 
of its features it was characteristically Eastern. " A great similarity appears between 
the conduct of the Jews when the chief captain of the Roman garrison at Jerusalem 
presented himself in the temple, and the behaviour of the Persian peasants when they 
go to court to complain of the governors under whom they live, upon their oppressions 
becoming intolerable. Sir John Chardin tells us respecting them, that they carry their 
complaints against their governors by companies, consisting of several hundreds, and 
sometimes of a thousand ; they repair to tijat gate of the palace near to which their 
prince is most likely to be, where they begin to make the most horrid cries, tearing 
their garments, and throwing dust into the air, at the same time demanding justice. 
Thn king, upon hearing these cries, sends to know the occasion of them. The people 
f'olivnr their complaint in writing, upon which he lets tbem know that he will conim't 
the cogniaance of the affair to some one by whom justice is usually done them" 



OH, xxn. 1— 30.J THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 209 

(Paxton). Compare the excitement of the multitudes assembled m the Ephesian 
theatre (ch. xix. 29—34). 

I. Thb perilous influence of populab sentiment. Masses readily take up 
prejudices and give way to mere feeling, and so are led to do terrible things. Illus- 
trate from the riots of country towns in the older election- times, when the people were 
excited by political sentiment ; or by the violent scenes of the French Eevolution. It 
is usually true of all mobs that " the more part knew not wherefore they were come 
together." Sentiment is valuable as giving tone and feeling to action, but sentiment 
alone can never be allowed to decide and control action, because it tends to make a 
man at once passionate and weak. There is no wise decision, no calm judgment, no 
definite purpose, no solid strength of will, and so sentiment leads men to do things of 
which they are afterwards ashamed, to forget the reasonable claims of others,, and to 
commit great social wrongs. The Christian man's duty, wherever his lot may be cast, 
is: 1. To strive against.^ielding to popular sentiments on (1) social, (2) political, (3) 
religious subjects, as injurious to his own spiritual life, and likely to make him unjust 
toward others. 2. To use his influence to check public excitement, and to disseminate 
right principles. In religious spheres, yielding to " sentiment " has often been the 
cause of public and private persecution. In common life, reason is the proper check of 
sentiment. In religious spheres, the revelation given us in God's Word, and the direct 
illuminations of God's Spirit, are the proper checks. Illustrate how, in religious 
spheres, untempered sentiment has often developed into " mania." 

II. The responsibility op all popular leaders. They gain their power by 
appeal to sentiment. Illustrate from the incidents of the text. The leaders of the 
Judaic party knew perfectly well that they had no case against the apostle, but they 
appealed to the prejudice of the people, and excited their feeling into passion, which 
might have led to St. Paul's death within the temple courts. Opportunity is here given 
to speak of the valuable work done by the revivalist and the missioner, and at the same 
time of the responsibility of such workers, in the influence they gain over masses of 
people. So far as their work is merely an appeal to sentiment, it can exert but a 
passing, and only too possibly a mischievous, influence. So far as they become teachers 
of the truth and persuaders of men to duty, their work will be permanent and blessed. 
The Crusades illustrate the sway of the masses by sentiment ; the Eeformation the 
•way of the masses by truth. 

III. The hopelessness or reasoning with excited crowds. St. Paul tried, but he 
found it vain : they were carried away by the mere sound of the word " Gentiles." 
Compare the scheme of the town-clerk at Ephesus. Excited masses can only be 
interested until their passion dies down, or dispersed by physical force. Reasoning 
is of no use until men have become reasonable. 

Show that Christ never works upon the mere crowd. He and his servants make 
their appeal to men who have their power of reason. They use emotion and affection, 
but in subordination to reason. They work by the enthusiasm of numbers, but 
subordinate this influence to the enforcement of the saving truth. — R. T. 

Ver. 25. — Times to suffer, mid times to get relief from suffering. This subject is 
suggested by the fact that, although the apostle's plea of his Roman birthright would 
have always stood him in good stead, he only used it occasionally ; from which fact we 
may assume that he sometimes felt it was his duty to submit to suffering, and that, at 
other times, he equally felt it his duty to resist suffering. Probably a careful estimate 
of the circumstances connected with each case led to his decisions. Here we may see 
that no special testimony could be made by his patient enduring of suffering, seeing 
that he was among strangers, who knew nothing of him or his mission, so he felt at 
liberty to secure relief from indignity and pain, and appealed for his rights as a Roman 
citizen. The apostle spoke as they were preparing to scourge him. According to the 
Roman custom, he was stripped to the waist, and tied with leather thongs to the 
column, or whipping-post, which was used within the fortress for this kind of torture. 
" It was unlawful to scourge a Roman citizen in any case ; it was an aggravation so to 
torture him as slaves were tortured only as a means of inquiry " (see oh. xvi. 37). 
Remember the familiar passage, Eccles. iii. 1 — 8. 

I. Christ's call to buffer. Of St. Paul Christ had said, " I will show him how 
*OT8 — ^n. w 



210 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oH.xxn.1— Stt 



great things he must suffer for my Name's sake." So to his early disciples Christ spoka 
of persecution and sufifering as part of his disciples' necessary lot. Compare his teach- 
ings in the sermon on the mount (Matt. v. 10 — 12) with John xv. 18 — 21. 1. As an 
historical fact, the earlier apostles found suffering attend on fulfilling Christ's mission ; 
and the Apostle Paul had a life full of peril and of pain. 2. As a fact of present obsei> 
vation, suffering is very largely the Christian's lot. It comes partly by reason of his 
conflict with evil in himself and in the world, and partly as a Divine arrangement 
for his moral testing and training. 3. As a doctrine of the Divine Word, suffering is 
(1) a means of sanctifying to the believer, " Tribulation worketh patience," etc. ; (2) a 
means of witnessing to the world the power of God's sustaining grace and the beauty 
of the Christian virtues. God has such witnesses in his great sufferers, in every age 
and in every sphere of life. 

II. Christ's call to avoid sdfferino. See his instructions as given to the apostles 
and the " seventy," when he sent them on their trial mission. If persecuted in one 
city, they were to flee to another. Nay, in this avoidance of suffering, our Lord set 
us his own example ; for, on more than one occasion he went away from a neighbour- 
hood which had become perilous, and escaped from those who would cast him from 
the hill-top. So St. Paul, in connection with our text, felt justified in avoiding and 
resisting suffering. The practical difiScvdty we find is to know when we should bear 
and when we should resist ; and the following suggestions may be fully illustrated : — 1. 
Wlien we can recognize an immediate good in our sufferings, either a blessing of men 
or the glory of God, we should be prepared cheerfully to bear. 2. When the suffering 
plainly comes in tlie orderings of God's providence, we ought to bear it. 3. When we 
find that we can, by patient suffering, make a needed witness for the Christian truth 
or the Christian spirit, we should be willing to suffer. 4. When we find ourselves 
among strangers and enemies we may use our influence to avoid suffering. 5. And 
when our suffering plainly comes from the mere wilfulness or the pure ignorance of 
men, we do right to resist. It may also be urged that we must always follow along the 
lino of "conscience" and "duty," whatever consequences may follow. Therefore 
the " three Hebrew youths" dare not shrink from the fiery furnace, nor Daniel from 
the den of lions. Impress that we have an inward leading of God's Spirit, even as St. 
Paul had; and that, if we will follow the lead in all simplicity, we shall be able to 
decide, in the circumstances of life that arise, whether it is our duty to suffer or to 
avuid suffering. Whether we bear or whether we refuse to bear, we must seek to glorify 
Christ, and do all things as part of our loving life-service rendered to him. — B. T. 

Ver. 28. — Naturally and spiritually free born. Eights of citizenship were obtained 
in various ways and on various grounds. Some men had it by birth, others by gift, 
others by purchase, others as the public recognition of heroic deeds. These may be 
illustrated in connection with the citizenship of London, Glasgow, Edinburgh, and 
other large cities. Roman citizenship was once sold at a very high rate, but in later 
times its value was lowered, and it was bartered for a trifle. It is not known how St. 
Paul's parents obtained their citizen rights, but the apostle held his as an inheritance. 
St. Paul was not a citizen by virtue of his having been born in Tarsus. " That city, 
in consideration of its sufferings under Cassius, and because of its adherence to Julius 
Cajsar, was admitted by Antony to many privileges ; but it was not a colony, only a 
free city, and that did not confer citizenship. Some of the apostle's ancestors, it may 
be assumed, had been admitted to citizenship in acknowledgment of good service, 
civil or military." A distinction is made, which men stiU recognize, between acquired 
rights and natural rights ; but a far higher value is set on the rights of birth than on 
those which can be obtained in any other way. We fix attention on the fact that St. 
Paul was twice free born. He held right of birth into Roman citizenship, and right 
of the new Divine birth into the kingdom of Christ and of heaven. 

I. The pbivilbqbs of btoman birth. 1. Illustrate what positions their birth puts 
some men in, and what consequent trusts and res|ionsibilities come upon them. 2. 
Show that such privileges are not to be despised by Christian people, because they may 
give them noble opportunities of serving Christ. 3. Point out that any envy of those 
born to high station is unworthy of all who feel aright the honour of having any kind 
or degree of trust from God. 4. And impress that the greater the trust of position and 



OH. xxnL 1 — 35.1 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLEa 



211 



priyilege which a man may have, the heavier will be his judgment if he migUBes his 
powers and privileges. " Of him that hath much will be required." 

II. The PEiviLEaB8 of Divinb bibth. Explain the Scripture figures of " new birth," 
" being born again," and " regeneration." Illustrate that no man can acquire a place 
in Christ's kingdom by any (1) wealth, (2) merit, (3) or effort. The only entrance is 
by a Divine birth ; " Ye must be born again ; " the only possible right of the Christian 
is his birthright. This kind of right excludes all pride and self-satisfaction. " We are 
saved by grace." It gives to God all the glory ; for we are " bom of God." It changes 
all the aspects and relations of our lives, so that we seem to have wakened up into a 
new world with new powers. It lays us under serious obligations, appoints for us 
high and holy duties, and holds out before us a glorious future. If the Boman citizen 
was bound to walk worthily of his citizenship, and honour the Boman name wherever 
he might go, much more should those who are bom of God " walk as children of 
light," " walk worthy of the vocation by which they are called." See St. Paul's state- 
ment, " Our citizenship is in heaven." — R. T. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XXin. 



Ver. 1. — Looking gteadfastly on for earneslr 
ly beholding, A.V. ; brethren for men and 
brethren, A.V. ; I have lived before Qod, 
etc., for I have lived, eio., before Qod, A.V. 
Looking steadfastly ; areAaas, as in oh. i. 10 ; 
iii. 4, 12; vi. 15; vil. 55; x. 4; xL 6; xiii. 
9 ; xiv. 9. It governs a dative here, as in 
oh. iii. 12; x. 4 ; xiv. 9 ; Luke iv. 20; xxii 
56; elsewhere it is followed by eii. 
Brethren. He omits here the "fathers" 
which he added in ch. xxii. 1. If there is 
any special significance in the omission, it 
may be that he meant now to assume a less 
apologetic tone, and to speak as an equal 
to equals. Howson and Lewin think that 
he spoke as being, or having been, himself 
a member of the Sanhedrim. But he may 
have meant merely a friendly address to 
hia countrymen. I have lived, etc. (irc7ro\f- 
TEv/uu T(j) ®iSi) ; comp. Phil. iii. 20 ; I have 
had my conversation (vitam degi) unto God, 
or, for God, i.e. according to the will of 
God, with a view to God as the end of aU 
my actions. So Josephus (' De Maccabeis,' 
sect. 4) says that Antiochus Epiphanes made 
a law that all Jews should be put to death 
otrives ^&voiej/ r^ irarpitfi vSfitp vo\iTev6fieyoif 
" who were seen to live according to the Law 
of their fathers." And so in 2 Maco. vi. 1 
it is said that he sent to compel the Jews to 
forsake the Law of their fathers — koI rots rod 
&€ov v6fiois fjL^ iroXiTe^etrQai — and not live 
agreeably to the laws of (Jod. And once more, 
in 3 Mace. iii. 3, 4 the Jews are said to fear 
God and to be tQ Toiirov v6ficj} Tro\tT€v6fi€i^oi, 
living according to his Law. Here, then, 
iroKertieffBai t$ @€$ means to live in obedi- 
ence to God. St. Paul boldly asserts his un- 
deviating compliance with the Law of God, 
as a good and consistent Jew (Phil. iii. 6). 

Yer. 2. — Ananias, the son of Nebedteug, 
■ucoessor of Joseph the son of Camei, or 



Camydos ('Ant. Jnd.,' zx. L S; t. 2), 

appears to have been actually high priest 
at this time. He was a violent, haughty, 
gluttonous, and rapacious man, and yet 
looked up to by the Jews (" trfes consid^rd," 
Benan). He had probably lately returned 
from Borne, having been confirmed, as it 
seems, in hia ofSoe by Claudius, to wnom 
Quadratus, the predecessor of Felix, had sent 
him as a prisoner, to answer certain charges 
of sedition against him. He seems to have 
beenhigh priest for the unusually long period 
of over ten years — from a.d. 48 to A.D. 59 
(see Josephus, • Ant. Jud.,' xx. v. 2 ; vi. 2, 
8; viii. 8). But, on the other hand, Josephus 
(' Ant. Jud.,' XX. viii. 5) speaks of a certain 
Jonathan being high priest during the 
government of Felix, and being murdered 
by the Sicarii at his instigation ; which 
looks as if Ananias's high priesthood had 
been interrupted. It would appear, too, 
from XX. viii. 8, that Ismael the son 
of Fabi succeeded to Jonathan, not to 
Ananias, as is usually supposed. But the 
question is involved in great obscurity. 

Ver. 3. — And for for, A.V. ; according to 
for after, A.V. God shall smite thee (rinrTuv 
<re /iiWfi). A distinct announcement of 
Bometliing that would happen. (For the 
incident itself, comp. 1 Kings xxiL 24, 25 ; 
Jer. xxviii. 15, 17 ; and ch. xii 1, 2, 23) 
Ananias perished by the daggers of the 
Sicarii (Joseplius, • BeU. Jud.,' ii. xvii. 9), 
at the beginning of the Jewish war under 
the procuratorship of Florus, in the year 
A.D. 66. He had been previously deposed 
from the high priesthood by King Agrippa 
toward the close of the government of 
Felix (' Ant. Jud.,' xx. viii. 8), about A.D. 
59, or early in a.d. 60, less than two years 
from the present time. Thou whited wall. 
This expression is admirably illustrated by 
the quotations from Seneca in Kuinoel : 
I " These base and sordid spirits are Uke th4 



212 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLEa 



[oH.mn. 1 — 3& 



wallg of their own honsea, only beantifnl 
on the outside." " What are our gilt roofa 
but lies f for we well know that under the 
gilding unseemly beams are concealed." 
" It is not only our walls which are coated 
with a thin outward ornament; the great- 
ness of those men whom you see strutting 
in their pride is mere tinsel ; look beneath 
the surface, and you will see all the evil 
that is hid under that thin crust of dignity " 
('0e Provid.,' c. 6, and ' Epist.' 115). 
Ananias was sitting in his priestly robes 
of office, presiding over the council in power 
and dignity, and preiumably a righteous 
judge, but his heart within was polluted 
with injustice, selfishness, and a corrupt 
disposition, which made him act un- 
righteously (comp. Matt, xxiit 27). Con- 
trary to the Law; or, acting illegally; 
irapamiiwv, only found here in the New 
Testament, but common in classical Greek. 
St. Paul's temper was very excusably roused 
by the brutality and injustice of Ananias. 
But we may, perhaps, think that he did 
not quite attain to " the mind that was in 
Christ Jesus," who " when he was reviled, 
reviled not again," but was " led as a sheep 
to the slaughter, and like a lamb dumb 
before his shearer, he opened not his mouth" 
(ch. viii. 32). 

Yer. 4. — God's high priest. This seems to 
show that Ananias actually was high priest, 
though some think that he had thrust him- 
self into the office after his return from 
Kome, without due authority, and that this 
was the reason why St. Paul excused him- 
self by saying, in ver. 5, " I wist not that he 
was high priest." 

Ver. 6. — And Paul said for then said Paul, 
A.V. ; high for the high, A.V. ; a rider for 
tlie ruler, A.V. I wist not, etc. These 
words express, as distinctly as words can 
express anything, that St. Paul was not 
aware, when he called Ananias a " whited 
wall," that he was addressing the high 
priest. Different reasons for this ignorance 
have been given. Some think that it arose 
from the uncertainty that existed whether 
Ananias really was high priest or not at 
this time, or whether the office was not in 
abeyance. Others attribute to Paul's weak- 
ness of sight the fact that he did not see 
that Ananias was sitting in the presidential 
chair, neither was able to recognize his 
features. Others, giving to o6k ^Seiv a 
sense which it never has, render, "I did 
not reflect," or "bear in mind, that he was 
high priest." What is certain is that for 
some reason or other Paul did not know 
that he was speaking to the high priest. 
Had he known it, he would not have said 
what he did say, because the Law is express 
which says, "Apxoina toS AaoO (row oil kokSi 
ipeis (Exod. xxii. 28, LXX.> 



Ver. 8. — Brethren for men and brethren, 
A.V. (as in ver. 1); a ton of Pltnrisees fol 
the son of a Pharisee, A.V. and T.H ; touch- 
ing for of, A.V. When Paul perceived, etc. 
Possibly the Pharisees in the Sanhedrim 
were disgusted at the brutal act of Ananias, 
and were not sorry to hear him called "a 
whited wall ; " and St. Paul's quick intelli- 
gence saw at a glance that tlie whole council 
did not sympathize with their president, 
and divined the cause. With a ready wit, 
therefore, he proclaimed himself a Phari- 
sea, and, seizing upon the great dogma of 
the resurrection, which Christians held in 
common with the Pharisees, he rallied to 
his side all who were Pharisees in the assem- 
bly. Of Pharisees. The R.T. has «api<ralav 
(in the plural), which gives the sense that 
his ancestors were Pharisees (oomp. Phil, 
ill. 5). Touching the hope, etc. (see ch. xxiv. 
21). The words are somewhat difficult to 
construe. Some take " the hope and resur- 
rection of the dead " for a hendiadys, equi- 
valent to " the hope of the resurrection of 
the dead." Some take iKirts by itself, as 
meaning " the hope of a future fife." Per- 
haps the exact form of the words is, " Touch- 
ing the hope and (its ultimate object) the 
resurrection of the dead I am called in ques- 
tion." The article is omitted after the pre- 
position (Alford). As regards St. Paul's 
action in taking advantage of the strong 
party feeling by which the Sanhedrim- was 
divided, there is a difference of opinion. 
Some, as Alford, think that the presence of 
mind and skill with which Paul divided the 
hostile assembly was a direct fnlfilment of 
our Lord's promise (Mark xiii 9 — 11; see 
Homiletics, I — 11) to suggest by his Spirit 
to those under persecution what they ought 
to say. Farrar, on the contrary, strongly 
blames St. Paul, and says, " The plan showed 
great knowledge of character , . but was 
it worthy of St. Paul ? . . . Gould he worthUy 
say, ' I am a Pharisee ' ? Had he any right 
to inflame an existing animosity?" and 
more to the same effect (vol. ii. pp. 325 — 
328). But it could not be wrong for St. 
Paul to take advantage of the agreement of 
Christian doctrine witli some of the tenets 
of the Pharisees, to check the Pharisees 
from joining with the Sadducees in crushing 
that doctrine. He had never thrown off his 
profession as a Jew, and if a Jew, then one 
of the straitest sect of the Jews, in any of 
its main features; and if he claimed the 
freedom of a Roman citizen to save himself 
from scourging, why not the fact of being a 
Pharisee of Pharisees to save himself from 
an iniquitous sentence of the Sunhedrim ? 

Ver. V. — Saddueees for the Sadducees, A.V. ; 
tissembly for multitude, A.V. 

Ver. 8. — Neither angel, etc. Is there any 
eonneotion between this expression and that 



OH. xxm. 1 — 35.] 



THE ACTS OF THE AP0STLE8. 



213 



in ch. xH. 15, " It is his angel " (see Ter. 
9)? For tlie statement regarding the Phari- 
aees and Sadducees, see Luke xx. 27. 

Ver. 9. — Clamour for ery, A.V. ; some of 
the for the, A.V. ; of the Pharisees' part for 
that were of the, etc., A.V. ; stood up for arose, 
A.V. ; and what for hut, A.V. ; o spirit hath 
spoken to him, or an angel for a spirit or 
an angel hath spoken to him, A.V. ; the E.T. 
omits the clause in the T.R., let us not fight 
against God. The scribes (comp. Luke xx. 
39). We find no evil in this man (comp. 
John xviii. 29, 33; Luke xxiii. 14, 15, 22). 
What if a spirit, etc. ; alluding to what Paul 
had said in ch. xxii. 17, 18. 

Ver. 10. — Be torn for have been pulled, 
A.V. ; by for of, A.V. ; take for to take, A.V. ; 
bring for to bring, A.V. A great dissension ; 
a-rdireais, as in ch. XV. 2, and above, ver. 7. 
The state of things here described is exactly 
what the pages of Josephus and of Tacitus 
disclose as to the combustible state of the 
Jewish mind generally just before the com- 
mencement of the Jewish war. The Boman 
power was the one element of quiet and 
order. The tower of Antonia was the one 
place of safety in Jerusalem. 

Ver. 11.— The E.T. omits Paul, in the T.E. 
and A.V. ; concerning for of, A.V. ; at for in, 
A.V. The Lord stood by him. The jaded, 
harassed, and overwrought spirit needed 
some unusual support. The Lord whom 
Paul loved, and for whom he was suffering 
so much, knew it, and in his tender care for 
his servant stood by Idm and spake a word 
of gracious encouragement to him. Paul 
felt that he was not forgotten or forsaken. 
There was more work for him to do, in spite 
of all the hatred of his countrymen. The 
capital of heatliendom must hear his testi- 
mony as well the metropolis of the circum- 
ijision. 

Ver. 12. — The Jews for certain of the Jews, 
A.V. and T.E. Banded together (iroi^o-oi/Tei 
rvrrpotpiiv). This word avarpoi^ is found 
in the New Testament only here and ch. xix. 
40, where it is reodered "concourse." The 
sense of " a conspiracy," which it has here, 
is common in the LX.X. (see Amos vii. 10 ; 
2 Kings XV. 15, etc.). The verb ffvarpecjisiv 
in the LXX. has the sense of "to conspire" 
(2 Sam. XV. 31 ; 2 Kings i. 9 ; xv. 30, 
avviarpf'^e (riaTpemia). Bound themselves 
under a curse (6,veBsni,Ti(rav favrobs). The 
word livdeefia (Eom. ix. 3 ; 1 Cor. xii. 3 ; xvi. 
22 ; Gal. i. 8, 9) corresponds to the Hebrew 
Dnn, the devotion of anything to destruction ; 
•nd hence "the thing itself so devoted." 
And the verb avaBsfiari^eiv corresponds to the 
Hebrew onnn, to devote to destruction, with- 
out the possibility of redemption. Here they 
made themselves an iivdOefia if they did not 
kill Paul before partaking of any food. It 
•eeuu, however, that there was a way of 



escape if they failed to keep the tow. 
Lightfoot, on this passage, quotes from the 
Talmud : " He that hath made a vow not to 
eat anything, woe to him if be eat, and woe 
to him if he do not eat. If he eat he sin- 
neth against his vow ; if he do not eat he 
sinneth against his life. What must such 
a man do m this case ? Let him go to the 
wise men, and they will loose his vow " 
('Heb. and Talmud. Exeroit. upon the 
Acts ')• 

Ver. 13. — Made for had made, A.V. Con- 
spiraoy ; irwafioala, in Latin conjuratio. It 
only occurs here in the New Testament, but 
is used occasionally by Diodorus Siculus and 
other Greek writers. The kindred word 
avvaiihits is found in the LXX. of Gen. 
liv. 13, rendered " confederate," A. V. 

Ver. 14. — The elders for elders, A.V. ; to 
taste for thai we will eat, A.V. ; killed for 
slain, A.V. The chief priests, etc. Meaning, 
no doubt, those who were of the party of the 
Sadducees, to which the chief priests mainly 
belonged at this time. A great curse. There 
is nothing in the phraseology of this verse, 
as compared with that of ver. 12, to warrant 
the introduction of the word " great." It is 
simply, " We have anathematized ourselves 
with an anathema." 

Ver. 15.— I>o ye for ye, A.V. ; the E.T. 
omits to-morrow, in the A.V. ; judge of his 
case more exactly for inquire something more 
perfectly concerning him, A.V. ; slay for kill, 
A.V. With the council. Either the tempo- 
rary feeling of the Pharisees had subsided, 
and their old hatred come to the front again, 
or the high priest and Sadducees, by some 
plausible excuse, persuaded the Pharisees 
of the council to join with them in asking 
that Paul might be brought before them 
again. Signify. The word i/i^avt^eiv only 
occurs here and at ver. 22, in this secse of 
"signifying" or "making known" some- 
thing, which it has in Esth. ii. 22, LXX., 
Codex Alexandrinus (as the rendering of 
IQtt, to tell), and in 2 Mace. iii. 7, and in 
Josephus, as also in classical Greek. Else- 
where in the New Testament it means " to 
manifest," or " show," as in John xiv. 21, 
22 ; in the passive voice " to appear," as in 
Matt, xxvii. 53; Heb. ix. 24; and in a 
technical legal sense " to give information " 
(ch. xxiv. 1 ; xxv. 2, 15). Judge of his case 
more exactly ; Siar/tviiffKeiv, k.t.\. The word 
only occurs here and in ch. xxiv. 22. The 
classical use of the word in the sense of 
" deciding," " giving judgment," is in favour 
of the B.V. ; SiaytvAaKnv, like hiAyvaais, 
diagnosis (oh. xxv. 21), is a word of very 
frequent use in medical writers, as is the 
iLKpifiiarcpov, which here is joined with it 
(oh. xxiv. 22, note). 

Ver. 16. — But lor and when, A.V. ; and he 
eame for he went, AV. Lyin^ in waitj 



214 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. xxm. 1 — 3£^ 



iveSpa, only here and in oh. xx7. S in the 

New Testament ; but oommon in the Books 
of Joshua and Judges in the LXX., and also 
in classical Greek. 

Ver. 17. — And for then, A.V. ; called unto 
him one, etc., for called one, etc., unto him, 
A.V. ; something for o certain thing, A.V. 

Ver. 18. — Siiith for said, A.V. ; asked for 
prayed, A.V. ; to for unto, A.V. 

Ver. 19.^ — And for then, A.V. ; going aside 
asked him privately for we/nt with him aside 
privately, and asked him, A.V. Took him by 
the hand {iiri\ap6/xevoi t^s x^ 'pJis) ; see above, 
ch. xvii. 19, note. Tlie action denotes a 
kindly feeling towards St. Paul, as indeed 
his whole conduct does (comp. ch. xxiv. 23; 
xxvii. 3 ; also Dan. i. 9 and Ps. cyi. 46). 

Ver. 20. — Ash thee to bring for desire thee 
that thou wouldest bring, A.V. ; unto for into, 
A.V. ; thou wouldest for they would, A.V. 
and T.B. ; more exactly concerning him for 
of him more perfectly, A.V. Have agreed. 
'S.vvTiSni'-i occurs four times in the New 
Testament, of which three are in St. Luke's 
writings (Luke xxii. 5 ; this passage ; and 
ch. xxiv. 9), and the fourth in John ix. 22. 
As though thou wouldest. The B.T., which 
reads /jLfWwv for /ieAAoyrfs, must surely be 
wrong. It is in contradiction to ver. 15, 
and makes no sense. The pretext of further 
inquiry was theirs, not Lysias's. 

Ver. 21. — Do not thou therefore for but do 
net thou, A.V. ; under a curse for with an 
oath, A.V. ; neither to eat nor to drink for 
that thef will neither eat nor drink, A.V. ; 
slain for killed, A.V. ; the for a (promise), 
AV. Do not . . . yield (f/.^ ireia-efjs) ; be not 
persuaded by them ; do not assent unto them 
(see Luke xvi. 6; ch. v. 40; xvii. 4, etc.). 
The promise, etc. ; tjji' o7r!> trod iiraryyeXlm'. 
The word occurs above fifty times in the 
New Testament, and is always rendered 
" promise " in the A.V., except in 1 John 
i. 5, where it is rendered both in the A.V. 
and the K.V. "message," which is the 
literal meaning of the word. In Polybius 
it means " a summons." Either of these 
meanings suits this passage better than 
" promise." 

Ver. 22.— ie« for then let, A.V.; go for 
depart, A.V. ; charging for and charged, 
A.V. ; tell for see thou tell, A.V. ; signified for 
shmced, A.V. (see ver. 15, note). Charging 
(a« in ch. i. 4 ; iv. 18 ; v. 28, 40, etc.). 

Ver. 23.-0/ the centurions for oenturiont, 
A.V. ; and said for saying, A.V. ; as far as 
for to, A.V. Two hunted soldiers ; one 
hundred for each centurion ; aTpaTuiras, foot- 
Boldiers, who alone would be under the com- 
mand of the centurions. The linreis and 
the Se^ioKiPai would be under the command 
perhaps of a rovpiidpxv!, or decurio, captain 
of a tnrma, or squadron. Here there would 
aeem to be two turmas, beoauM ft tnrma con- 



sisted of thirty-three men — here ^lossibly o{ 
thirty-five. Spearmen ; Si^toKdPo'- Thii 
word occurs nowhere else in Scripture or in 
any ancient Greek author. It ia first found 
in " TheophylaotuB Simocatta, in the seventh 
century, and then again in the tenth cen- 
tury in Oonstantine Porphyrogenitus " 
(Meyer). It seems most probable that it wa» 
the name of some particular kind of light 
infantry. But it is not easy to explain the 
etymology. Perhaps they were a kind of 
sMrmisbers thrown out on a march to pro- 
tect the flanks of an army ; as Plutarch 
speaks of javelin-men and slingers being 
placed to guard, not only the resr, but also 
the flanks of the army on the march (Steph., 
'Thesaur.,' under oupayia). "Holding or 
taking the right" might be the force of the 
compound, somewhat after the analogy ot 
i€^i6(reipos, Se^ioaTdTTjs, etc. ; which agrees 
with the explanations of Phavorinus icapa- 
<t>i\aKas, and with that of Beza, " Qui 
alicui dextrum latus [meaning simply latus] 
munit." Only, instead of the improbable 
notion of these men being a body-guard of the 
tribune — which their number makes impos- 
sible—it should be understood of the troops 
which protect the flank of an army on the 
march. Other improbable explanations are 
that S(^io\d$os means the soldier to whom 
the right hand of prisoners was fastened, 
or those who grasp with the right hand 
their weapon, the lance or javelin. The 
object of Lysias in sending so large a force 
was to guard against the possibility of • 
rescue in the feverish and excited state of 
the Jewish mind. And no doubt one reason 
for sending Paul away was his dread of a 
Jewish riot. 

Ver. 24. — Se bade them provide for pro- 
vide, A.V. (the infinitive irapaiTT^troi) ; 
might for may, A.V. ; thereon for on, A.V. 
Beasts (_KTiivri); here "riding-horses," ;ia 
Luke X. 84. In Eev. xviii. 13 it is applied 
to "cattle;" in 1 Cor. xv. 39 it means 
"beasts" generally. In the LXX. it is 
used for all kinds of beasts— cattle, sheep, 
beasts of biuden, etc. Beasts is in the plural, 
because one or more would be required fof 
those who guarded PauL 

Ver. 25. — Form for manner, A.V. After 
this form. Luke does not profess to give 
the letter verbatim, but merely its general 
tenor, which Lysias might have communi- 
cated to Paul, or which Paul might have 
learnt at Csesarea. 

Ver. 26. — Qreeting for lendeth greeting, 
A.V. Governor; Tiyen^r, as ver. 24; pro- 
praetor of an imperial province, as distin- 
guished from the avBiiraTos, or proconsul, 
who governed the provinces which were in 
the patronage of the senate. Sergius Paulng 
(ch. xiii. 7, 8) was a proconsnl, and so wai 
Gallio (ch. xviii. lOt: Fontiiu Pilate ^atL 



OH. xxm. 1 — 86.] 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



213 



xxvii. 2) and Felix were procurators, iiye- 
fidyes, only in a looser sense, as the more 
exact name of their ofiSce was iiriTpovos 
proonrator. Only, as they were appointed 
by the emperor, and often exercised the full 
functions of a legatus Osasaris, they were 
called TiyffiAves as well as proprsetors. Felix, 
called by Tacitus, Antoniua Felix ('Hist.,' 
T. 9), was the brotlier of Pallas, thefreedman 
and favourite of Claudius. He as well as 
his brother Felix had originally been the 
slave of Antonia the mother of the Emperor 
Claudius; and hencethenameilntonias Felix, 
or, as he was sometimes otherwise called, 
Claudius Felix. Tacitus, after mentioning 
that Claudius appointed as governors of 
Judsea sometimes knights and sometimBS 
freedmeu, adds that among the last Antonius 
Felix ruled this province with boundless 
cruelty and in the most arbitrary manner, 
showing by his abuse of power his servile 
origin. He adds that he married Drusilla, 
the granddaughter of Mark Antony and 
Cleopatra, so that he was Mark Antony's 
grandson-in-Iaw, while Claudius was An- 
tony's grandson. But see ch. xxiv. 24, note. 
In the 'Annals' (xii. 5) Tacitus further 
speaks of the incompetence of Felix to 
govern, stirring up rebellions by the means 
ha t/Ook to repress them, and of the 
Tiiisf lawlessness and confusion to which 
the province was reduced by the malad- 
ministration of Felix and his collea<;ue, 
Ventidius Cumanus ("oui para provinciss 
habebatur"). He adds that civil war would 
have broken out if Quadratus, the Governor 
of Syria, had not interposed, and secured 
the punishment of Cumanus, wJiile Felix, 
his equal in guilt, was continued in his 
goTernmeut. This was owing, no doubt, to 
the influence of Pallas. The same influence 
secured the continued government to Felix 
upon Nero's accession, Pallas being all-power- 
ful with Agrippina. Such was " the most ex- 
cellent governor Felix." For further accounts 
of him, see Josephus (' Bell. Jud.,' ii. xii. 8 ; 
xiii. ), who ignores his share in the govern- 
ment as the partner of Cumanus, and dates 
his appointment subsequently to the con- 
demnation of Cumanus at Bome, and is also 
there silent as to his misdeeds. (For further 
accounts of Felix, see ' Ant. Jud.,' xx. vii. 1, 
2 ; viii. 5 — 7, which relate his adulterous 
marriage with Drusilla, and some of his 
murders and cruelties.) 

Vei. 27. — Seized by for taken of, A.V.; 
teas about to be slain for should have been 
hilled, A.V. ; when I came iat then came I, 
A.V. ; wpon them leith the soldiers for with 
an army, A.V. ; learned for understood, A.V. 
The soldiers (j6 (rrpdrevna, as ver. 10). The 
army of the A.V. is out of place. Having 
learned, etc. Lysiaa departs here from 
strict truth wishing, no doubt, to set off 



his zeal in defence of a Roman citizen, and 
also to anticipate any unfavourable report 
that Paul might give as to his threatened 
scourging.) 

Ver. 28. — Desiring to know for when 1 
uould have known, A.V. ; down unto for 
forth into, A.V. 

Ver. 29. — Found for perceived, A.V. ; 
about for of, A.V. Questions; Cit^iu^to. 
only in the Acts, where it occurs five times 
(ch. XV. 2 ; xviii. 15 ; xxiii. 29 ; xxv. 19 ; 
xxvi. 3). St. Luke also uses f^rijo-ii (ch. 
xxv. 20), as does St. Paul four times in the 
pastoral Epistles (1 Tim. i. 4, T.E. ; vi. 4; 
2 Tim. ii. 23 ; Titus iii. 9). 

Ver. 30. — Shown to for told, A.V. ; thai 
there would be a plot against for how that 
the Jews laid wait for, A.V. and T.E. ; 1 
sent him to thee forthwith for / sent straight- 
way to thee, A.V. ; charging for and gave com- 
mandment to, A.V. ; to speak against him 
before thee for to say before thee what they 
had against him, A. v.; the E.T. omits /ore- 
well, in the A. V. That there would be a plot, 
etc. Two constructions are mixed up either 
by the wri ter of the letter, or by the transcriber. 
One would be i/lTjwdeicnjs S^fioi 4iri$ov\7is ttjs 
fieWoifftis eo-Eirflai, " When I was informed 
of the plot which was about to be laid 
against him ; " the other, Vl-qvueivros fioi 
iiriffouK^v /jL^Wfiv effeo-Sai, " When I was in- 
formed that a plot was going to be laid," 
etc. Against the man ; wphs avrii', as ch. vL 1 ; 
1 Cor.-vi. 1. But Kiynv itpis (instead of 
KOTtS), "to speak against" any one, is an 
unusual phrase. The T.E., which is retained 
by Mill, Alford, Wordsworth, Meyer, etc., 
is far more probable. Other readingB are 
K4ysiv, or \eyeiv avToiSs, 

Ver. 31, — So for then, A.V. Antipatris ; 
" forty-two Eomau miles ' from Jerusalem, 
and twenty-six from Osesarea, built (on the 
site of Kaphor Saba) by Herod the Great, 
and named in honour of Antipater, his 
father" (Alford). According to Howson, 
following the American traveller, the Eev. 
Eli Smith, the route lay from Jerusalem to 
Gophna, on the road to Nablous, and from 
Gophna, leaving the great north road by a 
Eoman road of which many distinct traces 
remain, to Antipatris, avoiding Lydda or 
Diospolis altogether. Gophna is three hours 
from Jerusalem, and, as they started at 9 
p.m., would be reached by midnight. Five or 
six hours more would bring them to Anti- 

> The Eoman mile was equal to 1618 
yards, or one hundred and forty-two yards 
less than the English statute mile. The dis- 
tance in English miles would therefore be 
under thirty-nine miles. Thirteen hours' 
walking at three miles an hour, with six 
hours' halt, would bring them to Ctssorea bj 
4 p.m. 



216 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. xxm. 1—35 



patriB, most of the way being downhill irom 
the hill country of Ephiaim to the plain of 
Sharon. After a halt of two or three hours, 
a march of six hours would bring them to 
Ctesarea, which they may have reached in 
the afternoon. 

Ver. 32. — But on for on, A.V. On the 
morrow, after their departure from Jerusalem, 
not, as Alford suggests, after their departure 
from Antipatris. It was a forced march, 
and therefore would not occupy two days 
and a night. 

Ver. 33. — And they for who, A.V. ; letter 
for epistle, A.V. Presented Paul ; irap4- 
(TTjiffav. This is a word particularly used 
of Betting any one before a judge (see Kom. 
xIt. 10, and the subscription of 2 Timothy, 
'Ore ^K SeuTe'pou irapiaTr) IlaOXos t^ Katffapt 
Neptavi). 

Ver. 34. — He for the governor, A.V. and 
T.B. ; it for the letter, A.V. Province ; 
eVapx'o. only here and in ch. xxv. 1. A 
general word for a government, most pro- 
perly applied to an imperial province. 



Ver. 35. — Thy cause for thee, A. V. ; alio an 
for are also, A.V. ; palace for judgment haU, 
A.V. I will hear thy oauM ; Siaicouo-o/iaf aov, 
found only here in the New Testament; but 
used in the same sense as here for " hearing 
a cause," in Dent. i. 16, AitucoiliraTe . . . 
Kol Kplvere, " Hear the causes between your 
brethren, and judge righteously," A.V. See 
also Job ix. 33, AiuKoiSav kvafieaov afKporepav, 
" That might lay his hand upon ns both," 
A. v., i.e. judge between us. Palace (iy t^ 
irpairapiif). The prsstorinm — for it is a Latin 
word — ^was originally the praetor's tent in a 
Eoman camp. Thence it came to signify 
the abode of the chief magistrate in a pro- 
vince, or a king's palace. Herod^s palace 
seems to have been a palace originally built 
by King Herod, and now used, either as the 
residence of the procurator or, as the mode 
of speaking rather indicates, for some public 
office. (For the use of the word irpaiTdptoVfBee 
Matt, xxvii. 27 ; John xviiL 28, 83 ; six. 9; 
Phil, i 13.) 



HOMILETICS, 

Vers. 1 — 11. — Polwy. The characteristic quality of an Israelite indeed, as oar Lord 
has taught us, is to be without guile. All kinds of trickery, deceit, false pretences, 
disguises, dissimulation, as well as dovniright falsehood, are entirely alien from the true 
Christian spirit. The man of God walks habitually in an atmosphere of transparent 
truth. He has nothing to conceal, nothing to simulate. He has to do with the God 
of truth, who searches all hearts, and from whom no secrets are hid. His one great 
object is to please God, and to live in all good conscience toward him. And it is a 
small thing with him to be judged of man's judgment. And then, as regards one 
fruitful source of falsehood, /ear — fear of evil, of danger, of blame, the man of God is 
comparatively free from its influence, because he trusts in God, and commits the 
keeping of his soul to him as to a faithfiil Creator. God's faithfulness and truth are his 
shield and buckler. Hid under the shadow of his protecting wings, he is safe. Even 
in the valley of the shadow of death he fears no evil, because God is with him. His 
only fear is lest he forfeit that omnipotent protection by conduct displeasing to God 
and unworthy of a Christian man. But is the man of God therefore to take no steps 
to secure his own safety ? is he to use no sagacity, no wisdom, no prudence, to follow 
no line of good policy, by which danger may be avoided, and the enemies who seek to 
hurt him may be baffled and eluded ? Surely this cannot be affirmed except on principles 
of fatalism, which equally preclude the taking of any steps towards the accomplishment 
of any end. To act wisely and discreetly, to take advantage of circumstances and 
opportunities as they arise, to bring about good results, and to avert evil ones, is as 
much the duty of a Christian as to sow in order that he may reap, or to take medicine 
in order that he may be healed. In the case before us, St. Paul was in imminent danger 
of being condemned by unrighteous judges. He saw that their passions and their pre- 
judices were inflamed against him, and that his own integrity was no security against 
an vmjust sentence. But he saw also that, though for the moment his judges were 
incited by their common hatred towards himself, there were strong elements of discord 
among them. He saw that on one of the leading truths of that gospel which he 
preached — the resurrection of the dead, and the life everlasting beyond the grave — the 
division between his enemies was at its height, and a large portion of his judges were 
on his side. It was therefore an act, not of guile or deceit, but of sagacity and policy, 
to take advantage of this circumstance, and to divide his opponents, and, iinder cover 
of their division, to save himself. And he did so with signal sncceas. In doing lo Iw 



■HU mn. 1— 35.] THE ACTS OF THE AP0STLE8. «17 

has added one to many other examples, that the safety of the righteous lies in the 
disunion of sinners. It may be added that the vision, with its message, in ver. 11, 
does not look as if St. Paul had sullied his bright conscience by any unworthy shifts 
when he stood before the counciL 

Vers. 12 — 35. — Special providence. It is difScuIt to define exactly what we mean 
by a speaidl providence. Not one sparrow falls to the pround without our heavenly 
Father, who works all things after the counsel of his own will, and makes all things " work 
together for good to thorn that love him, to them who are the called according to his 
purpose" (Rom. viii. 28). And yet there are times and occasions when the overruling 
and controlling hand of God is seen more clearly and more markedly than usual, and 
when the interposition of human will and intention is more conspicuously absent. And 
perhaps this is what we mean when we speak of a special providence. Let us mark 
some of the circumstances detailed in this section, which seem to bring St. Paul's 
escape from the Jews at this time under the category of a speciai providence. Thf 
danger was great and imminent. In the feverish excited state of the Jewish mind at 
this time, and when they were unable, through their weakness, to give effect to their 
intense hatred of their heathen masters, they were all the more ready to wreak their 
vengeance upon any more helpless victim who might fall into their hands. Such a 
victim was St. Paul ; and already in the temple court and on the castle stairs, he had 
nearly forfeited his life to their violence. Again, in the council-chamber he was on 
the point of being torn in pieces by them. The danger, therefore, was very great which 
he had already escaped. But a greater was at hand. More than forty Jews, in whom 
guile, hatred, and fanaticism were a triple cord not easily to be broken, bound them- 
selves together by a terrible curse to " remove " that obnoxious life, and seemed to 
make their own lives dependent upon the fulfilment of their atrocious vow. It was 
nearly certain that a request, coming to Lysias from the chief officers of the Sanhedrim, 
to bring Paul down again for some further inquiry into his case, would be complied 
with, and, if so, his death was certain also. Now mark the providential circumstances 
by which this plot was defeated. Paul had a sister, and this sister had a son. Wt hear 
nothing and know nothing of either of these persons except on this critical occasion. 
Where the young man lived, how he happened to be at Jerusalem (unless it were to 
keep the Feast of Pentecost), whether he had been influenced by his uncle to embrace 
the Christian faith, or whether, as seems more probable, he was a zealous Jew, and as 
such entrusted with the secrets of the party, we know not. All we know is that he 
became acquainted with the conspiracy, and went immediately to the castle to inform 
Paul of it. His ready admission to the prisoner, the good-natured compliance of the 
centurion with Paul's request to him to bring the young man to the chief captain, the 
chief captain's courteous attention to the young man's tale, and his instant determina- 
tion to send Paul off by night to Caasarea, were the further links, each absolutely 
necessary, in the chain of providence, by which Paul's escape was accomplished. But 
one other circumstance must be noted. It seems strange at first sight that the tribune 
of the Boman garrison should take so much trouble about one poor Jew, whom, more- 
over, he had only to keep a close prisoner in the castle to ensure his safety. But we 
have a ready explanation of this in Lysias's own letter, and in what happened the day 
before, as recorded in ch. xxii. 24 — 26. Lysias, not a Boman by birth, had committed 
a grave mistake in threatening Paul, a Boman citizen, with scourging. Such a mistake 
might have had grave consequences to himself. He therefore adroitly and promptly 
took a step to show his respect and reverence for the dignity of a Boman citizen, and 
also for the ofSce of the Boman procurator, by sending Paul off to Csesarea. At the 
same time, by so doing he avoided the chance of a riot at Jerusalem, and threw the whole 
responsibility of dealing with Paul and his Jewish enemies upon Felix. Nothing could 
be more politic. What, however, it is to our purpose to observe is that, by this tangled 
tissue of motives and interests, and by this accidental combination of circumstances, 
Qod's gracious purpose was brought about which he had announced to Paul in a vision 
of the night, saying, " Be of good cheer, Paul : for as thou hast borne witness of me in 
Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness also at Borne." The violence of the Sanhedrim 
(though they knew it not); the conspiracy of the Jews (though they knew it not); 
the courtesy and policy of Lysias (though he knew it not) ; as afterwards the intrigues 



218 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLEa [oh. xxm. 1— 85 

of Felh, the weakness of Festus, and the urgent malice of the Jews, — were all necessary 
steps, moving in a direction that they little suspected, for bringing the apostle of the 
Gentiles to the capital of the Gentile world. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOUa 

Ver. 1. — " Oood conscience Iff ore Ood" Those first words of Paul's defence, which m 
greatly excited and angered the high priest, are capable of being taken in more senses 
than one. We may regard them in — 

L The sense in which they must be false. It is certain that Paul did not intend 
to say that he had never been conscious of defect and guilt in his relation to God. The 
time had been when he might have said so. As a scrupulous Pharisee, who was, 
" touching the righteousness which is in the Law, blameless," he would consider him- 
self without any reason for remorse. But " what things were gain to him," those he 
" counted loss for Christ " (Phil. iii. 7). He had come to the conclusion that the " way 
of peace " was not by faultlessness, but by forgiveness of sins through Jesus Christ ; he 
had sought and found " the righteousness which is of God by faith " (Phil. iii. 9). And 
there is no living man who can look back upon all that he has said and done, and look 
in on all that he has been, and declare that he is conscious of no defect and no guilti- 
ness before God, — except, indeed, he is one whom sin has blinded, and who does not 
know how " poor, and blind, and naked " he is, in the sight of absolute purity. Com- 
paring our conduct and examining our hearts in the light of God's " exceeding broad 
commandment," we are all included under sin. We have all to acknowledge much in 
the matter oi positive transgression, and far more in that of unfulfilled obligation. 

II. The sense in which this may be true op ub all. It was true of Paul in this 
respect, that from the beginning of his Jewish course up to the time when he became 
a Oliristian, he had acted in accordance with his convictions ; that his change of view 
was purely conscientious ; and that from the beginning of his Christian career till that 
day he had steadfastly pursued the path in which God had directed him to walk. 
Every Christian man ought to be able to afiSrm this of himself, having regard to hii 
entire Christian course. This conscious spiritual integrity : 1. Includes a sense of con- 
tinued reconciliation and fellowship with God. 2. Includes unbroken uprightness of 
conduct, freedom from presumptuous and scandalous sin, and general conformity to the 
will of God in all the relations of life. 3. Admits of many failures and infirmities, 
which are acknowledged and resisted. 4. Results from that gracious influence from 
heaven which attends the waiting upon God (Ps. L 2, 3 ; Isa. xl. 31). 

II I. The ixtllest sense in which they can be true op any one. Paul may have 
been able to use these words of every period of his life ; but they can only be applied 
to the earlier part with a reservation. He could only feel that he had been honestly 
and earnestly pursuing a mistaken course during those years. Happy are they who, 
when the end arrives, are able to look back on a whole life devoted to truth, to heavenly 
wisdom, to holy usefulness ; who, from childhood to old age, have spent their powers in 
the service of Christ. These have not to set off one part of their career a;j;ainst another 
part, but can rejoice to feel that, from the beginning " until this day," they have, in the 
fullest sense, " lived in all good conscience before God." Here is an argument (1) for 
beginning at the earliest point ; (2) for continuing through the special temptations of 
mid-life ; (3) for persisting through the infirmities of later years, in the !»auty of a 
holy Christian life, in the excellency of earnest work. — 0. 

Vers. 3 — 10. — Things dubious and things certain. There are few passages ol 
Scripture in which there are so many doubtful points in a small space. 

I. Three doubtful points. It is uncertain : 1. What Paul meant by his apolo- 
getic remark (ver. 5; see Exposition). 2. Whether he was justified in administering 
such a scathing rebuke, " God shall smite thee," etc. It certainly looks much like the 
utterance of a man who for the moment has lost his self-control, and there seems to b« 
ground for contrasting it with the calm dignity of the Master when he was smitten 
(John xviii. 22, 23). The apostle laid no claim to perfection (Phil. iii. 13 ; " perfect,' 
ill Fhil. iii. 16, signifies mature, instructed, disciplined), and he may well have beet 



CH. xxm. 1— 3S.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 211 

provoked, at this time, into a resentment which he afterwards wished he had been able 
to master. 3. Whether he was right in classing himself with the Pharisaic party (ver. 6). 
Though -with them in those respects in which they differed from the Sadducees, and 
though, therefore, his words were formally correct, his spirit was so different from theirs, 
his principles were so opposite to theirs, his energies were bo spent in combating theirs, 
that there was (or at least seems to have been) more of falsity than truth in his declara- 
tion. It is always a doubtful thing to say under pressure what we should never dream 
of saying under ordinary circumstances. But we may look at — 

n. Thbeb certain truths. It is certain : 1. That only intrinsic worth can long hold 
tho honour of our fellow-men. If Paul was ready, as he was, to pay outward deference 
to " God's high priest " (ver. 4) ; if he was unwilling to " speak evil of the ruler of the 
people " (ver. 5) ; he certainly held in small honour the particular high priest then pre- 
siding. Kings, judges, statesmen, ministers, may enjoy a temporary deference and an 
outward tribute as public ofBcers ; but if they are corrupt, if they are self-seeking, if 
they are indulgent, they will soon sink into dishonour and even into contempt. Only 
the worthy will continue to enjoy the esteem of their kind. Possibly a few of the 
shrewdest and most cunning have carried their honours to the grave, though they have 
deserved public reprobation, but these have passed to a scene where the veil will be 
torn o£f, and the long-outstauding penalty be required ; but these are the few and not 
the many. Usually the pretender is unmasked here, and the iron hand of indignation 
comes down on the guilty head. 2. That it is an honourable and excellent thing to 
explain or apologize when one or the other is demanded. (1) It is the right thing ; it is 
due to those who have been misled or injured. (2) It is the manly thing ; it requires 
more courage, and courage of a higher order, to withdraw with expressions of regret than 
to maintain with the appearance of rectitude. (3) It is the Christian thing ; though, 
indeed, our Lord needed not to do this himself, yet we are sure it is in perfect accord- 
ance With his will : " If thy brother sin against thee, and he repent, forgive him," etc. 
(4) It is the peaceful thing ; to defend ocs's position vt to foment strife ; to acknow- 
ledge error is to disarm resentment and promote peace. 3. That straightforwardness 
is the best course to pursue. It is very doubtful whether Paul gained anything by his 
adoption ol' this expedient ; he was in the greatest danger of being " pulled in pieces " 
(ver. 10). Such expediency as that which he employed may sometimes be rewarded 
by a temporary success. But the deepest and the longest success is the reward of 
sincerity and unswerving truth : the deepest, because our own self-respect is preserved 
inviolate and our integrity strengthened ; the longest, for that which is founded on 
truth is built upon a rock, and is likeliest to endure. — 0. 

Vers. 11 — 24. — The powers that act on us from vnthout. Manifold are the powers 
which are acting nimn our spirit and deciding our course and destiny. Some of these 
are suggested by tliis narrative. 

I. The malevolent human. (Vers. 12 — 15.) In this case human malevolence took 
a very violent and malignant form : it sought to compass Paul's death by a dark and 
shameless stratagem. More often it seeks to do us injury for which we shall suffer, 
but from which we may recover. The very worst form which it assumes is that of 
aiming at our spiritual integrity, leading us into sin and so into shame and death. 

II. Ti£E indifferent human. (Vers. 18 — 24.) The Roman — centurion, chief captain, 
soldier — took no special interest in Paul, and had no prejudice against him. He regarded 
the whole matter in a professional light, and acted in simple and strict accordance with 
his habits of obedience and command. Around us is human law, human custom, 
human society — with this we must lay our account. It will proceed on its usual 
course, like a train upon the lines laid down for it, with small concern for our hopes 
and fears, our joys and sorrows. If we take heed, we may avail ourselves of its help; 
if we are indiscreet, it will dash against us unpityingly. So far as we may do so and 
can do so, we must order ourselves so as to benefit by its strong force. 

III. The benignant human. (Vers. 16 — 21.) Paul's sister induced her son to 
interpose, and the young man (or, youth) played his delicate and dangerous part well, 
intervening between these sanguinary schemers and their illustrious victim. We may 
hope for positive sympathy and active aid from (1) those who are closely and tenderly 
rekted to us ; (2) those who are young, and therefore open to many admirable inapira- 



220 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES [oh. zxia. 1— 36 

tions (obedience, pity, courage, aspiration, etc.) ; (3) those who have spiritual affinitiei 
with us, to whom we are brethren or fathers " in the Lord." 

IV. The Divine. (Ver. 16.) At this troublous and anxious time, when Paul was cut 
oflf from fellowship with the disciples, the Master himself drew near to him. He came 
with his comforting presence and his cheering word. He did not fail his servant then ; 
nor will he fail his faithful followers now. We may reckon upon (1) his comforting 
presence with us ; (2) his word of promise and cheer ; (3) his summons to bear witness 
in the future as in the past: "As thou hast testified ... so must thou," etc. 
While all these powers are acting upon us, we must play owr own part manfully, or 
the issue will be unfavourable (ver. 17). When all is done for or against us, we must 
make our own choice, decide for ourselves which of the two paths we will pursue, at 
which gate we shall be found when the journey of life is over (_Gral. vi. 4, 5). — 0. 

Vers. 12 — 35. — Paul at Ocesarea. I. " The Loed re mindful of his own." Recall 
the beautiful song in Mendelssohn's ' St. Paul.' 1. The craft of their foes. They con- 
spire against the righteous with a zeal worthy of a better cause (vers. 12, 13) ; and 
cloke their designs under pious pretexts (vers. 14, 15). 2. Hie Divine protection. Ha 
briugs the counsels of wickedness to light (ver. 16). The young man, whoever he was, 
Christian or otherwise, became, in Divine providence, a guardian angel of the apostle. 

" Nothing so fine is spun. 
But comes to light beneath the sun,'* 

to the help of the good and the confusion of the wicked (of. Pb. vii, 15 ; xxxiv. 8). 
Sincerity and good faith are found where they are least expected, when God is guiding 
the hearts of men (ver. 18). 

II. The GEACiotrs dbliveeancb. (Vers. 23 — 35.) 1. They are withdrawn from the 
snares of their foes. Paul, surrounded by the military guard, seems a visible picture of 
the angels of God encamping about those who fear him. " Against forty bandits he sends 
five hundred protectors." 2. Testimony to the truth is furnished on their behalf (ver. 
27, etc.). The honourable and straij^htforward dealing of the heathen Romans stands 
in contrast to that of the orthodox Jews. Better have the spirit of the Law without 
the letter than the letter without the spirit. The very indiflferentism of the Romans 
becomes overruled for the deliverance of Paul. Guarded in the palace of Herod, Paul 
has time for reflection and prayer. The intervals of arduous labour, the moments of 
respite from toil and conflict, — in these we may find proofs of the nearness and tender- 
ness of God. — J. 

Vers. 1 — 10. — Paul before the Sanhedrim. I. A susqestive conteast between 
corrupt ecclesiasticism and secular power. The bigotry, intolerance, personal animosity, 
unfairness, fanatical cruelty, all finding abundant confirmation in the history of th« 
persecutions emanating from the papacy. Lysias was cruel because he was reckless 
and followed bad customs, but Ananias was cruel because he was spiteful and tyrannical. 

II. The Masteb's pebdiction fulfilled. Such a scene was what the servant* cj 
Christ were told to prepare for. The apostle's infirmity, compared with the Saviour's 
perfect self-possession and patience, shows that the highest of meiely human characters 
faU far below the Divine goodness in Christ. Yet the instant apology, so courteously 
expressed, shows that the ruffle was only on the surface. The mistake was a natural 
one, and the provocation was great. 

III. The coebuption of Judaism bxhidited. Whether Paul acted blamelessly in 
appealing to Pharisees against Sadducees may be an open question, but, as be was 
brought before the highest religious authority of Judaism, and the Jews of that time 
rejected the reformation which Christianity in the person of Paul presented to them, it 
was a challenge to Jewish orthodoxy to vindicate itself if it could. And all the apostle 
probably meant was that he had been brought up in the orthodox school, and that 
Christianity was no heresy to the substance of Jewish teaching. The discussion which 
followed revealed the utter decay of Judaism. The heart of it was eaten out with 
scepticism and pride. The orthodox had no moral influence. The heterodox were 
powerful euougli to fight successfully their battle against the rulers, which was anothwr 



OH. xxm. 1—35.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLEa 221 

proof, Uke the crucifixion of Jesus, that the Jewish state was ripe for judgment. The 
Messiahship of Christ rested on the facts of the Resurrection. 

IV. The hollow hypocrisy or unbelief. The Kadducees were not open to con-vic- 
tion. Nor are imhelievers generally. Their professed love of truth is sincere. They will 
inquire in order to decry, but not to reach a conclusion contrary to their inclinations. 
No dogmatists are so bigoted and so tyrannical as the dogmatists of the Sadduceaii 
school. As in Paul's time, so still, worldly influence is called in to help unbelief. 
The Sadducees were the wealthy party. There was a root of faith in the Pharisaic 
school, but it was being destroyed by worldliness, and they loved the praise of men 
more than the praise of God. Had the Sadducees been willing to hear Paul, they 
might have been convinced of their own error. Had the Pharisees not hoped for 
victory over their antagonists more than for light, the council might have been 
held.— R. 

Ver. 3. — 7%e human Judge in the presence of the Divine. "Sittest thou to judge 
me," etc. ? (see celebrated sermon by Rev. Sydney Smith, preached at York, March 28, 
1824). 

L The law of man rests on the Law of Ood. 1. In its aims. 2. In its execution. 

II. The blessing of a faithfully kept and righteously administered system of justice, 
which, notwithstanding all human infirmities, can be maintained. 

III. The bar of human law both a prediction and an evidence of the future judg- 
ment. Yet the imperfections of earthly justice remind us that God shall muxe up all 
inequalities, and show hereafter perfectly that all justice is love. 

IV. The corruption of Jewish Law proved the necessity of a better law, the law 
of Christ, which is not a despotic law, but " peace, and righteousness, and joy in the 
Holy Ghost ; " not smiting our neighbour, but " bearing one another's burdens." — R. 

Ver. 11. — lAght in the darknest. " And the night following," etc. Review the 
position of the apostle. In prison. Hated by the Jews. Only rescued by a heathen 
hand, which itself may be turned against him. Perplexed by his own thoughts (cf. 
Elijah in the cave at Mount Horeb). Conflict of fears and desires — his hope to do 
greater things, his desire to see Rome ; his sense of a great vocation as the leading 
missionary ; his apparent helplessness among his enemies. The vision had a twofold 
purpose — to prepare the apostle for its work, to give encouragement to aU who resembled 
him in single-heartedness and spiritual heroism. 

L The assubance givbn. 1. The strengthening of faith in the personal Redeemer. 
His resurrection ; his sympathy ; his approval of the apostle's life ; the progress of his 
kingdom. 2. The certainty conveyed that all that would occiu: in Jerusalem would be 
overruled for good. 3. The prospect held out corresponding to the apostle's own aims 
and desires, that Rome would be visited — a prospect which emboldened him to appeal 
to Cassar, (dthough it might lead to greater sufferings eventually. 

IL The lesson taught. 1. In the darkest night the appearance of Jesus is new 
strength. 2. Faithful and heroic work is never left without encouragement. 3. Though 
visions of the night may not be granted to the Church now, except on very rare 
occasions, still there axe foresights of the future which can be obteined by deep insight, 
prayerful vigilance, elevated faith and study of events in the light of the Saviour's 
words, and the facts of his past intercourse with his disciples. 4. Holy amhition is 
accompanied with the spirit of apostolic self-devotion, and is rewarded with the accom- 
plishment of our desires. " Expect great things ; attempt great things." Why not 
aim at Rome ? James and John were not reproved by Christ for desiring a place beside 
him, but were reminded that they must purge all such desires of the sordid and selfish, 
and be prepared for the baptism of blood. If we take up the cross, we may sit with 
Jesus on the throne. 5. The highest description of a Christian's life is "bearing 
witness." Christ is all and ia alL We reflect bis light. Even at Rome a strnpla 
testimony is enough. — R. 

Vers. 12 — 35 — Conspiracy defeated. The " must " of the Lord's midnight message 
Interpreted by erents. Divine providence working. The Christian stands still and 
sees the salvation. The Word of Chxl is instead of human calculations and predictions. 



222 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xxra. 1—86. 

How difieTent from fatalism I Such a case as Livingstone in the dangers of his African 
mission reminds us that there is a feeling of confidence in our weakness which is lik« 
a vision in the night. Notice — 

L The guilt of fanaticism. The forty conspirators thought that they were doing 
God service. They divulged the oath to the chief priests and elders. It was, by their 
silence, appropriated as the deed of the whole Sanhedrim. The blindness of their 
passion secured its own defeat. 

IL The Divine interposition to pkotbct. The sister of Paul probably not a 
Christian. The boy attached to his uncle, showing the affectionate nature of the 
apostle. A weak instrument chosen of God to accomplish a great work. The soldierly 
feeling of the captain aroused, and his sympathy with a fellow-citizen of Rome. 
Human agents controlled and directed by Divine influences. 

III. EoMAN despatch AND DisciPLiNB Called, again, into the service of the gospel. 
The promise of the Lord was being fulfilled, though in a way unanticipated by Paul. 
CaBsarea revisited under very different circumstances. The lonely, persecuted Jew 
becoming important, Felix put on his mettle. The contrast between the two worlds 
— the world of Judaism and the world of imperialism. The prisoner going to Csesarea 
suggests what is wanted to deliver mankind from both — the cruelty of fanatics and the 
cruelty of despots and military ambition. The simplicity, heroism, all-conquering love 
of the Christian ambassador. " Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, saith the 
Lord." It was a significant change from Lysias's fortress at Jerusalem to Herod's palace 
at CtBsarea. The gospel was challenging the world. — R. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — A three/old example of true greatness. Every careful reader of the 
Testament is aware that there is obscurity present to a certain degree in this passage. 
The obscurity is of a nature not very likely to yield to timid treatment. It does not 
seem likely that there remain facts of history which would clear it up, for instance. 
Rather would it seem the preferable course to face at once the difficulty, to narrow its 
dimensions to the smallest compass, and to admit that it is not evident how it was that 
Paul faUed to know the thing that he said he did not know — whether this were that 
Ananias was the high priest, or whether it were that it was Ananias who uttered the 
command to smite him on the mouth. For this is one among many instances of the 
sort of difficulty that offers no impossibility of reaching a very feasible explanation, 
but only perplexity and uncertainty, as to which among several may have been the 
actual explanation. All, however, that is now incumbent on ourselves is to accept 
in all good faith Paul's statement, and the lessons which may be suggested by what is 
before us will not be prejudiced. We have in the passage a threefold exemplification 
of the greatness that is open even to human character and life. 

I. The geeatnbss of a great idea and rule of life. There is no reason to think 
that Paul said what exceeded in the least degree the facts. 1. He owned to a con- 
science. 2. He owned to the principle that conscience ought to be accepted as guide. 
3. He owned to the duty of accepting the governance of that conscience in things 
great and small — in " all things." 4. He glanced, to say the least, and very significantly, 
at the fact that conscience, too, had its Superior, its Master, it« Judge — the living 
" God" himself. A life led through the length of its intelligent period in obedience to 
conscience is a life that will have steadiness, consistency, strength, about it. Equally 
noticeable is it that human greatness, where it may most really touch the mark, will 
own, as it did notably in the case of Saul, to much mixture of imperfection, to much 
possibility of error, to grand oversights, even if conscience be its guide, unless that 
conscience is informed, is divinely informed, and is refreshed by the light of the Spirit 
or all true guiding. 

IL The greatness that cannot prove stoical when moral conbiderationb are 
AT stake. 1. Paul feels an intense scorn of the thing that Ananias does. 2. Though 
by exposing it, and trenchantly, in the face of open court, he exposed himself also to 
have it thought and said that personal resentment partly accounts for his conduct, yet 
Paul was content to run the risk of this. Many do now think that the conduct of 
Paul and his language here contrast unfavourably with what might have been, and 
detract something from the fnrceof his righteous indignation on a righteous occasion. 
There is, however, such a thiuK as a nuble disregard of fair fame, that a purer offering 



«■. xxHi. 1— 35.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 223 

may be made to one thing — tbe fair fame of truth. Nor do we think that anything 
less than this is the truth here of Paul. If his utterance were the result of personal 
resentment simply, it certainly could not have had the remotest chance of working 
well for him personally. If the utterance were the child of personal resentment 
exclusively, the suppression of it would have been the suppression of an actual and 
legitimate instinct. But there is no evidence of this, nor even looking tiiis way. For 
(1) Paul's remonstrance is worded so as to exhibit the insult done to righteousness, not 
to himself. And (2) not only is there not a trace of temper, but there is abundant 
indication immediately succeeding that Paul had himself under perfect control. 3. 
Paul expresses no wish for the punishment of Ananias, but he firmly declares the 
abundantly lilsely retribution of Grod. He certainly leaves his own case in the hands 
of him to whom "judgment belongeth.'' And his language is no bitter retort, invective, 
or imprecation. It is no sign of either humility or greatness to hide out of sight our 
own strong convictions or our strong faith in God's moral government, just because the 
instance in question may arise in our own history. Therefore, while on the one hand 
the actual words employed by Paul receive unimpeachable justification from those of 
Jesus himself (Matt, xxiii. 27), the spirit he manifested does not expose itself to 
censure in comparison with even that of Jesus (John xviii. 22, 23), for the simple 
reason that it does not offer to come into comparison with it, the occasions having 
their material points of difference as well as of resemblance. The wonderful and 
divinest meekness of Jesus is indeed ever imltahle, hut it does not follow that every 
possible occasion of meekness is a right occasion for it. It may be that stern duty shall 
allow no option, and its more painful behest be the word of crushing rebuke (as here) 
rather than the tones of mercy and meekness. 

III. The greatness that waits, ebadt to admit that a thinq done by one's self 
MIGHT HAVE BEEN BETTER LEFT UNDONE. There are many things that may aggravate 
or diminish the blame of error. Bare as they are, there are such things as genuine 
explanations of error, which leave no fault with the person who nevertheless has been 
the perpetrator of it. Possibly Paul may be justly credited with some blame in not 
knowing to whom he spoke before he spoke, just as the language which he used may 
possibly be liable to some censure. But, anyway, the occasion is a fit one to remind 
us of these things : 1. That it is one sign of a great disposition — other things being 
equal — to be open to acknowledge error. 2. That this is a much more effectual sign, 
when all the circumstances of an occasion (as now) make the admission one of 
peculiar difficulty. 3. That worth is added to any such acknowledgment when, after 
all, the error is one in manner only, and emphatically not In matter, and when it lies 
in the accidents rather than in the merits of the subject. Though it were only such an 
error, Paul publicly admits it, and quotes chapter and verse, as it were, to his own 
disadvantage. 4. That this virtue is especially the growth of Christian teaching, 
Christian principles. The germ of this virtue so rare lies in the truth, the sincerity, 
the purity to which Christianity invites our supreme homage. — B. 

Ver. 6. — 2%e hope of the living and the resurrection of the dead.. "The hope and 
resurrection of the dead." The chapter in which these words are found offers a striking 
illustration of the irresistible force of providence, or of providence and the direct acta 
of the Spirit in co-operation. The day was dark for Paul, nor did there seem a glimmer 
of hope of any justice for him at the hands of the council before whom he stood. But 
words and wisdom were found either by him or for him. Those words of wisdom were 
the weighty words of the text. The mere utterance of them rent the council in twain ; 
soon compelled the chief captain to come again to the rescue, in place of shirking 
his duty, as by a side move he had wished to do ; left an eniaged populace no chance, 
as they thought, of disposing of Paul except by a murderous conspiracy ; necessitated 
the removal of Paul by the governor under a sufiBcient military escort to another place 
and another court of trial, which in its turn led on directly to Paul's appeal to Csesar 
and arrival in the capital of the world. And weighty indeed were those words — ^words 
»fhich may be numbered as two ; for they were weighted with the solemn meaning and 
inscrutable mystery of a whole world. They touch all that is deepest in questions 
between Gud and man. They hold, in fact, the one question that lies hidden down in 
some of its aspects in mystery unfathomably deep. Notice, then— 



224 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xxm. 1—88. 

I. Thk hofb hebib intenbed. The expression may mean simply "the hope of 
Israel " (ch. xxvi. 6 — 8 ; xxviii. 20). But if it do mean this, it is instanced as having 
for its chief implication the revelation of immortality in and by Jesus. Or it may mean 
more specifically Israel's " hope in and for the resurrection of the dead," though for 
obvious reasons Paul omits the word " Israel "—a wider resurrection than that of Israel 
merely being deep in his heart (ch. iiiv. 15). The expression says " the hope," either 
absolutely or " of the dead." The ambiguity of expression is immaterial, because there 
is none of meaning. And grand indeed are the suggestions that come of the language 
employed. 1. " The hope " must be universal. The laborious and far-fetched excep- 
tions that possibly might be produced would be infinitely insignificant, and might be 
accounted for in, perhaps, every case by moral reasons, though the most disastrous. 
2. " The hope " must be of the very chiefest that can stir human hearts. 3. " The 
hope " carries in it the highest argument and testimony of the Creator of those hearts. 
4. " The hope " must determine the great leading tracks of our thoughts of God and 
thoughts toward him. If he is only our God up to the grave, the greatest feeders of 
human regard, awe, devotion, are ruthlessly cut off at one stroke. Wonder because 
of him, fear toward him, love for him, wither away rootless and profitless. According 
as we find groimd for this hope or were to fail to find it, our notions of God must be 
trustful or doubting, loving or callous, aspiring or ruinously baffled, and our own life 
rearing itself to air and light or cruelly beaten down to earth. Yes, the hope of universal 
man, his deepest hope, his last hope, his highest kind of hope, his most governing hope, 
is the hope that those called " the dead " are not dead, but that they " all live." For 
" the dead " the living hope this, and they hope it for themselves, ere they, too, shall 
be numbered among that number. Upon the basis of this hope rises the superstructure 
of our leading views of God, as of our forecasts of self. 

II. The ebsubbection of the dead hese spoken op. The resurrection of the dead 
(in the sense of the resurrection in any tenable philosophical sense of the body) is, 
beyond doubt, the specific revelation of Christianity. The Christian revelation of the 
resurrection of the body avails: 1. To guide human thoughts as to the method of 
the transition from mortality to immortality. Whatever may be the facts as to the 
disembodied and intermediate state, the resurrection of the body sufficiently fixes for us 
the form of the immortal life, and gives definiteness to our conception of it. 2. This 
revealed method evidently guarantees the maintenance of individuality in the immortal 
life. 3. For quite similar reason it postulates the continuous identity of the individual. 

4. It surely infers the responsibility of the individual. No one for one moment contends 
for human responsibility or for human irresponsibility in this poor lower life. That 
those who have known it for the years of life's brief span should ignore it, at the first 
moment when its commanding character would receive forcible illustration, is incredible. 

5. The resurrection of the dead indefinietly enlarges the entire character of man. Were 
the truth now conceivably subtracted from the wealth of truth which is our present 
possession, it would condemn us to a poverty of distressing misery. No more appalling 
type of the truncated could be found the world around. When Paul introduced wit£ 
powerful voice and distinctest of utterance this twofold expression of the grandest and 
the most fundamental fact of human nature, he threw, doubtless, the apple of discord into 
the midst of Pharisees and Sadducees, and he did it designedly. But he was gaining a 
hearing for the truth that carries humanity's highest outlook in it. He was making 
a fresh appeal to all that is greatest and deepest in human nature. He was reminding a 
hardened multitude of what should most raise them and endear the Christ who came 
from God to them. And he was preaching to them, not what could be construed into 
"a hard saying," but what was fitted to be perennial inspiration. Let us see to it th*( 
it may be to us what it should have been, but was not, to them. — B. 

Ver. 11. — The sympMuizing and mindful Master. We may justly suppose that, 
after the life, activity, and intense excitement of that day, a reaction set in for Paul 
with the time of darkness and enforced rest. Those who toil for their Lord all day wUl 
not find themselves forgotten in their night of darkness, of uncertainty, of trouble. 
The comfort of Jesus is in this night brought to Paul. And the way in which it was 
brought to him must have been most grateful. That comfort offered itself in lereral 
iegTMi. 



OB. xxm. 1— 35.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLEa 225 

L The Lobd himselv affbabs. What an honour 1 What a kindness I Wliat a 
comfort I 

II. The Lobd himself " stands bt " Paul. What a condescension I What a leally 
brotherly helping I 

III. The Lobd hiuself speaks words op good oheeb. What a help for Paul, thai 
voice! He had known diflFerent tones of voice of Jesus. What a gracious variety, 
this! What a close suggestion also of the faithful watching of the Lord over his 
faithful servant 1 He " had seen," he " had seen " the sorrowing, wearied, grieved spirit 
of Paul, and had come to stay his afSiction by the direct exhortation, " Be of good 
cheer." 

IV. The Lobd nrrERS a kindly suggestion, betokening kindly eemembranob op 
Paul's past witness at Jerusalem, though rr was even he who had pebbmptobily 
OUT it shobt, and had said, " Defabt ! " 

v. The Lord assures him op distinguished future service for him. 1. This 
will put to flight all cares and anxieties as to the result of this trial, as to the fear of 
assassinatiun, as to the uncertainty of his future career on earth. 2. It puts to flight 
all self-reproaching fears as to whether, " for his un worthiness," he was now to be cast 
aside. No ; he is still a vessel meet for the Master's use — a weapon, polished, and not 
to be cast aside or laid aside. 

VI. The Lord makes a very selection of wobds that cabby comfort and 
btrength with them. "Thou must bear witness also at Rome." His Lord needs 
him and relies on him. And says he can depend on him who had done hia work so 
well " in Jerusalem." — B. 

Ver. 1. — A good conscience. Joubert says, "The trick of personifying words is a fatal 
source of mischief in theology." The personifying has been mischievously applied to 
the word " conscience," and we make it into a kind of separate being, by whom, apart 
from our own judgment and will, our conduct is regulated. Having in mind the descent 
of Minerva, in the form of an aged man, to accompany young Telemacbus in the search 
for his father, we speak of " conscience " as an inward Mentor. The philosophical 
questions that arise concerning the nature and testimony of conscience may be briefly 
referred to, especially these two: (1) Is conscience a separate and independent power? 
or (2) Is conscience our faculty of judgment exercised concerning our own actions ? We 
approve of the second view, and regard it as " the secret judgment of the soul, which 
gives its approbation to actions that it thinks good, or reproaches itself with those which 
it believes to be evil." Here, in our text, St. Paul is not thinking of the absolute right 
and wrong, but of the ceremonial claims which rested on a pious Jew, and says that, in 
relation to the formal rules of his religion, he had a " good conscience," " a conscience 
void of offence," a sense of having always striven to be loyal and faithful. The word 
" good " is a general word, and we may understand St. Paul better if we try to see what 
it may be regarded as including. 

I. An enlightened conscience. For, apart from the bare distinction of the absolute 
nght and absolute wrong, conscience must be dependent on knowledge. All its finer 
and more precise testimonies come out of its culture. Our advances in education and 
moral training involve the quickening and enlightening of the conscience. The advanced 
man finds it altogether a more subtle guard of his life and conduct. It becomes keenly 
sensitive to the " beautiful " and the " becoming," as well as to the " right." This is 
illustrated in the case of the apostle himself; at one time "he verily thought within 
himself that he ought to do many things contrary to the Name of Jesus of Nazareth." 
With the letters in his hand authorizing the persecutions of the Damascene Christians, 
his unenlightened conscience made no testimony of his wrongness, and offered no 
reproaches. By-and-by, when the revelation of the Messiahship of Jesus came to his 
understanding and heart, then conscience smote him, and he felt the exceeding shame of 
his past doings. It may be shown that all which cultures a man quickens and sensitizes 
conscience ; but the greatest enlightener is the personal reception of Christ as our Saviour. 
Then we begin to see ourselves, and to make the true estimate of conduct, spirit, and life. 
If we are responsible for making the best of our opportunities for self-culture, we may 
be said to be also responsible for the measure of enlightenment of our conscience. 

n. A oleab conscienoe. By which qualifying term we may mean : 1. Que that can 



226 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLEa [oh. ixin. l-«& 

make decisions and testimonies in a firm, decided way, with no uncertainties or doubt- 
ings, no " maybe " or " perhaps." Conduct is greatly dependent on prompt, clear deci- 
iions of the judgment, and these follow simple witness of the conscience to the right 
and wrong, the true and the beautiful. 2. The term " clear " may mean free from the 
deteriorating influence of bad principles and fixed evil habits. A man may so live that 
his conscience has always a thick, foul atmosphere to speak through, and gets sadly 
defiled thereby. A man may come even to read his conscience in the light of hia 
inclinations. " Keep conscience as the noon-tide clear." 

III. An approvino conscibnob. One that commended his actions. It is well when 
the constant witness of conscience is favourable. He lives a hard life who knows the 
daily conflict of conduct and conscience. There can be no peace until the conscience 
may be quiet, or only give its approvals. Precisely the result of our gaining peace with 
God is our gaining peace with ourselves. Our wills regenerated, we are no longer 
disposed to resist the leadings of our conscience. 

In speaking of this subject we should remember that conscience " is not an infallible 
guide, but requires illumination, and therefore each man needs to pray for light ; but it is 
never right to act against its dictates." — E. T. 

Ver. 3. — Passion under insult. We may at once say that, though much excuse may 
be found for St. Paul, he was quite below the Christian standard in making such an 
answer to the official. He was certainly far below his Divine Master, who, " when he 
was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not; but committed him- 
self to him who judgeth righteously." A probable explanation of St. Paul's failure to 
recognize the high priest is given by Michaelis : " Soon after the holding of the first 
council at Jerusalem, Ananias, son of Nebcdseus, was deprived of the high priest's office 
for certain acts of violence, and sent to Rome, whence he was afterwards released, and 
returned to Jerusalem. Between the death of Jonathan, who succeeded him and who 
was murdered by Felix, and the high priesthood of Ismael, who was invested with this 
office by Agrippa, an interval elapsed in wiiich this dignity was vacant. This was at 
the time when Paul was apprehended, and the Sanhedrim, being destitute of a president, 
Ananias undertook the oSice. It is probable that Paul was ignorant of this circum- 
stance." The incident may suggest to us — 

I. The EIQHTB0UBNBS3 OF INDIGNATION. Distinguish between "anger," which is 
generally used for quick passionate temper, often both unreasoning and unreasonable, 
and " indignation," which is the proper uprising of our nature against wrong. We 
seldom do well to be " angry ;" we always do well to be " indignant." Anger suggests 
feeling mastering judgment ; indignation suggests judgment giving character to feeling. 
Every man ought to be sensitive to wrong, whether it be done to others or to himself. 
The question for him concerns, not the feeling of indignation, but the forms in which 
such indignation may find expression. St. Paul ought to be indignant at the offering of 
Buoh an insult, by one who occupied the position of a judge. " St. Paul's prompt and 
stern utterance perhaps anticipated compliance with this direction, which was quite 
Illegal in itself, and must have been considered to be aggravated as given against a 
Roman citizen, placed at a Jewish bar by the Roman commandant." For a similar 
insult offered to our Lord, see John zviii. 22. 

II. The nobilitt of the man who can apolooizb even fob his bighteous 
INDIGNATIONS. At oncB, in the spirit of the Christian gentleman, as soon as the official 
position of the person whom he had answered was pointed out to him, he expressed his 
regret. Some have, indeed, thought that he meant to say such conduct as that of 
Ananias made it impossible to regard him as the high priest, but it is more simple to 
read in his words some sense of his having yielded to his sensitive and intense feelings. 
Impulsive men are usually quick to acknowledge their faults, and to remove any evil 
Impressions which their conduct or language may have produced. The highest virtue is 
the self-mastery that keeps us from making such mistakes ; but the next vii tvie is a 
cheerful and humble readiness to make amends when our mistakes, or our hastv 
language, have injured another. 

ni. The higher eighteousnbss of the mastery of dtwonation bt the bpibit of 
Chbistiah fobbearanob. Just as there is a "righteousness which exceeds the right- 
eousness of the scribes and Pharisees," so there isa righteousness which exceeds ih« 



at xxra. 1— 36.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 227 

worldly maxims and moral rules wliioli guide ordinary men. It may be right to resent 
insult, but, from the Christian standpoint, it is much more right to bear it, and be patient 
under it, and forgive it And such righteousness is illustrated in the scenes of our 
Lord's trial, when contumely was heaped upon him. Show that few things offer a 
severer test of Christian virtue than unprovoked and unreasonable insult. By it even 
the watchful man may be taken at unawares, and be suddenly moved to passion. Only 
the constant habit of thinking before we speak, and letting the moments of thinking be 
moments of prayer, can keep us in the trying hour. St. Paul's regret for his hasty words 
would be more profound before God than before men. He found a serious and humbling 
lesson in this mistake. Impress how often we err, and disgrace our Christian profession, 
by the tone and temper in which we " answer back." — E. T. 

Ver. 6. — The resurrection a dividing doctrine. If the supposition be a correct one 
that, just at this time, there was no high priest, we can well understand how easily 
divisions and contentions might be aroused in the mixed council, where party feeling was 
always strong. The Pharisees and Sadducees were really more political than ecclesias- 
tical parties ; they had distinct lines of thought, and conflicted for the positions of 
supreme influence in the ecclesiastico-political life of the nation. Both parties vigorously 
opposed Christianity, but the Pharisees on the ground of its teachings — as they thought 
them — ^against Mosaism, and of its degrading the national hope of Messiah, by affirming 
that he had come in the person of the Galilasan Jesus. The Sadducees on the ground 
chiefly of the disciples' affirmation that Jesus had risen from the dead, which, they 
were quick to see, if once admitted, involved the truth of our Lord's claim to the 
Messiahship. St. Paul evidently estimated, quickly and skilfully, the character of the 
judges before whom he was brought, and easily turned them from the consideration of 
his case to mere party wrangling. He saw, plainly enough, that there was no chance 
of a fair judgment from either party. If we must recognize some guilefulness in 
St. Paul's conduct on this occasion, we must remember that he had to deal with 
party prejudice and unreasoning hatred, and he was justifled in securing hia deliverance 
by such a quick-witted device. We observe — 

I. That the jewibh besubbection was a dbeau ob a doctbine. To the Sadducees 
a mere superstitious dream, to the Pharisees an important doctrine. Hints of it are 
found in the earlier Scriptures, but the Old Testament has no clear testimony on the 
subject. This is not really remarkable, because Mosaism did not take this point of 
view ; it did not demand obedience upon the promise of the " life to come," but upon 
promise of " the life that now is." Thoughts of resurrection and eternal life do not 
properly come to a Jew as a Jew, only to a Jew as a personally devout. God-fearing 
man, with an individual spiritual life of fellowship with God. Therefore the psalmists 
and prophets alone give us hints of resurrection. See what helps come to the idea 
(1) from the translations of Enoch and Elijah ; (2) from the resurrections to naturnl 
life wrought by Elijah and Elisha ; (3) from the expressions used in the Book of Job, 
and in the Psalms ; and (4) from allusions in the prophets. Exactly in what sense 
the Pharisees believed in resurrection it is difBcult to say. Clearly they had no notion 
of that spiritual body in which Christ reappeared among men, and we also must appear. 
Probably they held the doctrine very much as we hold some of our doctrines, merely 
for a battle-ground. The Sadducees had not much difficulty in showing that stich a 
resurrection was a mere dream. 

IL That the Christian eesuiieeotion is a teuth and a hope. St Paul calls 
it here a hope, but it is really a truth upon which we may build our hopes. Illustrate 
by showing what St. Paul writes about it — about its foundations and about its vital 
importance to the Christian — in 1 Cor. xv. To him it was no mere dividing doctrine, 
thoi^h among foes he ventured so to use it ; to him it was infinitely sure and infinitely 
precious — the message to him of his Redeemer's own resurrection. He laboured, if 
" by any means he might attain unto the resurrection of the dead." 

in. Wheeem may we find the diffeeencb between the Jewish and thb 
Chbistian ideas of EEStrBBBOnoN ? We only note one of the more impunant 
differences. Pharisees had only, as aids to their conception, cases of resurrection 
iv-hich were merely a temporary restoration of bodily life. All the risen ones they 
could know of died ft natural death. Christians take their conception from th« 



228 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLEa [oh. xxm. 1—35. 

resurrection of thdr Lord, which was to a spiritual, incorruptible, and eternal 
life.— E.T. 

Ver, 11. — Divine cheer in anxious hours. One of St. Paul's marked peculiarities 
was sensitiveness to Divine visions and communications. Such visions are indeed 
granted only in the sovereignty of Divine grace; but we may see that they are granted 
only to such persons as are receptive, and likely to be influenced aright by them. The 
same remark may be made concerning " visions " and " miracles " and all special modes 
uf Divine communication. They are conditioned as truly by what man can receivt 
lis by what Qod can grant ; and this may sufBciently explain why we have no visions 
or miracles now. On St. Paul's sensitiveness to the Divine nearness, note (1) that his 
Christian life began in a vision and revelation ; (2) that his labours had been directed 
in a special manner ; and (3) that the culture of his spiritual life involved the quick, 
clear vision of the " unseen." Show what an anxious day this had been to the apostle. 
He estimated the malice of the Jewish party, and knew well that nothing short of his 
death would satisfy these zealots. Ko doubt he spent much time in prayer, and, as a 
response, there came this vision of his glorified Lord, and the cheering and assuring 
message. Our Lord gave his personal cheerings to St. Paul — by manifestation and 
message — on all the great occasions of pei-plexity and danger in the apostle's career 
(see ch. xviii. 9 ; xvii. 22 — 25, etc.). We may see that, in this instance before us, the 
grounds on which the apostle should be of "good cheer" were partly expressed and 
partly assumed. 

L " Be of good oheeb ; " fob tou shall still work and witness. No joy to 
St. Paul could be compared with this, that he might be longer spared to work for his 
Divine Master. True, he could say that " to die is gain," but he could unfaignedly 
rejoice with his disciples that he was " to continue with them all for their furtherance 
and joy in faith." On this occasion, taken back to the castle in the charge of the 
Soman guard, he might reasonably have felt despondent. " To human apprehension 
there was at this time nothing between the apostle and death but the shelter afforded 
in the Roman barrack." He might fear that his work was done. All earnest Christian 
workers know what times of depression and despondency mean. Even after successful 
work there may come the feeling of exhaustion, and we may say, like Elijah, " Let me 
die, for I am not better [more successful] than my fathers." To Elijah, to St. Paul, 
and to us, at such times, the best of all cheer is the message, " The Lord hath need of 
thee " yet awhile. With such cheer the clouds pass ; we can smile again on life. We 
are lifted up above our difficult circumstances and our exceeding perils. We learn 
that if bearing and battling have to be our lot, it is but for a while ; we shall battle 
through, and we shall even serve God in the battling. This is good cheer indeed. 
" Christ shall still be magnified in our body, whether it be by life or by death." 

n. " Be of good chbeb ; " foe I ah with you. This is the comforting which is 
assumed rather than expressed. Christ " stood by " the apostle, but it was only his 
coming out of the invisible into the visible. St. Paul only saw what was the perma- 
nent fact. His Lord was always standing by him, always within the visions of his 
souL And there is no cheer for us like this. Compare the intense anxiety of Moses 
to be sure that Jehovah was present in the camp. " If thy presence go not with 
me, carry us not up hence." It was perfect rest for anxious Moses to hear Jehovah 
respond, saying, " My presence shall go with thee." What is in this case assumed is 
actually expressed to St. Paul in some of his other visions. At Corinth Christ had 
said, " Be not afraid ... for 7 am with thee, and no man shall set on thee to nurt 
thee." Still, we know that trial is nothing, if Jesus is with us, helping us to hear ,• 
and work is nothing, if Jesus is with us, helping us to do. " I can do all things, ani 
can bear all sufferings, if my Lord be there." Then impress what is for us the real 
cheer of life. 1. Work. 2. God's presence the inspiration and the strength of our 
working. 3. The inward consciousness that God's approval rests upon our work. In 
our text Christ did but assure St. Paul, what he also assures us, that " man is immortal 
until his work is done." No arrow can pierce any one of us until our last battle has 
been fought, and it is enough that our Lord knows whe« our bit of aernce lot him is 
eomplete. — B. T. 



CH. xnn. 1— 35.J THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. ' 229 

Ver. 16. — Providential protection: There is a time for miracle to work, and a tim« 
for providence to work, and the appropriate time* the Lord of infinite wisdom and 
knowledge alone can arrange. It seems very strange to us that St. Peter should have 
been brought out of prison by the miraculous deliverances of an angel, and that St. 
Paul should be left dependent on the accident, as some would call it, of his nephew's 
overhearing the plot against his life. Yet, perhaps, there is no real difference between 
a " miraculous " and a " providential " deliverance. Both are Divine interventions on 
behalf of God's servants, and both are simply adaptations of the intervention to 
particular cases. When we can get a fuller and worthier conception of God's working 
in the " natural," we shall probably lose sight of the distinction which we now make 
hetween the " natural and the supernatural." And this we shall do, not by losing the 
"supernatural," but by losing the " natural," and seeing that all Divine workings are 
beyond mere " nature," beyond mere human energy. We shall find Divine energy in 
the flowers, and trees, and sunshine, and storms, and in the genius, art, and poetry of 
man. We shall not " level down," but " level up ; " and, forgetting how men would 
drag us down to the operations of dead law, we shall find everywhere the working of 
the living Ood, and all life will seem to us God's great miracle. While we have to 
make a distinction between the " miraculous " and the " providential," we may notice 
that— 

I. ThK one 18 AN EXTBAORDINAET, THE OTHBB AU ORDDJABY AaENOT. We knOW 

that our fellow-men, and we ourselves, have ordinary and regular methods of working, 
and that both we and they, under pressure of circumstances, sometimes transcend 
ourselves, and act with an energy, promptitude, skill, aiid power which quite surprises 
those who seem to know us most intimately. May not this sujigest to us tho, distinc- 
tion in God between the miraculous and the providential? The miraculous is the 
Divine working to meet sudden and unusual circumstances. Then we may see that 
there was no need for extraordinary intervention in St. Paul's case, because this was 
no sudden calamity, breaking in upon and interfering with the Divine order ; it was 
but a step in the regular course of providential dealings with St. Paul, and ordinary 
resources of providence sufficed to overcome the seeming danger. 

IL The one is a temporary, the other a permanent agency. God's providences 
have been working through all the ages, and they have sufficed to secure the safety oi 
his servants under all kinds of perils. From the Old Testament numerous illustrations 
may be taken ; e.g. notice how David was preserved while he was pursued by Saul ; 
or see how events were providentially ordered for Joseph. Eemarkable stories of 
wonderful providences are given in modem books ; e.g. that of the man pursued by 
soldiers, who searched the house where he had found refuge, and quarrelled outside the 
door of the room in which he was secreted, as to whether that room had been searched ; 
the quarrel resulting in their going away and never entering it. God's miracles have 
been wrought in almost every age, but they have always been temporary phenomena, 
special occasions of necessity, and having some unusual testimony to make. By theii 
very nature miracles must be occasional only. 

III. One produces a sudden impression, the other apfeam to thouohtfui, 
CONSIDERATION. Miracles are wonders. They are not, indeed, wonders only ; they are 
works ; they are signs and wonders. Still, it is their chief characteristic that they 
arrest, arouse, surprise, excite attention. On the other hand, God's providences need 
to be watched for and observed and thoi^ht about. " Whoso will observe these 
things, even he shall understand the loving-kindness of the Lord." Then impress 
that, in life, human agencies that seem to bring about results for us, as his nepliew's 
intervention brought about St. Paul's safety, must never take o\u interest merely 
for their own sake. We must ever look behind them and see that they are but 
working out the Divine plan and Divine will. God delivered St. Paul from peril by the 
aid of his nephew just as truly as if he had rescued him by the hand of an angeL — B. T. 

Ver. 29. — Stranger^ testimoniet to Ood^s servants. The moral influence exerted by 
St. Paul on this Roman captain was so decided that he is compelled to send to his 
■uperior this report, "whom I perceived ... to have nothing laid to his charge worthy 
of death or of bonds." Such a man as this captain would judge fairly matters of 
character or of conduct. He had no blinding and bewildering ecclesiastical prejudice! 



230 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. xiiv. 1—27. 



which made crimes where there were none. So his testimony to the apostle is impor- 
tant. Indeed, it is always well for us to feel that the world and the stranger are sure 
to judge us, and form impressions from our character and conduct. We cannot be 
indifferent to their opinion. Our walk and conversation ought to do honour to our 
Master. Men should " take knowledge of us that we have been with Jesus." The 
words used by the captain here remind us of two things. 

L That the wokld wants no judgment on men ron thbib opinions. About 
opinions a Eoman soldier could be supremely indifferent. With opinions human laws 
and magistracies have nothing to do. In opinions men may have the fullest liberty 
and toleration. Only when opinions influence conduct in a way that imperils social 
order, or the safety of the state, does the law or the magistrate concern himself with it. 
So we find that, in order to bring so-called heretics under the civil power, it has always 
been necessary to accuse them of rebellion against the law; the judge condemns them 
as anarchists, not as heretics. In these times we are beginning to learn more fully that 
opinion had belter not be interfered with, and that every man may have full " liberty 
of prophesying," of persuading men to adopt his views. And all wrong teachings are 
to be met by right teaching, by the moral force of argument, and not by the physical 
forces of the law. Though still we properly keep the liberty to matters of simple 
opinion; when men express their views in their conduct, we are bound to consider 
whether their conduct tends to preserve the public peace and the social order. 

II. Sectabian prejudice alone wants to punish men fob theib opinions. Even 
the sectarian Jews knew that St. Paul had done no wrong. They trumped up s. 
charge against him of defiling the temple, but they knew well enough that it was 
a groundless charge. They were offended with his opinions and teachings, as opposing 
their own. Illustrate from the assumptions of the Papal Church, and her efforts <o 
crush all who held other opinions than she sanctioned. Modern illustrations of the 
bitterness of sectarian prejudice may be mentioned. A man may, like the apostle, 
have the truth of God, but he must be rejected unless his message rings in exact 
harmony with the received opinions. Show, in conclusion, that the strangers' judgment 
of us is the only really important one. They ask what we are in character, conduct, 
life, and relations ; and they can best judge about the value of our opinions by those 
things in which the opinions find their practical expression. Let, then, those outside 
our circles, the strangers, judge us as Christians. Will they say of us as the Eoman 
officer said of St. Paul, "About their opinions we know little or nothing; but this we 
can say. They are good men and true " ? — B. T. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 



Ver. 1. — The high priest Ananias eame 
down for Ananias the high priest descended, 
A.V. ; certain elders for tfte elders, A.V. and 
T.K. ; an orator, one Tertullus for a certain 
orator named Tertullus, A.V. ; and they for 
who, A.V. After five days. Of whioli the 
first Wiis the day on which St. Paul left 
Jerusalem, and the fifth that on which 
Ananias and his companions appeared be- 
fore Felix (see ver. 1 1, note). TertuUuB. A 
Latin name, formed from Tertius, as Luoul- 
lus from Lucius, Catullus from Catius, etc. 
Informed ; iii(pavi(a>, in the sense of " laying 
an information" before a mugistrate, only 
occurs elsewhere in ch. iiv. 2, 15 (see above, 
eh. xxiii. 15, note). 

Ver. 2.— Called for called forth, A.V.; 
much peace for great quietness, A.V. ; evils are 
corrected for for very worthy deeds are done 
iinto,A.V. and T.E. ; there is also a change in 



the order of the words, by thy providence is 
placed at the beginning instead of at the 
end of the sentence. When lie was called. 
We see here the order of the trial. As soon 
as the charge is laid against the prisoner, 
he is culled into court, to hear what his 
accusers have to say against him, and as it 
follows nt ver. 10, to make his defence (see 
ch. XXV. 16). We enjoy much peace. The 
gross flattery of this address of the hired 
orato.-, placed at the beginning of his speech, 
in order to win the favour of the judge, ia 
brought into full light by comparing 
Tacitus's account of (he misconduct of Peliz 
in Samaria in the reign of Claudius, who 
he says, thought he might commit any crime 
with impunity, and by his proceedings nearly 
caused a civil , war (' Annal.,' xii. 54); and 
his character of him as a ruler of boundless 
cruelty and profligacy, using the power of 
a king with the temper of a slave (' Hist.,' 
T. ix.) ; and Josephua'f itatement that no 



OH. ixiv. 1—27.] 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



231 



sooner was Felix recalled from his government 
than the chief men among the Jews at 
Oiesarea went up to Borne to accuse him 
before Nero, when he narrowly escaped 
punisliment through the inflaence of his 
brother Pallas. By thy providence, " Pro- 
videntia Csesaris " is a common legend on 
Roman coins (Alford). Evils are oorrected. 
The reading of the E.T., SLopeti)x.aTa, mean- 
ing "reforms," occurs only here, but, like 
the kindred KuTopBdixara of the T.B., is a 
medical term. i^i6pBwcis, reformation, is 
found in Heb. ix. 10. The KaTope^fiara of the 
T.B. (which also occurs nowhere else in the 
New Testament) means, in its classical use, 
either " successful actions " or " right ew. 
tions;" KaTopS6oi is to "bring things to a 
successful issue." Possibly Tertullus may 
have had in view the successful attack on 
the Egyptian impostor (see ch. xxi. 38, note), 
or the wholesale crucifixion of Sicarii and 
other disturbers of the public peace. 

Ver. 3. — In all ways for always, A.V.; 
excellent for noble, A.V. Meyer connects 
in all ways and in all places with the pre- 
ceding StopBufioLTtov yivofxiviov : ** reforms and 
improvemonts that have taken place on all 
sides and in all places." ncicTj; or irdvTn, 
found only here in the New Testament, 
means "on all sides," '■ in every direction." 

Ver. 4. — But for notwithstanding, A.V. ; 
I entreat thee for I pray thee, A. V. ; to hear 
for that tkou wouMest hear, A.V. Of thy 
clemency (rf! ay ivieixela). The word is 
rendered "gentleness" in 2 Cor. x.l, where 
alone it occurs in the New Testament ; iiri- 
fticns is most frequently rendered "gentle" 
(1 Tim. iii. 3 (B.V.) ; Titus iii. 2 ; Jas. iit. 
17 ; 1 Pet. ii. 18). A few words. The Greek 
has avvT6nws, briefly, concisely, found only 
here in the New Testament, but common 
in classical Greek and especially in medical 
writers, where it means " rapidly," " in a 
short time." 

Ver, 5. — Insurrection for sedition, A.V. 
and T.B. We have found (6up((>'T«s). The con- 
struction of the sentence is an anacoluthon. 
The participle is not followed, as it should be, 
by a finite verb, iKpari\iiaiJ.ev (in ver. 6), but 
the construction is changed by the influence 
of the interposed sentence, "who moreover as- 
sayed to profane the temple," and so, instead 
of ^ KpaT'fiffaij.ey avT(Jy, we have '6v Koi iKpar-fitra' 
y.ei/. A pestilent fellow (Aoi|U(ii') ; literally, a 
pestilence ; as we say, " a pest," " a plague," 
or " a nuisance," like the Latin pestis. It 
only occurs here in the New Testament, but 
is of frequent use in the LXX., as x.g. 1 
Sam. ii. 12, x. 27, and xxv. 25, viol 
7uiiiw\, " sons of Belial ; " 1 Mace. x. 61 ; iv. 
8 kfipes KoL/Mil: and xv. 21, simply Aoi;nol 
(rendered " pestilent fellows " in the A.V.), 
and elsewhHre as the rendering ot other 
Hebrew wordi. It ia occasionally nseil alan 



in this sense by classical writers. A. mover 
of insurrections (o-Tdtrcu, B.T.). This was 
the charge most likely to weigh with a 
Homan procurator in the then disturbed and 
turbulent state of the Jewish mind (comp. 
Luke xxiii. 2 ; John xix. 12). Felix him- 
self had had large experience of Jewish 
insurrections. The Jewish riots at Philippi 
(ch. xvi. 20), at Thessalonica (ch. xvii. 6), at 
Corinth (ch. xviii. 12), at Ephesus (oh. xix. 
29), and at Jerusalem (ch. xxi. 30), would 
give colour to the accusation. The world 
(fi olKoviJ.4vTi). The Eoman, or civilized, 
world (Luke ii. 1 ; iv. 5, etc.). Bingleader ; 
irptuTsffToTjis, only here in the New Testa- 
ment, but used by the LXX. in Job xv. 24, 
and not uncommon in classical Greek, as a 
military term, equivalent to the first, t.«. the 
right-hand man in the line. Also, in the 
plural, the soldiers in the front rank. The 
sect of the Nazareues. As our Lord was con- 
temptuously called " The Nazarene "(Matt, 
xxvi. 71), so the Jews designated his 
disciples " Nazareues." They would noi 
admit that they wera Christians, i.e. disciples 
of the Messiah. 

Ver. 6. — Moreontr assayed for also hath 
gone about, A. V. ; on whom also we laid hold for 
whom we took, A.V. To profane the temple. 
The same false charge as was made in ch. xxi. 
I 28. The remainder of ver. 6, after the words 
" on whom we laid hold," the whole of ver. 
7, and the first clause of ver. 8, are omitted 
in the R.T. on the authority of n. A, B, G, H, 
etc. But the propriety of tlie omission is 
doubtful (Alford, Bishop Jacobson, Plump- 
tre), though sanctioned by Mill, Bengel, 
Griesbach, Lachmann, and Tisohendorf 
(Meyer). If the words are not genuine, it is 
a marvellously skilful interpolation, fitting 
into the place so exactly both at the beginniug 
and at the end, and supplying a manifest 
want in the speech of Tertullus. (For the 
statement in ver. 8 A.V., comp. ch. xxiii. 30.) 
Ver. 8. — From whom thou wilt be able, 
by examining him thyself, to take for by 
examining of whom thyself mayest take,A.\. 
According to the R.V., whom refers to St. 
Paul, but according to the A.V., to Lysias. 
This last agrees with ver. 22. By examining 
tiim ; avaxpivas (Luke xxiii. 14 ; ch. iv. 9 ; 
xii. 19; xvii. 11; xxviii. 18; elsewhere 
only in St. Paul's Epistles). In ch. xxv. 26 
the kindred avaxpitn?, examination, is used. 
Ver. 9. — Joined in the charge for assented, 
A.V. and T.B. ; affirming for saying, A.V. 
Joined in the charge. The reading of the 
E.T., avviiriBiVTo, meaTis "joined in the at- 
tack upon," as in the LXX. of Dent, xxxii. 
27 (" behave themselves strangely," A. V.) ; Ps. 
iii. 6 (Codex Alexandrinus ; " set themselves 
against me," A.V.). The awiBfvTo of the 
T.B. means "agreed" (aa John ix. 22), 
" assented." 



232 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLEa [oh. xxiv. 1— 27. 



Yer. 10. — And when (ha governor, etc., 
PaiU answered foi then Paid, after that the 
governor, etc., answered, A.V. ; cheerfully 
for the more cheerfully, A.V. and T.B. ; 
mahe my defence for answer for myself, A.V. 
Forasmuoli as I know, etc. St. Paul, with in- 
imitable skill, pitched upon the one favour- 
able side of his judge's person, viz. his long 
experience in Jewish affairs, and made it 
the subject of his opening reference — a cour- 
teous and conciliatory reference, in striking 
contrast with the false, fulsome flattery of 
Tertullus. Of many years. If Paul was 
speaking in the year a.d. 58, and Felix 
had been governor only since a.d. 53, 
" many years " was rather an hyperbole. 
But Tacitus expressly states that Felix 
was joint procurator with Cumanus ; and 
therefore he had been a judge to the 
Jewish nation long before the banishment 
of OumanuB- Tacitus's authority is infi- 
nitely superior to that of Josephus, and this 
passage strongly supports the statement of 
Tacitus (' Annal.,' xii. 54). Make my de- 
fence (t^ wepi ^fiavTov aTro\oyovfj.at), For 
the word aTroKoyov/iai, and for the situation 
of St. Paul, and for the gracious promise 
provided for such situation, see Luke xii. 
12 ; xxi. 15 ; see too oh. xix. 33 ; xxv. 8 ; 
xxvi. 1, 2 ; and for the use of aTro\oyla, see 
ch. xxii. 1, note. 

Ver. 11. — Seeiiig that (hon canst talee know- 
ledge for iecause that thou mayest understand, 
A.V. and T.B. ; it is not more than for there 
are yet hut, A.V. ; / went up to worship at 
Jerusalem for I went up to Jerusalem for to 
worship, A.V. Twelve days. These days 
may be thus reckoned : (1) arrival at Jeru- 
Biilem (ch. xxi. 15) ; (2) visit to James and 
the elders (ch. xxi. 18) ; (3) first day of 
purification (ch. xxi. 26); (4) second day 
of purification ; (5) the third day ; (6) the 
fourth day; (7) the fifth day, when the 
tumult took place (ch. xxi. 27); (8) Paul 
brought before the Sanhedrim ; (9) the con- 
ipiracy of the forty Jews, Paul leaves Jeru- 
salem for CBSsarea — the first of the five days 
mentioned in ch. xxiv. 1 ; (10) arrival of St. 
Paul " next day " at Csesarea, and lodged i 11 the 
pretorium — second of the five days (ch. xxiii. 
32, 35) ; (1 1) Paul in Herod's judgment hall 
— third of the five days ; (12) ditto— fourth of 
the five days ; (13) the current day, being also 
the fifth day of those mentioned in oh. 
xxiv. 1. The mention of the brief time of 
twelve days shows the narrow limits of time 
within which the crime must have been 
eommitted, while the adroit mention of the 

Surpose of his visit, to worship, would show 
ow unlikely it was that he should have 
gone with any evil intent. 

Ver. 12. — Neither in the temple did they 
(Jnd me for they neither found me in the 
temple, A.V. ; or stirring up a crowd for 



neither raising up the people, A.V. ; nor . . 
nor for neither . . . nor, A.V. Stirring up a 
orowd. The reading of the B.T. is MaToaiv 
TFoioviiTa KxXou, which must mean "a stoppage 
of the crowd," in which sense it is a medical 
term. But Meyer thinks it is a mere clerical 
error for the reading of the T.B. ima-ia-Taaiv, 
which is used in the LXX for "a tumultu- 
ous assembly" (Numb. xxvL 9; 3 Bsdr. 
xxv. 9), and in Josephus, ' Oontr. Apion.,' i. 
20, of a conspiracy or revolt. In the LXX. 
also the verb iTrnrvvlirTaiMi means " to rise 
in revolt against" (Numb. xiv. 25; xvi. 19; 
xxvi. 9). 

Ver. 13. — Prove to thee for prove, A.V. 
Prove (TrapairTriTai) ; see oh. i. 3, note. 

Ver. 14. — A sect for heresy, A.V. ; serve for 
worship, A.V. ; our for my, A.V. (my is 
better, as following "J serve," and addressed 
to a Roman judge) ; which are according te 
the Law, and which are written in the pro- 
phets for which are written in the Law and 
in the prophets, A.V. A sect. This, of 
course, refers to this expression of Tertullus 
in ver. 5, UpcarcirrtiTTis rris t&v Na^tapaiay 
aip€(r6ais,"Ringleaderof the sect of the Naza- 
renes." The word a'lpea-is, which means 
primarily " choice," has not necessarily or 
even ordinarily a bad sense- In classical 
Greek its secondary sense was a " sect " or 
" school " of philosophy. Academics, Peripa- 
tetics, Stoics, Epicureans, etc. The Jews 
applied it to their ovm different schools of 
thought. So in ch. v. 17 we read, Alpea-is 
rail' ^aSSoVKaiwv, " The sect of the Saddu- 
cees ; " in ch. xv. 5, Alpe<ris tS>v ^api<raiay, 
" The sect of the Pharisees ;" in ch. xxvi. 5 
St. Paul speaks of himself as having been a 
Pharisee, Karct r^y dKpi^ea-rtiTTiv alpeaj/ t^j 
riiierepas BpriffKflas, " After the straitest sect 
of our religion " (see too ch. xxviii. 22). It 
begins to have a bad sense in St. Paul's 
Epistles (1 Cor. xi. 19 ; Gal. v. 20 ; and 2 
Pet. ii. 1, alpeasis airwKeias, where, however, 
it gets its bad sense from the cnraKelas 
joined to it). In ecclesiastical writers it 
came to have its worst sense ot " heresy " as 
something worse even than " schism." In 
this reference to Tertullus's phrase, St. Paul 
seems hardly to admit that Christianity was 
properly called " a sect " by the Jews, but 
gives it the milder term of "the Way " (see 
ch. ix. 2, note). The God of our [my] father 
(t$ iraTpifCji @ef) ; comp. Gal. i. 14 ; and oh. 
xxii. 3; xxviii. 17. Observe how St. Paul 
throughout insists that, in becoming a Chris- 
tian, he had not been disloyal to Moses, or 
the Law, or the prophets, or to the religion of 
his fathers, but quite the contrary. Accord- 
ing to the Law. KotA rhv vSfiov may mean 
either, as in the E.V., "according to the 
Law," or, as Meyer takes it, "throughout 
the Law," and then is better coupled, es 
in the A.V., with to7s yiypafiincyots. Th« 



OH. XXIT. 1—27.] 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



233 



law, and ... the prophets (as Matt. r. 17 ; 
Luke xxiv. 27, 44). 

Ver. 15. — Saving for and have, A.V. ; 
these also themselves look for for they them- 
selves also allow, A.V. ; resurrection for 
resurrection of the dead, A.V. and T.B. 
'Which these also themselves look for (see 
ch. xxiii. 6). Both of the just, eto. This is 
distinctly taught in Dan. xii. 2 (comp. 
Matt. XXV. 46 ; John v. 29). 

Ver. 16. — Herein . . , aUo for and herein, 
A.V. and T.R. ; to have a conscience , . . 
alway for to have always, etc., A.V. ; and 
men for and toward men, A.V. (For the 
sentiment, comp. ch. xxiii. 1.) Herein (4y 
rrfoTw) ; i.e. on this account, under these cir- 
cumstances supplying the ground and cause 
of my action (comp. John xvi. 30). So, too, 
Matt. vi. 7, 'Ex rij ToAvKoyi<f aJrav means 
" On account of their much spfiaking." I 
exercise myself; 4(r/ciS, here only in the 
New Testament, but frequent in medical 
writers for " to practise " the medical art. 

Ver. 17. — After many years ; or, several 
years. St. Paul's last visit to Jerusalem 
was that mentioned in ch. xviii. 22. Since 
then he had spent '' some time " {xp^""" 
Tiva) at Antiocli, had gone over all the 
country of Phrygia and Galatia, had come 
to Ephesus, and stopped between two and 
three years there, had gone through Mace- 
donia, had spent three months at Coriiith, 
had returned to Macedonia, and from 
thence had come to Jerusalem in about 
fifty days. All which must have occupied 
four or five years — from a.d. 54 to a.d. 58— 
according to most chronologers. Evidently 
Paul had not been plotting seditious move- 
ments at Jerusalem, where he had only 
arrived twelve days before, for a purely 
benevolent and pious purpose, after an 
absence of four or five years. Alms . . . 
and offerings. Those of which he speaks in 
1 Cor. xvi. 1 — 4 ; 2 Cor. viii. ; Kom. xv. 25, 
26, 31. To this may be added " the charges " 
for which he made himself answerable tor 
the poor Nazarites (ch. xxi. 24, 26). 

Ver. 18. — Amidst which for whereupon, 
A.V. and T.B. ; they fovjnd me purified in 
the temple with no crowd, nor yet with tumult : 
but there were certain Jews from Asia for 
certain Jews frnm Asia found me purified in 
Hie temple, neither with multitude, nor with 
tnmult, A.V. and T.E. Amidst which (t'x 
als, E.T.) refers to the alms and offerings. 
The T.R. has iv oTs, " under which circum- 
stances," "at the transaction of which 
deeds," or, briefer, " whereupon," A.V. But 
there were. Most manuscripts followed by 
the B.T., read Tives Se a,ir6 ttJs 'Atrtas, thus 
giving a broken unfinished senten' e instead 
of the plain and complete one of the T R., 
which agrees, moreover, exactly with ott. 
xxi. 27. 



Ver. 19. — To malee accusation for object, 
A.V. The sense is exactly the same. 

Ver. 20. — Men themnelves for same here, 
A.V. ; what wrong-doing they found for ij 
they have found any evil doing in me, A.V. 
and T.E. ; when for while, A.V. Let these 
men themselves. Since the Asiatic Jews are 
not here to bear witness, let these men who 
are here speak for themselves as to what 
they witnessed in the Sanhedrim. 

Ver. 21. — Before you for by you, A.V. and 
T.E. [iiri for into). Except {fi) : &X\o, else, 
is understood after ri, so that ij is equivalent 
to er fi.il. Touching the resurrection (see ch. 
xxiii. 6, where the exact words are, " Touch- 
ing the hope and resurrection of the dead, I 
am called in question "). 

Ver. 22. — But Felix, having more exact 
knowledge concerning the Way, deferred them, 
saying for and when Felix heard these things, 
having more perfect knowledge of that way, 
he deferred them, and said, A.V. and T.R. ; 
determine for know the uttermost of, A.V. 
Having more exact knowledge, eto. At 
Osesarea, Felix must have seen and heard 
something of Christianity. The conversion 
of Cornelius with his household and friends, 
men belonging to the rlominant Roman 
power ; the work of Philip the evangelist, 
residing probably for some years at Csesarea, 
and working among Romans as well as Jews, 
must have given Felix some knowledge of 
" the Way." He would learn something, too, 
both of Judaism and Christianity from 
Drusilla, hia wife (ver. 24, note). When 
Lysias . . . shall oome (see vers. 7, 8, and 
note). I will determine (Siayyda-ofiat) ; see 
above, ch. xxiii. 15, where the verb is in the 
active voice, and is rendered in the R.V. 
" to judge." The idea of the word is " to 
know with discrimination ; " and this is the 
sense it has in medical writers, who use it 
very frequently ; as e.g. Galen says, Up&Tov 
yap Stayvuvai 'XP'h t^ irore 6<tt1 ira&os (quoted 
by Hobart). Hence the "diagnosis" of an 
illness (ch. xxiii. 15). 

Ver. 23. — Gave order to the for com- 
manded a, A.V. ; that he should be kept in 
charge for to keep Paul, A.V. and T.R. ; 
and should have indulgence for and to let him 
have liberty, A.V. ; not to forbid any of his 
friends for that he should forbid none of 
his acquaintance, A.V. ; to minister unto him 
for to minister or come unto Mm, A.V. and 
T.E. Indulgence (fixeo-is); literally, re- 
laxation, viz. of the prison restraints and 
confinement. The word is used in the 
LXX. of 2 Chron. xxiii. 15, ISaKav mrri 
&ve(rw, i.e. those who had taken Athaliah 
prisoner, " let her loose " till she got out of 
the temple court. It is also a common 
medical term for the cessation or remission 
of pain or disease. St. Paul uses it four 
times in liis Epistles for " rest " or " ease * 



23« 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[cH. XXIV. 1— 2T 



(2 Cor. U. 13; vil. 5; viil. 13; 2 Thess. i. 
7). Doubtless St. Luke was thus enabled 
to be much with St. Paul during hisimpi ison- 
meut, and, as suggested above, to have his 
help in writing his Gospel. 

Ver. 24. — But for and, A.V. ; Felix came 
for when Felix came, A.V. ; Drusilla, hit 
wife for hU wife Drusilla, A.V. ; and sent 
for he tent, A.V.; Christ Jetut for Christ, 
A.V. and T.R. Came ; ■jrapay(i'6ii,evoi, a very 
favourite word with St. Luke, occurring 
twenty-nine times in his Gospel and the 
Acts. It implies that Felix had been absent 
from Caesarea for some days after the trial. 
Drusilla. She was, according to Josephug 
(' Ant. Jud.,' XX. vii. 1, 2) the daughter of 
Herod Agrippa I., who " killed James with 
the sword " (ch. xii 1, 2), and died shortly 
afterwards. She was first tlie wife of Azizus, 
King of Emesa; but Felix, becoming 
enamoured of her on account of her singular 
beauty, employed a certain magician, a Jew 
named Simon, to entice her away from her 
husband, and persuade her to marry him, 
contrary, as Josephus says, to the institu- 
tions of her country. She perished, with 
Agrippa, her only son by Felix, in the 
eruption of Vesuvius, in the reign of Titus 
(Josephus, as above). Tacitus says that 
Drusilla, the wife of Felix, was !»r<ind- 
daughter of Antony and Cleopatra. But he 
seems to have confounded her with another 
of the three royal wives of Felix, mentioned 
by Suetonius in ' Claudius ; ' unless, per- 
chance, as has been conjectured, he had two 
wives of the name of Drusilla, of whom one 
was, as Tacitus says, granddaughter of 
Antony, by being the daughter of King 
Juba and Cleopatra Selene, Antony's 
daughter (see note in Whiston's ' Josephus,' 
and in Kuinoel, on ch. xxiii. 24). But there is 
no certainty on the subject Only Josephus's 
detailed account of Drusilla, the wife of 
Felix, agrees with St. Luke's statement that 
she "was a Jewess," and is beyonddoubt true. 
Ver. 25. — And temperance for temperance, 
A.V. ; the judgment for judgment, A. V. ; «)os 
terrified for trembled, A.V. ; and when for 
when, A.V. ; call thee unto me for call, for 
thee, A.V. 

Ver. 26.— Withal for also, A.V. ; would he 
for should have been, A.V. ; that he might 
loose him is omitted in the B.T. and E.V. ; 
wherefore also for wherefore, A.V. Sent for 
him the oftener. The mixture of conviction 
with covetouauess in the mind of Felix as 
the motive for seeing Paul is observable. 
As in other cases of double-mindedness, the 
convictions were doubtless stifled by the 
corrupt avarice, and so came to nothing. 

Ver. 27. — Wlten two years were fulfilled 
for after two yeart, A.V. ; Felix was suc- 
teefied by Porciut Festus for Pordus Fcntua 
tajne into Vrlijc* room, A.V. ; desiring to gain 



favour with the Jews for witting to ihow thi 
Jews a pleaiwre, A.V. ; in bonds for bounds 
A.V. ; Felix is also transposed. Was suc- 
ceeded by; ^\a$e SidSoj(oi/. This word 
occurs only here in the New Testament, but 
is used twice in Ecclesiastious. It is also, 
as ttbuve noted, the identical word used by 
Josephus of Festus. But in oh. xxv. 1 
Festus's government is called an iirapxl'h 
and Josephus (' Ant. Jud.,' xx. viii. 11) calls 
Festus an iwapxos, instead of the more usual 
iTrirpoTros. Could Josephus have seen the 
Acts of the Apostles? Poroius Festus 
Josephus speaks of him as sent by Nero to 
be the " successor " (StdSoxos) of Felix 
(' Ant. Jud.,' XX. viii. 9 ; ' Bell. Jud.,' ii. xiv. 
1). Nothing is known of him from Tacitus 
or other Latin historians, and he appears 
from Josephus's account to liave held the 
government for a very short time, probably 
less than two years, when he died ('Ant. 
Jud.,' XX. ix. 1). But the impression derived 
from Josephus is the same as that conveyed 
by St. Lute, that he was a just and upright 
ruler, in marked contrast with Felix his 
predecessor, and his successors Albinus and 
Gessius Florus. Desiring to gain favour (x</- 
piTc KaToBicrBai) ; literally, to lay up in store 
good will, or favour, or a boon, to be re- 
quited at some future period. A frequent 
phrr.se in the best classical authors. Felix 
had good reason thus to try and put the 
Jews under obligation to him at the close of 
his government. For the danger was great 
to the retiring governor of complaints being 
sent to the emperor ot oppression and 
plunder, which were often listened to and 
punished. Joseplius relates, in point of fact, 
that the chief Jews in Csesarea sent au 
embassy to Rome to lodge a charge against 
Felix before Nero ; and that he only escaped 
punishment by the influence of his brother 
Pallas (' Ant. Jud.,' xx. viii. 9). 

The scene in this chapter is a very strik- 
ing one, depicted with admirable simpli- 
city and force. The bloated slave sitting 
on the seat of judgment and power, repre- 
senting all the worst vices of Boman de- 
generacy. The heads of the sinking Jewish 
commonwealth, blinded by bigotry and 
nearly mad with hatred, forgetting for the 
moment their abhorrence of their Roman 
masters, in their yet deeper detestation of 
the Apostle Paul. The hired advocate with 
his fulsome flattery, his rounded periods, and 
his false charges. And then the great 
apostle, the noble confessor, the finished 
Christian gentleman, the pure-minded, up- 
right, and fearless man, pleadiu" his own 
cause with consummate force and dignity, 
and overawing his heathen judge by tha 
majesty of hig character. It is k graphic 
description of a very noble goeae. 



OH. XXIV. 1—27,] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 235 



H0MILETHJ5. 

Vers. 1 — 27. — " Not this man, hut Barahhas." There are many gradations of the 
iruth stated in 1 Sam. xxi. 7, " The Lord seeth not as man seeth," and the correspond- 
lag truth, "That which is highly eateemid among men is abomination iu the sight of 
God." But both passages mark distincily how often the judgment of man diverges from 
the judgment of God, or in other words, how far men often are fj om " jiidging righteous 
judgment" concerning persons and things which come under their notice. This false or 
erroneous judgment proceeds from two causes. The first is the comparative ignorance 
of man. He forms his judgment oftentimes on insufficient gmunds. His mental vision 
only takes in a portion, sometimes a very small portion, of the materials upon which 
a sound judgment sliould be based. In the instances to which 1 Sam. xvi. 7 refers, 
iSamuel, judging by the fair looks and commanding stature of Eliab, thought he must he 
tit to be the ruler of Israel. His eye could not discern the heart, the hidden character 
of the man. And so it continually happens. We base our judgments on insufficient 
premises, being ignorant of those things which, if known, would influence them 
m an opposite direction. The practical lesson to be drawn from this view of the erro- 
neous judgments of men is threefold. 1. To be diligent in adding to our knowledge 
whenever we are called upon to form a judgment. 2. To be always diffident and modest 
in regard to our own conclusions. 3. VVhenever our judgments do not agree with those of 
Holy Scripture, to be sure that the disagreement arises from our own ignorance, and to 
submit ourselves accordingly. But the second cause of men's erroneous judgments is 
not mere ignorance, but injustice and unfairness of mind. Men misjudge others because 
they are influenced by hatred, prejudice, self-interest, and other corrupt motives. They 
are like the unjust judges spoken of by Isaiah (v. 23), " who justify the wicked for 
reward, and take away the righteousness of the righteous from him." A large part of 
the favourable and unfavourable judgments of the world are of this character. We 
hare a typical example of this in the chapter before us, Here are two men standing 
on the stage of observation. One is Felix. We know him as a cruel, licentious, 
unrighteous man, steeped in blood, rich by oppression, profligate in conduct. We know 
liim as one the meanness of whose servile origin broke through the crust of the splen- 
dour of his official greatness. We know him as a man raised to power by the most 
corrupt and shameful influences which have ever prevailed in national affairs, and 
abusing that power to the utmost under the screen of an infamous security. By his 
side stands another man, certainly one of the greatest fii;ures among the great men of 
the world, and one of the very best among the very good of the children of men. It 
is the Apostle Paul. For his mighty victories in the world of mind and spirit he 
might have borne surnames from provinces of the East and of the West, more glorious 
than those of the Africani and Germanici of the Koman commonwealth. For energy 
of action, for dauntless cotirage, for in*chaustible resource, for masterful vigour of 
character, for lofty eloquence, for influence over the minds of other men, he stands abreast 
with the greatest of the earth's heroes. For absolute disinterestedness, for unsullied 
purity, for overflowing benevolence, for ardent and glowing kindness, for self-sacrifice, for 
self-restraint, for uprightness, for truth, for generosity, for laborious well-doing, for con- 
sistency of life, for perseverance through every hindrance and oontradiotioft in a sublime 
and noble purpose, for tenderness and faitlifnliSess to friends, and for ungrudging service 
to his Divine Master, where shall we find his equal ? What, then, was the judgment 
passed on these men respectively — this Felix and this Paul ? Felix is thanked and 
belauded for his " very worthy deeds ; " Paul is " a pi stilent fellow ; " " Away with him 
from the earth : it is not fit that he should live ! " And so we are reminded of another 
judgment, the unanimous judgment of a great multitude: "Not this man, but 
Barabbasi " and we are put upon our guard against the judgments of men. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOEa 

Vera. 1 — 23, 26, 27. — Malice, innocency, and power. We have illustrated here — 
I. Tks weapons of malice. 1. Persistent hatred. It was a long journey t« 



236 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLEa [oh. xxrv. 1—27 

CsBsarea, and it was a most humiliating thing, to which they were utterly ayerse, for thi 
high priest and the elders to appear before the Roman judge to get their countrymen 
into their own power ; nevertheless the undying hatred, the animosity which did not 
diminish by time carried them through their distasteful work. 2. Disgusting flattery 
(vers. 2, 3). 3. Gross misrepresentation (ver. 5). Paul had caused no little dissension 
and conflict among his fellow-countrymen, but it was simple perversion of the truth to 
call him a " pestilent fellow," etc. 4. Offensive characterizatiou (ver 5). Paul was 
" a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes ; " but malice put his position into the mr/st 
offensive form it could command. 5. Downright falsehood (ver. 6). He had not " gone 
about to profane the temple." These various falsities came from the lips of TertuUus, 
but they were owned and adopted by the Jews (ver. 9). To such baseness malice will 
stoop to compass its ends ; to such iniquity professed piety will condescend when 
inflamed by the imholy heats of bigotry. 

II. The defence of innocence. 1. Courtesy (ver. 10). We may not flatter, but we 
must be courteous and conciliatory (1 Pet. iii. 8 ; 1 Sam. xxv. 23 — 33). 2. Straight- 
forward statement (vers. 11, 14 — 17). There is no better way by which to prove our 
integrity than telling the whole truth from beginning to end, with perfect frankness. 
3. Fearless denial (vers. 12, 13, 18). We should solemnly deny, in calm and dignified 
language, that which is falsely alleged afjainst us ; in quietness and composure rather 
than in vehemence and loud protestation, is our strength. 4. Righteous challenge 
(vers. 19, 20). We may do well to face our accusers with bold and righteous challenge 
(John viii. 46). 

III. The pitifdxness of UNEiGHTEOtrsNESS IN POWER. Felix (1) gave an unrighteous 
decision, for the case had broken down, and Paul should have been released; (2) 
hankered after a bribe (ver. 26) ; was willing to sell justice for money ; (3) left his posi- 
tion with an act of selfish injustice (ver. 27). He presents a pitiful picture both as a 
public administrator and as a private individual. How little to be envied are those 
who climb to high stations! How contemptible is power when it is perverted to mean 
and selfish ends I How admirable, how enviable in comparison, is innocence in insignifi- 
cance or even in bonds ! — C. 

Vers. 15, 16. — A powerful incentive to a noble life. Between the life of the meanest 
and basest men on the one hand, and that of the purest and noblest on the other, what 
an immeasurable spiritual space intervenes ! We look here at — 

I. A NOBLE HUMAN LIFE. There are those who, in the ordering of their life, never 
rise above (1) a consideration of their own enjoyment or acquisition. There are 
others who never rise higher than (2) the consideration of others which is bom of 
natural affection ; that which springs from the ties of kindred and, perhaps, common 
interest or companionship. Others again there are who get as far as (3) political or 
national enthusiasm. But they only are worthy of the One " with whom they have to 
do," and reach the full stature of their manhood, who are constrained by (4) the sense 
of obligation to God and to man. Paul " exercised himself to have always a conscience," 
etc. Here was : 1. A lofty aim. " To have a conscience void of offence toward God, 
and toward men." This means something more than the avoidance of the darker sins 
and the greater crimes, of those misdeeds which stamp a man as a sinner and a criminal 
in the eyes of the world. It means (1) righteousness in the sight of the Supreme ; the 
being counted righteous by God, and the attainment of positive righteousness like his 
own ; so that a man is living in a state of abiding acceptance with God, and is also 
walking before him in uprightness and integrity of heart and life. It means also (2) 
recognition of the claims of men on our regard, and the consequent shaping of our life 
in purity, honesty, truthfulness, helpfulness; so that a man has not to reproach him- 
self either with acts of injury or with negligence and inconsiderateness ; he has a 
" conscience void of offence " toward men as well as toward God. 2. A comprehensive 
view. Paul aimed to be conscientious at all times, in all things (5ii irai^<ij). And we 
know that this was more than a figure of speech ; it could hardly be said to be in any 
way hyperbolical. He did strive to act with a good conscience always. With whom- 
soever he had to do, in whatsoever he was engaged, he sought to act faithfully. And 
the truly noble life is one in which the humbler as well as the higher activities and 
endurances are regulated by holy and heavenly principles. 3. An earnest endeavour j 



OH. xxrr. 1— 27.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 287 

" I exercise myself," i.e. " I strenuously endeavour," " I put forth my whole energy," 
" I labour." Paul's action amounted to something vastly more than an occasional senti- 
ment or • feeble futile effort ; it was an earnest aspiration spending; itself in vigorous 
exertion. He cultivated his spiritual powers ; he trained himself in holy habits ; he 
wrestled with the adversaries of his soul ; he did stem battle with the lower propensi- 
ties ; he strove to exliibit the graces which are dear to God, the virtues which are valu- 
able to men. 

II. A POWERFUL mcBNTiVB TO LIVE IT. (Ver. 15.) We may draw many powerful and 
all-sufficient incentives to rectitude from considerations which are at hand. 1. Our 
supreme obligation to God, the Divine Author of our being and Source of all our 
joy. 2. Our influence upon our fellow-men, and the effect our life has on theirs. 3. The 
elevated jey we have in the consciousness of rectitude, both of integrity of heart and 
innocency of life. But we shall do well to add this other also : 4. The hope of future 
blessedness; including (1) the approval of the Divine Master; his " Well done" (Matt. 
XXV. 21) ; and (2) the extended sphere he will appoint the faithful (Matt. xxv. 21). — C. 

Ters. 24, 25. — Bare heroism and common folly. There are two main points well 
worthy of attention. 

I. An act of moral heroism particularly rare. Paul " reasoned of righteous- 
ness, continence, and judgment to come." It requires some courage for a man tu 
address a company of his fellows, even when he feels sure that they will be sympa- 
thetic ; it demands other and far higher courage to address a number of men, when it is 
certain they will be unsympathetic ; but it requires higher devotedness still, it demands 
heroism of a rare order for one man to use the language of remonstrance and rebuke 
when speaking to another man, particularly when that other is the stronger and higher 
of the two. Vox the poor man, the captive, the accused, the one who stood absolutely 
in the other's power, to "reason of righteousness, continence, and judgment to come," 
to the imrighteous and dissolute judge, who had so much ground for dreading the future, 
— ^for Paul thus to expostulate with Felix was heroism itself. Let us thank God that- 
he gave us such a man, to do such a work, at such a time in the history of our race 
Let us emulate his spiritual nobility. High courage is, in part, a gift to he thankfully 
accepted; but it is also, in part, a grace to be studiously acquired. Paul was the ifaith- 
ful man he proved himself at Oiesarea, not only because his Creator endowed him witli 
a fearless spirit, but because (1) he placed himself on the right side — on the side of 
truth, of righteousness, of God ; and because (2) he cultivated carefully the convictiot. 
that infinite power and love surrounded him with its constant care. He could always say, 
" The Lord stood by me." This is the secret of spiritual nobility, of moral heroism. 

II. An act of spiritual folly painfully common. " Fehx trembled." His 
° agitation should have passed at once into resolution ; he should have said at once, " I 

will return on my way ; I will turn my back on my old sins ; I will be a new man, 
living a new life." But he did not ; he made terms with his old self ; he temporized ; ho 
played with his opportunity ; he resorted to evasion, to self-deception ; he excused 
himself; he said, "Go thy way; when I have," etc. O well-worn, much-trodden path 
of self-excuse, along whose pleasant way such thousands of travellers have gone on to 
their ruin ! This is how we commit spiritual suicide, how we go to our death I We do 
not say presumptuously, "I will not ; " we say feebly, falsely, fatally, " I will soon," 
"I will when " There are three strong reasons against delay under religious con- 
viction. 1. It is a guilty thing. We blame our children when they hesitate or linger 
instead of rendering prompt and unquestioning obedience ; but we are more bound than 

they to implicit and unhesitating obedience to the Supreme. " I will when " 

means " I will not now." It is rebelliousness of spirit put in the least flagrant form ; 
but it is still rebellion; it is a state of sin. 2. It is a delusive thing. We defer, 
imagining that we shall find ourselves able and willing to do the right thing further on. 
But we have no right to reckon on this ; for: (1) Outward hindrances tend to become 
stronger rather than weaker. Life becomes more and more complicated, companions 
grow more numerous and urgent, difficulties and entanglements thicken, as our days go 
by ; the hedge before us becomes thicker and higher continually. (2) And inward and 
spiritual obstacles become more difficult to surmount ; the habit of the soul to-day is 
the finest silken thread which the child's finger may snap, but it wUl short?" become 



238 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. miv. 1—27 

the strong oaWe which the giant's strength will be unable to divide. Well does Scrip- 
ture speak of " the deceitfulness of sin." 3. It is a fatal thing. If vice has slain its 
thousands, and pride its thousands, surely procrastination has slain its tens of thousands. 
The man who is consciously and determinately refusing to serve God knows where he 
stands and what he is ; he knows that he is a rebel against God, standing on perilous 
ground. But he who thinks he is about to enter the kingdom, or even dreams of so 
doing, shelters himself under the cover of his imaginary submission, and goes on and 
on, until sinful habit has him in its iron chain, or until " pale-faced Death " knocks at 
his door, and he is found unready. 

" Oh, 'tis a mournful story, 
Thus on the ear of pensive eve to tell. 
Of morning's firm resolve the vanished glory, 
Hope's honey left to wither in the cell. 
And plants of mercy dead that migbt have bloomed go welL* 

a 

Vers. 1 — 23. — Paul before Felix. L Tbrtullus and Pattl : a contbast. Between 
false and spurious eloquence. False rhetoric, as Plato taught, always owes its power to 
its flattering the passions of the audience. So here the orator addresses himself directly 
to the magistrate's self-love. It is pretty clear that Felix, instead of being the bene- 
ficent ruler he is described as being, must have been well hated by the people for his 
vices and oppression. Later they accused him to the emperor. Flattery is a great 
solvent. The great gain the little, and not less the little gain the great to their ends 
by it. " Great lords, by reason of their flatterers, are the first to know their own 
virtues, and the last to know their own vices" (Selden). "Know that flatterers are the 
worst kind of traitors " (Sir W. Raleigh). On the other hand, true eloquence speaks to 
the heart and conscience (ver. 10). Paul indulges Felix in no flattering complimentary 
titles. He respects the office and the existing order which it represents, true to his 
teaching in Eom. xiii. ; but not the bad man in the oBice. He speaks with freedom 
and boldness. He avows himself the member of a despised sect. He is a Nazarene. 
But Christianity is no newly invented heresy, nor does the gospel depart from the faith 
of the fathers. Rather Christ's gospel their spiritual sum and substance, the end and 
goal of the old covenant. All that is true in any of our sects is continuous with the 
old ; what is quite novel is probably not true. The simple words of Paul contain a fine 
defence of persecuted opinions. 1. They are not of yesterday. 2. The future belongs 
to them. 3. Meanwhile, the great thing we exercise is a good conscience. If they are 
really conscientious, force cannot put them down. 

II. The Chbistiah's best defence. 1. " To have a conscience void of offence." Reli- 
gion which does not aim at this and end in this, is vain ; otherwise a mere matter of the 
head, or of hereditary habit, an occasion of contention and source of division, chaff 
without wheat, and a shadow without life. A life that will bear the inspection of men 
and of God, the only certificate of true religion ; or rather, the endeavour for such a 
life. The " exercise of one's self in worthy habits, to noble ends. 2. Hope is ever con- 
nected with the good conscience. The hope of the resurrection not a doctrine the 
splendour of which first appears in the New Testament pages; it appears in bright 
glimpses in the Old from the time of the Babylonian Captivity onward. In some form 
it lives and burns at the heart of all genuine faith and religion. With a joyous con- 
fession on the lips, a clear conscience in the bosom, an innocent life-record behind one, 
the just judgment of God before one's expectation, — ^here are the defences of the 
Christian against the arrows of calumny. — J. 

Vers. 24 — 27. — The Divine Word and the conscience, L Lovinq the sotmD of the 
GOSPEL, BUT NOT THE QOSPEL ITSELF. There Is sUver music in the message of recon- 
ciliation to man's distracted heart ; but the call to repentance as the necessary condition 
of peace, this is discordant with passion and self-will. And there are grave errors here. 
Some suppose that the gospel renders the moral law superfiuous ; others, that the 
freedom of the conscience under the gospel means licence; others take faithful reproof 
as personal affront ; noany are luider the dominion of sense, and the will is captive to 
the lusts of the flesh. 



BH. xiiT. 1— 27.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 339 

n. Why many never become seeious Chbistians. 1. They have not the resolution 
for thorough repentance, to break utterly with the evil past. 2. They neglect the 
acceptable time and the day of salvation. " The golden grace of the day "* flees, and 
never comes back to them. 3. They tlirust aside the thought of judgment to come. 
Though they know the vanity of the world, they are too indolent to tear themselves 
from its deceptive pleasures. Disgusted with the hateful bondage of sin, they are too 
weak to break off their fetters. Superficial impressions are felt, but frivolity admits no 
deep impressions. 

in. The excuses op the sinner. 1. Certain subjects are not in gouJ tasiu. Speak 
to me of everytliing but that I Generalize on virtue and goodness, but let my favourita 
waaknessetl or vices alone ! 2. Procrastination. " To-morrow 1 " 

"To-morrow and to-morrow 
Creeps in this petty pace from day to day. 
To the last syllable of recorded time ; 
And all our yesterdays have lighted foola 
The way to dusty death." 

"Procrastination is the thief of time. 
Year after year it steals till all are fled, 
And to the mercies of a moment leaves 
The vast concerns of on eternal time." 

The time of repentance is now and always for him who is willing. For 6od is ever 
calling, inwardly and outwardly ; in every circumstance time can be foimd to obey. 
But never for him who cannot find it seasonable to listen t(j God at any time, " Ye shall 
seek me, and shall not find me, and shall die in your sins " (John viii. 21). 

IV. An exahfle of oenttine pbeackinq. 1. He speaks of repentance and its 
fruits; justice towards our neighbour; personal purity; sober recollection of the 
Divine judgment. 2. Its powers. The preacher is a slight and insignificant man, yet 
he makes the powerful magistrate tremble. He is bound in one sense, yet in another 
free, and the lord is the real slave. He is the accused ; yet quickly he changes parts 
with Felix. Paul is the liero in the light of truth and of eternity, Felix the coward 
and the abject. If we are on the side of truth, the Word of God becomes a sword in 
our band. If we are opposed to it, we must be fatally pierced by it. — J. 

Vers. 1—9. — The governor's court. Time given to Paul for special preparation, 
possibly for communication with fellow-believers in Cassarea. The relation of the 
parties to one another. The Roman ruler ; his character one of the blackest : " In 
the practice of all kinds of lust and cruelty, he exercised the power of a king with the 
temper of a slave " (Tacitus). The calm, heroic, lofty-minded apostle ; rejoicing that 
an opportunity would be given him of proclaiming the gospel in such a place, and 
upheld by the Divine assurance that he was sate. The representatives of the San- 
hedrim ; Ananias, the elders, and the paid orator Tertullus, evidently feeling the 
weakness of their cause, half ashamed of their position in attacking a defenceless 
man, ready for hypocritical plotting, and yet knowing that no dependence could be 
placed on Felix. 

L A SAD PICTURE OP THE WORLD as it was at that time. The corruption of judges, 
th« despotism of rulers, tlie furious hatreds and evil passions at work, the blindness 
of fanaticism, the decay of religious life in the nation which had received most religious 
teaching and privileges. 

IL As EXAMPLE OP OALUMNT AND MISREPRESENTATION. Th« charges made were of 
political rebellion, of heresy, of sacrilege, of disorder. The first was insincere ; for the 
priests among the Jews cared nothing about preserving Eoman rule. The others were 
instigated by fear of Paul's teaching, partly due to ignorance, but mainly to bigotry 
and jealousy. They knew that if the gospel was accepted, their own priestly power 
was gome. Truth is always stronger than falsehood. — B. 

Vers. 10 — 21. — The Just man's deftnct. Twofold — negative ; positive. The tentr- 
iations met by a clear and bold denial. Over against the false representation a simpt* 
and candid statement of his position as a private and public man. Notice—* 



240 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xxiv, 1— 27, 

L The apostle stood firmly on the ground of LiBBBTT OP C0N80IEII0E. They accused him 
of heresy ; he maintained that his conscience was void of offence towards God and man. 

IL The foundation of confidence is tiib Word op God — the Law, the prophets, the 
true traditiou of the fathers. All these things the apostle believed. 

IIL The eesukreotion was the great stumbling-block to the Jews, but the great 
support of the apostolic faith. The position taken in the Sanhedrim is maintained 
before Felix. The resurrection is the vital point of the new faith. 

IV. The zeal of the Christian was quite consistent with patriotism. There was 
nothing revolutionary in the method of Christian teaching. The disturbance was 
simply due to the presence of a new element of life among old corruption. So always, 
the world is turned upside down by earnestness, because it ia already the wrong side 
upwards. — B. 

Ver. IB.— Practical religion. "And herein do I exercise myself," etc. Circumstances 
of the case justify the self-assertion. We must not be afraid to give our own example 
as a testimony to the truth. 

L Practical religion is founded on the heartfelt aoceptanob op the Word of God. 
"Herein," i.e. in the faith just described, distinguished from: 1. The irreligion of 
Felix ; iadiiference and direct opposition to God. 2. The blind bigotry of Pharisaism ; 
mere worship of the letter of Scri|iture and tradition; an excuse for conscientious life. 
3. The speculative unbelief of Sadducees. Eationalism. Intellectual pride. Faith made 
living in Christ. The facts of the gospel opened the secrets of the Scriptures to Paul. 
Jesus became to him the Word of Life. 

II. Practical religion demands constant effort. "I exercise myself." 1. Not 
asceticism, but zealous endeavour to do good in proclamation of the gospel. 2. Faithful 
and heroic patience under the trials of life. 3. The showing forth of Christian cha- 
racter before the world for a testimony, both by the blameless conduct, and by the 
calm and bold defence of the truth when necessary. The secret of strength and 
courage is a conscience void of offence. Those who do not exercise themselves both 
give offence and find ofi'ence. " If God be ior us, who can be against us ? " — B. 

Vers. 22 — 27 (or ver. 25). — The character of Felix in the light of Christianity. 
I. The corrupt judge. Selling justice for bribes, delaying sentence in hope of gain, 
either from the Jews or from Paul. The influence of Christianity in purifying courts of 
law. JuHge Hale. Room for improvement still as Christian equality banishea all 
distinctions between rich and poor. Justice is still too dear. 

U. The man with seared conscience. In contrast with him who exercises himself 
to have a conscience void of offence. The light of education, of contact with Judaism 
through Drusilla, of knowledi;e of facts at Caesarea, all darkened by sensuality, avarice 
worldly power, constant trifling with conscisnce. He could tremble at truth, but even 
while trembling was ready to sell it for his own vicious pleasures. He felt its force, 
but steadfastly resisted it, and even sent again and again for Paul, in hope to make 
gain out of him. 

III. The triflbr with opportunity. Preaching may move the feelings without 
changing the heart. Behind the procrastination there is generally a moral corruption 
hidden. The opportunities which are trifled with harden the heart and hasten the 
judgment. Felix knew not the time of his visitation. Judgment fell on him, and the 
Jews, to whose wickedness he pandered, became his accusers before Csesar. No season is 
more convenient than the present, when the voice of God says, " Repent 1 " — R. 

Ver. 5. — The indictment that was a self-indictment. The preparations for the 
indictment of Paul before Felix had been well considered. Somewhat formidable, save 
to the strong heart, and that divinely refreshed (ch. xxiii. 11), most concerned in the 
matter, must the legal phalanx have appeared, when Ananias the high priest, and the 
elders, and their practised professional helper TertuUus, and others of the Jews, made 
their apfiearance. The speech containing the accusation against Paul, which began 
with fi^tkry for a Felix, not unnaturally culminates in falsehood hurled at Paul, and 
mockery flung at the Nassarene. The portraiture of perverseness such as this is no 
novelty ; yet some peculiarity in the featuring may be found here. A new touch ot 



OH. XXI?. 1—27.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 241 

two fails not to give some new expression to the countenance. What a mournful 
commentary on human nature, that it i§ necessary to contemplate its worst expression 
of countenance, and to study, not the model to copy, but the type false and debased to 
avoid! Consider, therefore — 

I. What it is that is undebltino the fact that the faithpul teaoheb of 
Chbist is described as " PESTILENT." Thcse are the two things that underlie the ugly 
fact. 1. That it is the depths of a muddy nature that are reached. 2. That it is 
something that has the undisputed power to reach those depths that is present and 
working. The " pestilence " was all subjective to TertuUus and friends. The strong 
force was the force of Christ, 

IL What it is that underlies the fact that the dbvelopin& manifestations 

OF Gk)D's MIND TO THE WOBLD HAVE SO UNIFORMLY FROM THE FIRST PROVOKED NOT 
A FEW TO VOTE THEM NOTHINO BETTER THAN THE SIGNS OF SEDITION. These are at 

least some of the things thac underlie the fact. 1. That the unfolding of God's mind 
and pm-pose to the world always means war with its inertness. The keen appetites of 
the world are not to true knowledge, not to godly activity, not to wisdom's perfect 
work. 2. That the growing manifestation of God to manliind always means a summons 
to simpler, purer, more determined holiness and height of life. The stir and report 
that swell round the echoes of the voice summoning men in this sort are indeed sedition 
to their stifled order of life and of habit and of affection. It is not in them to " seek 
for honour, glory, and immortality." God's greater, better, clearer gifts necessarily 
postulate a truer human return of them, and a correcter reflection. 

III. What it is that underlies the fact that the purest following of the 

PUREST TRUTH AND OF THE HIGHEST IDEAL WHICH GoD HAS GIVEN TO MEN HAS SO 
often GATHERED OVER ITS INNOCENT HEAD THE WORST ACCUMULATIONS OF MISCON- 
STRUCTION, MISREPRESENTATION, AND FALSEHOOD. A notable instance is here before 
us. The polished orator, the trained and keen lawyer, heaps the epithets, every one 
ill or of ill omen, " pestilence," " sedition," " ringleader," " sect," " the Nazarenes " 
These were the fruit of a tongue rather than merely a pen "dipped in gall." And false 
is the word stamped, as a monogram is stamped, on every one of them. These are some 
at least of the causes at work under the fact. 1. That reason, opportunities of know- 
ledge, convictions, conscience injured, ignored, insulted, know terrible ways of revenge, 
and a terrible force of revenge. Obscurity becomes thick darkness ; mistake becomes 
wilful preference for the wrong ; one sin becomes a multitude. 2. That a certain sort 
of heart, once deeply conscious, without the slightest readiness to acknowledge it, that 
it is losing, loses also itself, loses its self-control, and finds itself drifted, hurried, 
hounded on to senseless lengths. Heaven's sweetest beneficence — for this it has 
nothing but the vocabulary of traducing slander. 

Conclusion. These things are not the necessities and inevitable things of human 
nature. They are results of permitted unfaithfulness, condoned infidelities, encouraged 
wilfulness, and deliberate defiance of tmth, in place of devoted affiance to it. Deep 
need the roots of them to be sought, that without mercy they may be uprooted and 
exterminated. And they need the prayer earnestly offered, " Search me, God, and 
know my heart : try me, and know my thoughts : and see if there be any wicked way 
in me, and lead me in the way everlasting." — B. 

Vers. 10 — 21. — The defence of Paul. The simplest analysis of ttie defence wMch 
Paul here made for himself is its highest praise. The matter of it must be closely 
dependent upon the occasion, but the characteristics of its methcid must be good for all 
occasion, and imitable to all generations. Notice in this defence — 

I. Its address to the judge, ungarnished by a hollow compliment. The 
contrast which is presented in this respect to the introduction of TertuUus speaks for 
itself. There is here nothing but simple truth. 

IL The honest businesslike poqitedness with which it proceeds to its one 
task. " I do the more cheerfully answer for myself," says Paul. He could never 
answer for himself with hope of any ordinary justice before a couricil of his own 
people. But now, while this is Ms one task to answer for himself, and he takes to it 
immediately, he does not refrain from saying that there are aspects of the case which 
enable him to throw himself with spirit into his work. 

ACTS— n. ft 



242 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLEb. [oh. xxir. 1— 27. 

III. ITB ENTIRB ABSTINENCaE FBOM ANYTHING BEARINa THE REMOTEST EEBBMBLAKCH 

TO ABU8K OF EiB AOOCBEBS. Paul denies the allegations laid to his charge, shows to 
an experienced judge that there was very little time in which the things alleged could 
possibly have occurred, and challenges, by a direct contradiction, the ability of his highly 
respectable accusers to prove their assertions and make out their charges. But 
through all there is not a word that sounds like " pestilent feUow," or " iedition," or 
" ringleader." 

IV. Its dikeot fkketratino to what lay at the heart op the matter. 
This was a difference " in the way of worshipping God." The keen Eoman judge (and 
Paul knew it and correctly took advantage of his knowledge) was not likely to be so 
very anxious to lend the force of Roman law and a Roman executive to the mere bid- 
ding of Jewish bigotry and ecclesiasticism. 

V. Its honouring before one who knew little and thought less of it, oon- 
sciBNCB the foundation pbinciplb OF ALL RELIGION. Paul does not blow contempt 
upon the truths or methods of religion, even in that shape ot religion least understood 
or honoured by Felix, revealed religion. He declares : 1. His conscience. 2. His living 
constant care of it. 3. His acknowledgment of the necessity of training it to correct- 
ness and to vigour. 4. His recognition of its twofold duty, (1) toward God and (2) 
toward man. In all this, there can be no doubt that Paul honoured his God, his reli- 
gion, and his individual conscience, with no hope of any deep sympathy, on the part ot 
Felix indeed, but also without any fear of the high priest Ananias aj^ain daring to order 
them to " smite him on the mouth." 

VL Its very evident but none the less consummatb stroke of policy, in 
poiNTmo to the fact of the strange absence of some witnesses, and the 

BTRANQEB SILENCE OF OTHERS ALTHOUGH THEY WERE PRESENT. Paul Calls attention 

to the fact that these two things speak for themselves. And finally challenges once 
more contradiction of this position, that he had not been the originator of any distur- 
bance whatever, much less seditious disturbance in Jerusalem, imless his famous inter- 
polation, " Touching the resurrection of the dead I am called in question by you this 
day," could be interpreted as such. But Paul knew this challenge could not be taken 
lip, both because the Pharisees sided with him in the matter on the very occasion, and 
because the disturbance was one as between the rival theologies of the Jews, and not 
as between mere civilians. The correctness, cogency, calmness, of this defence made up 
its masterly convincingness. There could be no doubt which party had the moral 
victory of the day. There can be no doubt of the fallen countenances of Ananias and 
elders and Tertullus. And there can be no doubt that, in this very defence, the accused 
Christian may bear to the end of the world words not altogether unlike these : 
" After this manner, therefore, defend ye yourselves." — B. 

Ver. 14. — The confession of a coherent worship and faith, Paul ii, of course, at no 
loss to account for the enmity of the Jews manifested toward him. And it is his 
intention that his judge shall overhear, if not hear, the true state of the case. He has 
vindicated himself and will still vindicate himself against the ostensible accusations laid 
to his charge. But now he pierces beneath all pretences and appearances, and touches 
firm ground. And the concisest way of conveying his view of the state of things to his 
judge lies in a very simple confession of his religion. To which we may consider (as 
suggested by Paul's language here) two things to be essential. They are — 

I, Worship. And Paul is able to say these three things all distinctly germane to 
the confession. 1. That he worships. 2. That he worships Ood. 3. That h« worships 
the Ood of his fathers, i.e. the very same God whom his accusers profess to worship. 

II. A DEFINITE FAITH. An intelligible faith makes an informed instead of a »uper- 
stitious worship. ' There are ways and ways, of worship. And these follow very con- 
sistently the faith that is held. Notice : 1. That Paul very decidedly pronounces for 
himself that his faith embraces "all things written in the Law and the prophets." 
2. He implies that the faith of his enemies failed of this. It fell short, perhaps, partly 
in its very character, but probably much more seriously in its compass. The typical 
Jew of the days of Jesus prided himself in reading the Law literally and fully, though 
with many a corrupt addition. His " way " of interpreting the prophets was of a far 
mote eclectic character. He couldn't see, because he viouldn^t heUeve, the humble and 



€«. xxiT. 1— 27.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 243 

the humbling prophecies of the Messiah. Paul's " heresy " was, in fact, that he believed 
"aU." The Jews' ruining sin was that they would not believe " all." This quietly 
%pokeii sentence of Paul gave the key to all. And it is another comment upon the Jews 
in harmony with that uttered by Jesus himself, " Had ye believed Moses, ye would 
have believed me," etc. (John v. 46). — B. 

Ver. 15 (see also previous Homily on oh. xxiii. 6). — A hope grown from a deep and 
manifold root. The hope that there shall be a resurrection of the dead is here described 
as a " hope toward God." It is hope pre-eminently resting upon God. For — 

I. It 18 THB INSTINCTIVE HOPK TOWABD GOD OF O0B NATDBE GIVEN BY HIM. 

The deep-seated instincts of nature are necessarily among the strongest moral arguments 
of which we can take cognizance. 

II. It 18 THE HOPE TOWABD GOD THAT COMES OF THB CONCLtTSIONS OF OUB 

TBAINED EBABON, A SEASON GIVEN ALSO BY HIM. Reason's arguments upon certain 
highest subjects, iy themselves, may easily be uncertain and fallacious. But as guides 
on the way to other arguments, and as supports of other arguments, they are often very 
significant, very suggestive, very helpful. And it is so to a high degree in this instance. 

III. It is THE HOPE OF THB Cheistian HEART TOWARD GoD. It is the end of the 
gospel to him who believeth. If this hope .fall through, all falls through. The 
Christian's deception becomes an absolutely typical and leading instance of deception 
for the whole world's whole length of history ; and the Christian's disappointment the 
keenest of all disappointments — his collapse making him the most miserable of all men. 

IV. The hope that this resurrection shall include all — the "unjust" as the "just" 

— ^18 A HOPE TOWARD GoD BESTING EMPHATICALLY ON THB TESTIMONY OF HIS OWN 
BEVELATION, AND CONTBIBOTBD TO LABGELY BY CEBTAIN ASPECTS OF HIS JUSTICE WITH 

WHICH THAT REVELATION MAKES US FAMILIAB. In this theme the mystery of 
unfathomable depths of unsearchable wisdom is before us. It enwraps the height of 
highest hope, the deepest things of fear. — B. 

Vers. 24, 25. — The highest powers eluded hy the hea/rt's subterfugei. The immediate 
connection reminds us very forcibly how the man who is the worst friend to himself ii 
sometimes environed with opportunities charged with the offer of mercy. Providence 
and the God of all providence long wait upon him in natural relationships, in his very 
weaknesses, in suggestions and inducements of almost every various kind. How many 
things conspired now to give Felix the opportunity of hearing and knowing the truth ! 
His position, his popularity, his knowledge " of that Way," the fact of his having married 
a Jewess, and even the itching of his hand for a bribe (ver. 26) — things so strangely at 
variance with one another and some of them with goodness — did nevertheless all com- 
bine to make him a hearer of the things greatest and best to be heard. He heard, felt, 
resisted, and lost. And Felix is a great and long-enduring illustration of— 

L The power that libs in the appeals of religious, and specially of 
Christian truth. There are deep vaUd reasons for this. 1. Bight lies with them, by 
the verdict of (1) even reason ; (2) conscience ; (3) experience of practical life. In 
every one of these directions, even to all their ramifications, theie is nothing like a 
mere beating of the air, nothing like mere sound and fury, nothing like vox et prceterea 
nihil, in the appeals of religious truth. Bach appeal is a home-thrust, that purports 
to reach and is fitted to reach what is deepest and most enduring in a man. And each 
appeal is a manifesto in the name of one or more of these grand authorities and arbiters 
of human life. 2. The imaginings, as just as they are instructive (if not first .stifled) 
of the mysterious looming future, lend a large contribution to the power of religious 
appeal. Sometimes they are roused as by the mutterings of distant thunder, sometimes 
as by itrains and snatches of celestial music. The echoes are for some so rich with 
sound, 10 mellow ; or for others they wander as though haunting the empty chambers 
of hollow hearts. The apprehension of the infinite and the infinite future " hangs in 
doubt" before many eyes. But it is not always the apprehension of fear, and whether 
one or the other it does its work. 3. Love, and of an unusual kind, dwells in them. 
The interference with the sacredness and the retiredness of individual thought and feel- 
ing which is offered by religious appeal, and offered also with a certain appearance o( 
ftrbitrMj •uthority, is remarkably counterbalanced by its undisputed disinterestedness, 



244 THE AOitJ OF THE APObTLES. [oh. xxiv. 1— 27. 

Men would never bear to be addressed on any other subject whatsoever in the way and 
in the tone and with the persistency to which they readily yield themselvea in the 
matter of the appeals of religion. And that they sufficiently know nothing but their 
own deepest advantage is aimed at, is the sufBcient account of it. 4. No doubt the 
commanding power of religious appeal — in the sense of convincing power — is due to the 
operation of the Holy Spiiit. 

n. The poweb or kbsistanos to the appeals of religion, which ehfhabizes 
wo TERRIBLY HUMAN RESPONSIBILITY. The deep reality of such power of resistance is 
testified with certainty from the too well-known fact of it. Notice such causes of it 
as are traceable amid the deeper and inscrutable mysteries that cloud the subject. 1. A 
mind really turned from the light and truth. 2. A heart that is strong in ita own 
pride. How many a heart knows the love that is intended for it, yet of pride refuses 
it 1 3. An aversion to effort, specially moral effort ; and to the demand of change 
which it involves in habit and action, specially that form of change called reform. 
4. The grievous facilities for yielding to temptation. Legion is the name of subter- 
fuge in things moral. The wide sweep of opiiortunity for resisting, courts the very 
spirit of him who is open at all to the approach of temptation. The shifts to which 
such will condescend to have recourse are innumerable, unaccountable, and find their 
strict description only as of those " devices of Satan, of which we are not ignorant," 
indeed — " not ignorant " in a double sense — but against which so many are unarmed 
and irresolute in their presence. The versatility also of subterfuge in order to gain the 
end of resistance is amazing. It can blind the eyes of reason and of self-interest. It 
can stifle the conscience and hush to silence the deepest, justest sources of fear. It can 
defy the lessons of practical life. It will induce a man to use the responsible advantages 
of his own highest position to stay, in feeling's most favoured and critical moment, the 
pressure and all the persuasion of moral importunity itself. And to all else, to elude 
the one precious moment of grace, temporizing, procrastinating, playing with time, it 
condescends to the mournfully vain expedient of attempting to throw dust with one 
hand into the eyes of others, and into its own with the other. The moment when 
Felix trembled as he heard the great verities of life aimounced and urged, was the 
lairest moment of his life. But it vanished. And the darkest moment succeeded it all 
swiftly, when Felix not only resisted the pleadings of knowledge, of truth and grace, 
and of the Spirit, but resisted them by the aid of the subterfuges of procrastinating, 
" Go thy way for this time 5 when I have a convenient season. I will call for thee." — ^B. 

Ver. 2. — I'he influence of a good ruler on national evilt. See the rendering in the 
Revised Version, " Seeing that by thee we enjoy much peace, and that by thy provi- 
dence evils are corrected for this nation." How far this may be a true description of 
Felix it may be difficult to decide. The only good thing known of his rule is the ener- 
getic effort which he made to put down the gangs of Sicarii (Assassins) and brigands by 
whom Palestine was infested. Within two years of this very time Felix was recalled 
from his province, and accused by the Jews at Home. He only escaped punishment by 
the intervention of his brother Pallas, then as high in favour with Nero as he had been 
with Claudius. But Tertuilus describes the proper influence of good rulers, and so 
suggests a subject on which we may profitably dwell. 

I. The growth of national evils, especially in a conquered natiok. Certain 
forms of lawlessness are only kept in check by the strong hand of an active, vigorous 
government. In every laud there are criminal classes and revolutionary classes, and 
these make headway as soon as, from any cauBe, the pressure of authority and national 
police is relieved. In a conquered nation there is always a dangerous sympathy with 
the revolutionary classes, which increases burglary, brigandage, and murder. Effective 
illustration may be taken from the recent history of Ireland. 

II. The modes in which such national evils may be corrected. 1. There b the 
simple, but harsh method of conquest by armies, and the crushing down of all expres- 
sions of life by brute force. This, however, never really succeeds. 2. There is the 
slow method of forming aright public opinion, which makes the nation become its own 
police. This often fails, because the demagogue creates an opposing and unworthy 
public opinion. 3. There is the influence gained by the good ruler who can be prompt 
•nd strong, wiie and far-seeing, who loves the people, and master! the evila for tht 



OH. xxrv, 1— 27.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 245 

people's Bakes. Such a ruler secures peace from external quarrels and internal dissea- 
sions, and, in securing peace, bears directly on the people's well-being. He effects all 
reasonable reforms, so as to remove .everything that hinders the national prosperity. 
Show that it becomes us to pray for good rulers ; to seek grace and help for them that 
they may rule well ; and to aid them in carrying out all good schemes. — E. T. 

Ver. 3. — " Most noble Felix ; " or, ike power of the flatterer. Felix was not noble at 
all. Tacitus says of him that " in the practice of all kinds of lust, crime, and cruelty, 
he exercised the power of a king with the temper of a slave." TertuUus had an end to 
gain, and adopted flattery as a means. He was a hired pleader, and selected for the sake 
of his glib eloquence. He could talk well. Men of his class were found in most of 
the provincial towns of the Roman empire. They were necessary because the local 
lawyers would not be sufficiently familiar with tlie proceedings at the lioman courts, 
or with the minute details of Roman law. TertuUus had " learned the trick of his 
class, and began with propitiating the judge by flattery." Canon Farrar says, " Ter- 
tuUus was evidently a practised speaker, and St. Luke has faithfully preserved an out- 
line of his voluble plausibility. Speaking with polite complaisance, as though he were 
himself a Jew, he began hy a fulsome compliment to Felix, which served as the usual 
captatio henevolentiae. AUuding to the early exertions of Felix against the banditti, 
and the recent suppression of the Egyptian false Messiah, he began to assure his 
excellency, with truly legal rotundity of verbiage, of the quite universal and uninter- 
rupted gratitude of the Jews for the peace which he had secured to them, and for the 
many reforms which had been initiated by his prudential wisdom." The subject sug- 
gested for our consideration is this — What are the limits of piaise? How far may we 
go in conciliating others by words of approval and congratulation ? At once it may be 
answered that no praise may go beyond the truth or be out of harmony with the truth. 
But in practical life we have to remember that different persons have different estimates 
of personal character. 1. Some are incompetent to form sound judgment, and such 
persons give praise that is simply unsuitable, but is not spoken with any purpose of 
flattering. 2. Others are prejudiced, and can only see the evil sides of a man's 
character and actions. Their estimates are wholly unworthy. 3. Others are just as 
blind to the evil and as prejudiced to the good, and their estimates, though seemingly 
flattering, are really only exagp;erated and untrustworthy ; they lack criticism, but are 
not insincere. 4. Yet others praise with some object which does not appear ; they liave 
an end to gain, and the praise is regarded simply as a means towrards obtaining the end. 
These are the flatterers, and their characteristic is insincerity. The following points 
may be illustrated concerning the power of the flatterer : — 

I. His MOTIVES. Always some personal end is in view. Usually the flatterer seeks 
to get something that is not in itself right. It is an agency to use when a man's case 
is bad. If a man lacks arguments, he will flatter the jndge. He means to throw him 
off his guard, and to get him into a favourable mind by praises. 

II. His aids in thk person flattered. There is in us all, even in the best of 
men, a self-love that makes praise pleasant. If the flattery is kept well in hand and 
skilfully disguised, even noble natures, even humble natures, may be swayed by it. If the 
flattery is too open and intense, good men are put on their guard and resent the insult. 

HI. The moral mischief op his work. Show the injury that is done to the flatterer 
himself, whoig confirmed in his insincerity when he finds flattery succeed. A man may 
get into such a habit of flattering that he will lose the power to recognize the truth, 
and come to believe in his own exaggerations. Show the injury that is done to the 
'person flattered, who may be led to form an undue estimate of himself, and so be placed 
in positions of extreme moral peril when the hour of temptation comes. If it is wrong 
for us to think of ourselves above that which we ought to think, it must be wholly 
•wrong for any one to flatter us so that our self-opinion is unduly raised. Felix was 
really pushed a little nearer to his fall by this flattery of TertuUus. For Scripture 
teachings concerning flattery, see Ps. xxxvi. 2; Ixxviii. 36; Prov. ii. 16; xx. 19-, 
xxvi. 28 ; xxix. 5, etc. Press the apostolic counsel, " Speak every man truth with his 
neighbour : for we are members one of another " (Eph. iv. 25). — R. T. 

Ver. 14.— J%e way catted heresy. The Revised Version reads, " After the Way whici 



24« THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. ixit. 1— 27 

they call a sect, so serve I the God of our fathers." St. Paul's teachings the Jewish 
party certainly regarded as heresy, and did not liesitate to call heresy. St. Paul urges 
that he did no more than belong to a sect, or section, of the Jews, who, while worship- 
ping according to the Mosaic system, had received, as they believed, some further light 
by the direct revelation of God. To some Jews St. Paul's doctrine of resurrection, 
based upon the feet of the resurrection of Christ, was a heresy. To others his free 
announcement of gospel blessings to the Gentiles was a heresy. But his chief offence 
in the eyes of the more bigoted Jews lay in this, that he freed his Jewish converts 
from the characteristic demands of the Jewish ritual. This was, in their eyes, heresy 
indeed. As indicating a wider use of the term sect than that with which we are 
familiar, it may be noticed that it was used of Jewish sects by Josephus, of schools of 
philosophy by Greek writers generally, and of schools of medicine by Galen. There 
are four sides from which heresy, as a misrepresentation or perrersion of accepted truth, 
may be viewed. 

I. Heeest ab imperillino the tbuth. The apostle speaks distinctly of false 
doctrine, which puts the Christian truth in peril. There are great first principles, great 
foundation truths, and for these we do well to be jealous. But we must clearly see that 
while heresy on these points is dangerous to the Christian faith and life, heresy on 
points which men have been pleased to elaborate— on mere details and accepted formulas 
— have never shaken the rock-built house of truth, and never will. God has given us 
two all-sufficient tests of moral and religious truth. No heresy ever vet has stood the 
application of these two tests. 1. Is the statement in harmony with God's revealed 
Word ? 2. Does it practically work out into that which is good — morally pure and 
good? We need never fear any presentation of so-called truth that is in accord with 
God's Word, and is manifestly " unto holiness." It is God's truth, whatever some may 
call it, if it helps to make men holy. 

II. Heresy as a btnonym fob individuality. This it very often is. A man 
expresses a well-established truth in some new form or new phraseology, and, without 
waiting to examine it, and see if it was only new clothing on the old body of truth, 
his fellow-men raise the heresy shout, and create prejudice against him. St. Paul's 
heresy was only individuality, and God gave him that individuality in order that it might 
make him a holy power. Jews called it heresy, but we have learned to glory in the 
gospel with the Pauline stamp upon it. The lesson taught by the Christian records of 
nearly two thousand years, but which we are strangely unwilling to learn to-day, is 
tlmt we must never crush individuality by the shout of heresy, but thank God for 
sending men who cain clothe his old truth in adaptation to the thought and life of each 
succeeding age. 

III. Heresy as bbquirino judicial inteefbeencb. This men think it does. This 
it never does. God's truth never wants the bolstering of any human courts or judges. 
God's truth asks only one thing from the world's powers and potentates — to he let 
alone. Truth wants the open air and the sunshine, that is all. It can win its own way. 
It can carry its own conviction. It can take care of its own purity. It can cast off 
aU unworthy additions. We greatly need an absolute and unquestioning confidence 
that God's truth is in no danger. It smiles at unbelief and over self-reliant science, 
much as the granite rocks seem to do at the wild careering waves. 

IV. Heresy as the healthy assertion op neqlboted sides of truth. Truth- 
revealed truth — is a great whole, but no one age seems able to take in the whole ; some 
parts are always prominent and some are always in the background ; and there is this 
constant peril, that the truths in the foreground are treated as if they were the whole, 
and any one who brings up to view the neglected aspects is liable to the charge of heresy. 
Many a so-called heresy is only a missed truth or a half-truth ; and then, after men 
have done " calling names," they are glad to accept the teaching. One rule is set 
before us, " Prove all things, hold fest that which is good," whatever may be the name 
by which men call it."— R. T. 

Ver. IG.— Loyalty to Ood and men. " A conscience void of offence toward God, and 
toward men." Bishop Butler's definition of " conscience " can hardly be surpassed. Ha 
gays, " There is a principle of reflection in men, by which they distinguish between, 
approve and disapprove, Uieir own actions. We are plainlj constituted such sort of 



oa. xxiT. 1— 27 J THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 241 



CTPatures as to reflect on our own nature. The mind can take a view of what passes 
within itself, its propensions, aversions, passions, affections, as respecting such objects 
and in such degrees, and of the several actions consequent thereupon. In this survey 
it approves of pne and disapproves of another, and toward a third is affected in neither of 
these ways, but is quite indifferent. This is strictly conscience." (See previous Homily 
on ch. xxiii. 1.) This subject may be fitly introduced by discussing — What is conscience ? 
What is its sphere? and What are its limitations? The expressions in the text 
remind us that the testimonies of our conscience depend upon our cherished standards. 
There ought to be a due recognition of both Divine and human rules, and our conduct 
has to be regulated in view of both. St. Paul presents us the example of the man who 
is loyal to the revealed will of God, and loyal also to the rules which men make for 
the regulation of their social relations. These may indeed sometimes clash, and then 
the true-hearted man must follow out the Law of God, whatever may be the conse- 
quences. But usually there is found a practical harmony between the two, so that the 
moral life is acceptable both to God and man. In estimating the value of others' 
opinion of us, let us remember that the great thing to cherish is our will to that which is 
right, and our inward consciousness of heing right. That conviction was the strength 
of St. Paul. When Plato was told that he had many enemies who spoke ill of him, 
" It is no matter," he said, " I would so live that none should believe them." It may 
be impressed, in conclusion, that the merely natural conscience is practically insufficient 
and untrustworthy as a guide of life ; and it absolutely needs spiritual illumination, a 
quickening by the power of the Holy Ghost. — R. T. 

Ver. 23. — St, Faul't Kberty. " He commanded a centurion to keep Paul, and to let 
him have liberty." It is evident that the prosecution of the apostle by the Jewish 
party had utterly broken down. No charge could be substantiated which made him 
amenable to punishment according to Boman law. If Felix had been &free man, and, 
•8 a judge, free of all other considerations than the doing of justice, he would have 
liberated St. Paul at once, declaring publicly his innocence. But Felix was not free. 
No man is really free who does not dare to do the right. And we can recognize a gracious 
overruling providence in St. Paul's being kept for a while longer imder Roman pro- 
tection. So great was the enmity against him of the Jewish party, that his life would 
have been in extreme peril if he had been liberated. Knowing that he was dealing 
unfairly by the prisoner, and impressed by his dignity of bearing, Felix compromised 
matters with himself, persuaded himself that he could secure Paul from the schemes of 
the Sanhedrim by keeping him prisoner ; put off Paul's enemies by an excuse that he 
would confer with Lysias ; and privately arranged for Paul to have a real, though not 
an apparent, liberty. Through all the ages some of the worst wrongs have been done 
in the name of compromise, which is too often the weak device of those who cannot 
" stand firm to the right." 

I. Felix bound. 1. By the weakness of his moral character. 2. By the desire to 
please an important section of those whom he had to govern. 3. By the consequences 
of his own wrong-doings, which it cost him all his effort to keep off as long as possible. 
4. By the circumstances in which he found himself placed, and which he had no 
strength of will or purpose to master. The man of vice and self-indulgence enervates 
his will, and becomes the slave of his sin as truly as does the drunkard. 

IL Paul apparently bound. He had been tied by a chain to a Eoman soldier day 
and night, according to the usual Roman custom, andi if Felix relaxed this, still Paul 
was a prisoner in the barracks, and probably a soldier-guard waited on him constantly. 
If his friends were free to come to him, he was not free to go out to them. If we 
estimate his character aright, we shall feel that even the slightest form of bondage must 
have been most painful to him. His was a soul so noble than even the limitations of a 
frail body were to him an agony. 

III. Felix getting as fbbb ab possible trom his bonds. Not free enough to say, 
honestly and honourably, " This man is innocent of all crime against the state, and 
must be set at liberty at once." Only able to shake the fetters off enough to say, 
" Forbid none of his acquaintance to minister or come unto him," and only able to giv« 
this order in a private way to the centurion. 

lY. Paul beallt fbek. However be might seem to be still set under outward 



248 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLEa [oh. xxiT. 1— 27, 

limitations, nothing can imprison a man save his own wilful sin. Nobody can put any 
real fetters on any fellow-man. Each man who wears fetters puts them on himself; 
each man who dwells in a prison goes in himself, and himself bolts the door. 

" Stone walls do not a prison mak% 
Kor iron bars a cage." 

But "whosoever committeth sin becomes the slave of sin." So, whatever may hare 
been the limitations of the apostle's circumstances, there was no bondage, for there was 
no conscience of sin. The freedom of Paul (1) to commune with Grod, (2) study the 
truth, (3) to serve the Churches, may be shown ; and it may be pointed out how often 
the very limitations of a man's circumstances, through sickness or persecution, has 
found him the freedom for some great and noble service, as may be illustrated from 
Luther's work while in the Wartburg, and from John Bunyan's work while in Bedford 
jail.— B. T. 

Vers. 24, 25. — The substance of the faith in Christ. From Farrar's ' Life of St. Paul,' 
note to p. 340, vol. ii,, see the relations of Felix to this Drusilla. She was a Jewess by 
birth, and would be interested in a man who was the object of such virulent persecution. 
She had, no doubt, heard of the Prophet of Nazareth, and was likely to show some 
curiosity when one of his leading disciples was a prisoner at the court. Private 
audiences were given to Paul, and he was invited to speak freely concerning " the faith 
in Christ." It is a side light thrown upon the greatness of St. Paul's nature, that he 
used his opportunities at once so skilfully and so nobly. " With perfect urbanity, and 
respect for the powers that be, he spoke of the faith in Christ which he was bidden to 
explain, in a way that enabled him to touch on those virtues which were most needed 
by the guilty pair who listened to his words. The licentious princess must have 
blushed as he discoursed of continence ; the rapacious and unjust governor as he spoke 
of righteousness ; both of them as he reasoned of the judgment to come. Whatever 
may have been the thoughts of Drusilla, she locked them up in her own bosom ; but 
Felix, unaccustomed to such truths, was deeply agitated by them " (Farrar). The 
word " faith " is employed in Scripture with several distinct meanings ; here it is used 
of the Christian doctrine, but St. Paul deals with the practical rather than the theore- 
tical aspects of it. His remarks bore upon that first necessity of Christianity, the con- 
viction of sin. Bungener puts the point of his preaching both succinctly and forcibly 
when ke says, " Paul, as usual, wished to press certain consequences ; and it is always 
against these that people resist, even when they are far better than Felix and Drusilla. 
' He heard him concerning the faith in Christ ; and as he reasoned of righteousness, 
temperance, and judgment to come '-—of righteousness, to a cruel and unjust despot ; of 
temperance, to a debauchee whose very marringe had been but one scandal the more ; 
and of judgment to come, to a man who had doubtless sought in Epicurean negations a 
refuge from the gods — ' then Felix trembled.' " St. Paul's theme finds expression in three 
words : righteousnew, full and honourable discharge of all the duties which man owes to 
God, and man owes to man ; temperance, or the due control of all the appetites and 
passions of the body ; judgment to come, or the certainty that all life-conduct must, 
sooner or later, be perfectly appraised, and due punishment be inflicted. " St. Paul 
does not confine himself, as a merely ethical teacher might have done, to abstract argu- 
ments on the beauty or the utility of 'justice' and 'temperance.' Here, also, his 
own experience was his guide, and he sought to make the guilty pair before whom he 
stood feel that the warnings of conscience were but the presage of a Divine judgment 
which should render to every man according to his deeds. It will be noted that there 
ia here no mention of the forgiveness of sins, nor of the life of fellowship with Christ. 
Those truths would have come, in due course, afterwards. As yet they would hare 
been altogether premature. The method of St. Paul's preaching was like that of the 
Baptist and of all true teachers " (Plumptre). The three topics may be treated in a 
more general way if presented thus : 1. Kighteousness, or the Divine ideal of a human 
life. 2. Temperance, or a man's personal responsibility in the use of his body, and the 
shapings of his human relationships. 3. Judgment to come, or the appalling &ct for 
ftU who follow their own wilful ways, that results must be divinely recognized. Com- 
jpaie the convincing of the Spirit, which is of sin, righteousness, and judgment ; and 



m. xiiT. 1— 27.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 249 

jH-ess that only upon the conviction of sin can the message of a Saviour from sin com« 
with power to any one of us. — E. T. 

Ver. 25. — Convenient seasons. This familiar topic needs but a brief outline. Pro< 
crastination is one of man's chief perils. It is the " thief of time," the " delusion of the 
evil one." No man has any " by-and-by," any " to-morrow " to which he can trust. 
" Now " is our accepted time, our day of salvation. A man has nothing but the 
passing moment ; yet he comfortably shifts off the duty of to-day by the vain fancy that 
it can be done to-morrow. " Felix is the type of the millions whose spiritual life is 
ruined by procrastination." Philip Henry says, " The devil cozens us out of all our 
time by cozening us out of the present time." Archias, a supreme magistrate of the 
city of Thebes, was seated at a feast, surrounded by his friends, when a courier arrived 
in great haste, with letters containing an account of a conspiracy formed against him. 
" My lord," said the messenger, " the person who wrote tliese letters conjures you to 
read them immediately, being serious things." "Serious things to-morrow," replied 
Archias, laughing, and then put the letters under his pillow. This delay was fatal. 
The conspirators that evening rushed into the banqueting-room, and put the careless 
Archias, with all his guests, to the swovd. 

I. Convenient seasons mat excuse delat. Better opportunities always seem to be 
away in the future. The pressure of dnily business or daily pleasure will surely be 
lightened some day. We all have our eye upon some distant time when we mean to 
be in earnest about religion, and our sincere intent excuses our present delay. 

II. Convenient seasons mat base the conscibncb. This is what we have in the 
case of Felix. He was smitten, but was purposed not to yield, so quieted conscience 
with a vague promise. 

III. Convenient seasons mat nbvek comb. They seldom do. Press that the only 
convenient seasons for us are just those in which Grod brings home to our souls his 
truth, and urges us to its acceptance. Could Felix only have seen it, the most con- 
venient season for him was the hoar when Paul urged upon him the " faith in Christ." 
-B.T. 

Ver. 28. — Covetoumess excusing injustiee. Felix proved utterly ignoble. His 
reasons for leaving a man prisoner whom he knew to be altogether innocent, are base. 
" Willing to do the Jews a pleasure." " Hoped also that money should have been given 
him of Panl." Felix is stamped as (1) a time-server, and (2) as a corrupt judge. " Felix, 
well knowing how the Christians aided one another in distress, and possibly having 
some information of the funds with which St. Paul had been recently entrusted, and 
ignorant of those principles which make it impossible for a true Christian to tamper by 
bribes with the course of the law, might naturally suppose that he had here a good pro- 
spect of enriching himself." Nothing so quickly and so utterly debases a man as the 
cherished spirit of covetousness. This, however, is a somewhat unusual form and 
expression of the many-sided evil. Olshausen says, " The sword of God's Word pierced 
deep into the heart of Felix, but for this very reason he suddenly broke off the con- 
ference. But his moral baseness betrayed itself striltingly in this, that he could still 
hold fast his prisoner for the mere purpose of obtaining money for his release, yea, that 
at his departure from the province, he left him in prison, out of complaisance to the 
Jews." Illustrate (1) that Felix knew the right ; (2) but that, nevertheless, he did the 
wrong ; and (3) that the love of money in part explains his choosing the wrong. The 
following incident may be helpful in the illustration of this third point : — " A case was 
tried before a young cadi at Smyrna, the merits of which were these. A poor man 
claimed a house which a rich man usurped. The former held his deeds and documents 
tu prove his right ; but the latter had provided a number of witnesses to invalidate his 
title. In order to support their evidence efSectually, he presented the cadi with a bag 
containing five hundred ducats. When the day arrived for hearing the cause, the poor 
man told his story, and produced his writings, but could not support his case by witnesses; 
the other rested the whole case on his witnesses, and on his adversary's defect in law, 
who could produce none ; he urged the cadi, therefore, to give sentence in his favour. 
After the most pressing solicitations, the judge calmly drew out fi"om under his sofa the 
bag of ducats which the rich man had given him as a bribe, saying to him very gravely, 



260 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLEa 



[oh. XXV. 1—27 



' Yon have been much mistaken ia the suit, for if tbe poor man could produce no 
witnesses in confirmation of his right, I myself can produce at least five hundred.' He 
then threw away the bag with reproach and indignation, and decreed the house to tht 
poor plaintiff"— B. X> 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XXV. 



Ver. 1. — FestuK therefore having come for 
■inw when Fntus woe come, A.V. ; went up 
i nr he atcended, A.V. ; to Jeruealem from 
Osetarea for from Cxsarea to Jerusalem, A.V. 
The provinoe (^irapx'"); above, oh. xxiii. 34. 
After three days, etc. It is an evidence of 
tlie diligence of Festus that he lost no time 
iu going to Jerusalem, the centre of dis- 
affection to the Eoman government. 

Ver. 2. — And for then, A.V. ; chief priests 
fur high priest, A.V. and T.E. ; principal 
men for chief, A.V. ; and they besought for 
and besought, A.V. Chief priests ; as in yer. 
15 and oh. xxli. 30. But the reading of the 
T.R., " the high priest," is more in aooord- 
ance with oh. xxiy. 1, and is approved by 
Alford. Tbe high priest at tliis time was 
Qo longer Ananias, but Ismael tbe son of 
Phabi, who was appointed by King Agrippa 
towards the close of Felix's government 
(Jocephus, 'Ant. Jud.,' xx. viii. 8). He went 
to Rome to appeal to Nero about the wall 
which the Jews had built to screen tbe 
temple from being overlooked, and which 
Agrippa had ordered to be pullel down; 
and being detained at Rome as a hostage, 
be was succeeded in tbe high priesthood by 
Joseph Oabi tbe son of Simon. We may 
feel sure that on this occasion he was 
present before Festus, for he had not yet 
gone to Rome. Informed him (^iv^tpiviaav) ; 
see ch. xxiv. 1, note. The principal men of 
the Jews (pi Trparoi). In ver. 15 Festus 
speaks of them as oi irpe<r$iTepot, The 
question arises as to whether the two 
phrases are identical in tlieir meaning. 
Meyer thinks that the irpSroi includes lead- 
ing men who were not elders, i.e. not San- 
hraiists. Josepbus calls the leading Jews 
of Ceesarea oi irpaTiioiiTis tuv 'louSaiuc ('Ant. 
Jud.,' XX. viii. 9). 

Ver. 3. — Ashing for and desired, A.V. ; to 
hill him on the way for in the way to kiU 
him, A.V. Asking favour, etc. The Jews 
evidently thought to take advantage of tbe 
inexperience of Festus, and of his natural 
desire to please them at his first start, 
to accomplish tbeix murderous intention! 
against Paul. 

Ver. 4. — Mowheit for but, A.V. ; was Jeept 
in charge for should be kept, A.V. ; was about 
Ic depart thither shortly for would depart 
shortly, thither, A.V. Was kept in charge. 
Featut did not merely mention the fact, 



which the Jews knew abeady, that Paul 
was a prisoner at Csesarea, but his determi- 
na(ion to keep him there till he oould go 
down and try him. The A.V. gives the 
meaning. Either StTy is to be understood, 
as if Festus should say, ** Paul is a Roman 
citizen; Caasarea is the proper place for 
him to be tried at before the procurator, and 
therefore he must be kept in custody there," 
or some such words as, " I have given 
orders" must be understood before "that 
Paul should be kept." 

Ver. 5. — Saith for said, A. V. ; which are of 
power among you for which among you are 
able, A.V. ; if there i$ anything amiss in the 
man, let them accuse him for accuse this man, 
if there he any wickedness in him, A.V. 
Which are of power among yon ; t.«. your 
chief f»«», or, as wo should say, your 6e»4 
men, which would include ability to conduoS 
the accusation as well as mere station. 
Josepbus frequently uses Swarof in the 
sense of "men of rank and power and 
influence," 'lovialav oi SwardraToi ('Ant. 
Jud.,' xiv. xiii. 1); i)KOV 'lovSaiav oi Swaroi 

(' Bell. Jud.,' i. xii. 4), etc. (see 1 Cor. i. 26 ; 
Rev. vi. 15 ; and the passages ftom Thucy- 
dides, Xenophon, and Fhilo, quoted by 
Kuinoel). The rendering of the A.V., 
though defensible, is less natural and lesi 
in accordance with the genius of tbe lan- 
guage. Amiss ; &TOTrov, but many manuscripts 
omit &TOToy, leaving the sense, however, the 
same. 

Ver. 6. — Not more than eight or en day$i 
for more than ten days, A.V. and T.R. ; on 
(%« morrow for tJie next day, A.V. ; he sai . . . 
and commanded for sitting . . . commanded, 
A.V. On the morrow (see ver. 17). To be 
brought (ix6?>'oi). The technical word for 
bringing a prisoner before the judge (oh. 
vi. 12; xviii 12; Luke xxL 12; xxiii. 1, 
etc.). 

Ver. 7. — Had come down for came dovm, 
A.V. ; about him for about, A.V. ; bringing 
against him for and laid . , . against Faul, 
A.V. ; charges {oT complaints, A..\. Charges; 
oiTi<£/40To, only here in the New Testament, 
and rare in classical Greek. The A.V. 
"complaints" means in older English 
exactly the same as " charges " or " accusa- 
tions " (comp. " plaintiff"). 

Ver. 8. — Paul said in his defence for k$ 
answered for himself, A.V. and T.R. ; not 
for neither, A,V.: against for yet against, 
A.V.; sinned for oj^ended anything, A.V. 



iiT. 1— 27.J 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



251 



Said in his defence iairo\(ryoviievov) ; oh. 
xxlv. 10, note. The Law . . . the temple, 
. > . Csesar. The accusations againet him 
fell under these three hends (ch. xxiv. 5) : 
he was the ringleader of an unlawful sect; 
he had profaned the temple; and he had 
stirred up insurrection against the govern- 
ment among the Jews. The aocusationi 
were false under every head. 

Ver. 9. — Desiring to gain favour loith the 
Jews for iDilling to do the Jews a pleasure, 
A.y. To gain favour, etc. (see above, oh. 
xxiv. 27, note). It was not unnatural that 
Festus, ignorant as he still was of Jewish 
malice and bigotry and violence, in the case 
of Paul, and anxious to conciliate a people 
so difficult to govern as the Jews had showed 
themsulves to be, should make the proposal. 
In doing so he still iusisted that the trial 
should be before him. Before me ; €V 
efiov, as oh. xxiii. 30 and xxvi. 2; eVl iroC 
" before thee," viz. King Agrippa in the last 
case, and Felix in the former. The expres- 
sion is somewhat ambiguous, and may 
merely mean that Festus would be present 
in the court to ensure fair play, while the 
Sanhedrim judged Paul according to their 
Law, and so Paul seems, by his answer, to 
have understood it. 

Ver. 10. — But Paul said for then said Paul, 
A.V. ; I am standing for I stand, A.V. ; 
ie/ore for at, A.V. ; thou also for thou, A.V. 
I am standing before Csesar's judgment-seat 
{finds ft/ii). The judgment-seat of the 
procurator, who ministered judgment in 
Cfflsar's name and by his authority, was 
rightly called " Csesar's judgment-seat." As 
a Roman citizen, Paul had a right to be 
tried there, and not before the Sanhedrim. 
The pretence that he had offended against 
the Jewish Law, and therefore ought to be 
tried by the Jewish court, was a false one, 
fts Festus well tnew ; for he had the record 
of the preceding trial before him. 

Ver. 11. — If then I am a wrong-doer for 
for if I be an offender, A.V. and T.B. ; and 
for or, A.V. ; if none of those things is true 
for if there he nojie of these things, A.V. ; can 
give me up for may deliver me, A.V. I 
refuse not ; ov irapcuTov^at. Here only in 
the Acts, and three times in Luke xiv. 
Elsewhere, four times in the pastoral Epistles, 
and twice in Hebrews. Frequent in classi- 
cal Greek. No man can give me up (xop(- 
irairBtti); aa ver. 16, "to hand over as a 
matter of complaisance." St. Paul saw at 
once the danger he was in from Festus's in- 
clination to curry favour with the Jews. 
With his usual fearlessness, therefore, and 
perhaps with the same quickness of temper 
which made him call Ananias " a whited 
wall," he said, " No man (not even the 
mighty Boman governor) may make me over 
to tbeai at theii request, to please them," and 



with the ready wit which characterized him, 
and with a knowledge of the rights which 
the Lex Julia, in addition to other laws, 
conferred on him as a Roman citizen, he 
immediately added, I appeal unto Cassar. 

Ver. 12.— TAou hast for hast thou 1 A.Y. 
and, aa far as punctuation is concerned, T.B. 
The council. Not the members of the San- 
hedrim who were present, but his own con- 
eiliarii, or assessores, as they were called, in 
Greek TdpeSpoi, with whom the Boman 
governor advised before giving judgment. 
Unto Caesar shalt thou go. In like manner, 
Pliny (quoted by Kuinoel) says of certain 
Christians who had appealed to Csasar, that, 
" because they were Roman citizens, he had 
thought it right to send them to Rome for 
trial " (' Epist.,' i. 97). Festus, though, may- 
be, rather startled by Paul's appeal, was 
perhaps not sorry to be thus rid of a difficult 
case, and at the same time to leave the Jews 
under the impression that he himself was 
willing to send the prisoner for trial to 
Jerusalem, had it been possible. 

Ver. 13. — Now when certain days were 
passed for and after certain days, A.V. ; 
Agrippa the king and Bernice arrived at for 
King Agrippa and Bernice came unto, A.V. ; 
and saluted for to salute, A.V. and T.B. 
Agrippa the king. Herod Agrippa II., son 
of Herod Agrippa I. (eh. xii.), and conse- 
quently brother of Drusilla (oh. ixiv. 24). 
He was only seventeen at his fatlier's death, 
and so not considered by Claudius a safe 
person to entrust his father's large dominions 
to. But he gave him Chalcis, and afterwards; 
in exchange for it, other dominions. It was 
he who made Ismael the son of Phabi 
high priest, and who built the palace at 
Jerusalem which overlooked the temple, 
and gave great offence to the Jews. He was 
the last of the Herods, and reigned above 
fifty years. Bernice was his sister, but was 
thought to be living in an incestuous inter- 
course with him. She had been the wife of 
her uncle Herod, Prince of Chalcis ; and on 
his death lived with her brother. She then 
for a while Ijeoame the wife of Polemo, King 
of Cicilia, but soon returned to Herod 
Agrippa. She afterwards became the mis- 
tress of Vespasian and of Titus in succes- 
sion (Alford). And saluted ; a<riraa-6fj.emi, 
which reading Meyer and Alford both retain. 
The reading of the B.T. is ao-Tracrii^ecoj. It 
is quite in accordance with the position of a 
dependent king, that he should come and 
pay his respects to the new Roman governor 
at Csesarea. 

Ver. 14. — As they tarried for when they had 
leen, A.V. : laid for declared, A.V. ; case for 
cause, A.V. ; before for unto, A.V. ; o prisoner 
for in bonds, A.V. Many days (irXefouj 
fifidpas). Not necessarily many, but as oh 
xxiv. 17 (margin), "some," or "BeveraL" 



2SS 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. XXV. 1 — i!7. 



The number indicated by the comparative 
degree, rtKeian, depends upon what it is com- 
pared with. Here it means more days than 
was necessary for fulfilling the purpose of 
their visit, which was to salute Festus. They 
stayed on some days longer. Laid Paul's 
case before the king ; aveOeTo ri /caret rhv 
UavAov, The word only occurs in the New 
Testament here and in Gal. ii. 2, " I laid 
before them the gospel which I preach 
among the Gentiles." In 2 Maco. iii. 9, 
'AveBeTO rtpl toS 76")<»'((toi i/KpavKTiiov, 
"HeliodoruB laid before the high priest 
Onias the information that had been given 
about tlie treasure in the temple " (see other 
passages quoted by Kuinoel). The word 
might be rendered simply " told," the thing 
told being in the accusative, and the person 
to wliom it is told in the dative. It was 
very i.atural that Festus should take the 
opportunity of consulting Agrippa, a Jew, 
and expert in all questions of Jewish Law, 
about Paul's cause. 

Ver. 15. — Ashing for sentence for desiring 
to have judgment, A.V, and T.E. The chief 
priests (ver. 2, note). Informed me (see 
above, ver. 2, and oh. xxiv. 1, note). 

Ver. 16. — That it ia for it is, A.V. ; custom 
for manner, A.V. ; to give up for to deliver 
. . . to die, A.V. and T.E. ; the accused for he 
which ia accused, A.\. ; have had opportunity 
to make his defence concerning the matter for 
have licence to answer for himself concerning 
the crime, A.V. To give up (above, ver. 11, 
note). Have had opportunity to make his 
defence (jiiroy airoXoyias AajSot) ; see oh. xxii. 
1, note. 

Ver. 17. — When therefore for therefore, 
when, A.V. ; together here for hither, A.V. ; I 
made no delay for without any delay, A.V. ; 
hvt on the next day for on the morrow, A.V- ; 
tat down for I sat, A.V. ; brought for brought 
forth, A.V. To be brought (above, ver. 6). 

Ver. 18. — Concerning for against, A.V. ; 
no charge for none accusation, A.V. ; evil 
things for things, A.V. and T.E. They 
brought no charge. The expression, common 
in classical writers, iirupipnv aWtav, answers 
to the Latin legal phrase, crimen inferre 
(Cicero, ' Contr. Verrem.,' v. 41 ; ' Ad 
Herenn.,' iv. 35). Such evU things as I sup- 
posed J viz. seilitions, insurrections, murders, 
and such like, h hich were so rife at tliis time. 
Ver. 19. — Religion for superstition, A.V. ; 
who for which, A.V. Certain questions (X^rii- 
luiTo); ch. XV. 2; xviii. 15; xxiii. 29, eto. 
Eeligion (SeHTiSoi/ioWa) ; see ch. xvii. 22, Sckti- 
daiixoviaT^povs, where tliere is the same doubt 
as here whether to take it in a good sense 
or a bad one. Here, as Festus, a man of the 
world, was speaking to a king wlio was a 
Jew, he is not likely to have intended to 
use an offensive phrase. So it is best to 
render it " religion," as the B.T. does. But 



Bishop Wordsworth ren 'ers ttjs IStat Sim- 
Saiiiovias his own superstilion, Paul's, wliicb 
agrees with the context. These details 
must have been among those "comolainta" 
spoken of in ver. 7. Whom Paul affirmed to 
be alive. Notice the stress constantly laid 
by the apostle upon the resurrection of the 
Lord Jesus. If his own superstition is the 
right rendering, we have here the nature 
of it, in Festus's view, belief in the resur- 
rection of Jesus. 

Ver. 20. — I, being perplexed how to inquire 
concerning these things, aslced for because 1 
doubted of such manner of questions, I asked 
him, AV. and T.E. I, being perplexed, eto. 
The (^Tri(rts spoken of by Festus does not 
mean his own judicial inquiry, though it is 
so used once in Polybius (vi. xvi. 2), but the 
disputes or discussions on such subjects bm 
the Eesurrection, eto. (John iii. 25 ; 1 Tim. 
14; vi. 4 ; 2 Tim. ii. 23 ; Titus iii. 9), in 
which Festus felt himself at a loss. The 
A. v., therefore, expresses the sense more 
nearly than the E.V. The T.E. too, which 
inserts els before r^v irepl roirav ^-^Tijcrty, is 
preferable to the E.T., because awopov/iai does 
not govern an accusative case, but is almost 
always followed by a preposition. Those 
who follow the reading of the T.S., irepl 
roirov, either understand irpiy/taTot or refer 
Toirou to Paul or to Jesus. 

Ver. 21. — To be kept for the decision of 
the emperor for to be reserved unto the hearing 
of Augustus, A.V. ; should for might, A.V. 
The decision; Sta-yvHiris, here only in the 
New Testament ; but it is used in this sense 
in Wisd. iii. 1 8 ("the day of trial," or "hearin g," 
A. v.), and by Josephus (' Ant. Jud.,' xv. iii. 
8). For the verb SiayivtiaKa, see oh. xxiii. 
15; xxiv. 22, notes. The emperor (toO 
Se^oo-ToD); rather, as the A.V., Augustus. 
Augustus was the title conferred by the 
senate upon Octavius Csesar, b.o. 27, whom 
we commonly designate Augustus Csesar. 
It became afterwards the distinctive title 
of the reigning emperor, and, alter the end 
of the second century, sometimes of two or 
even three co-emperors, and was now borne 
by Nero. Its Greek equivalent was 26/3airT(ij. 
Augustus may be derived, as Ovid says, from 
augeo, as faustus from faveo, and be kindred 
witli augur, and mean one blest and aggran- 
dized of God, and so, full of majesty. It ii 
spoken of all holy things, temples and the 
like, "Et quodounque sua Jupiter auget 
ope" (Ovid, ' Fast.,' i. 609); and, as Ovid says 
in the same passage, is a title proper to the 
gods. For, comparing it with the names of 
tho greatest Eoman families, Maximus, 
Magnus, Torquatus, Corvus, etc., their 
names, he says, bespeak liuman honours, 
but of Augustus, he says, " Hio sooium 
summo cum Jove nomen habet." And la 
the Greek 'Zf^tmrit bespeaks a veneratioa 



OH. XXV. 1 — 27.J 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



'^i 



closely akin to adoration. Ceesar, originally 
the name of a family of tlie Julia gens, 
became the name of Octayius Ceesar 
Augustus, as the adopted son of Julius 
Csasar ; then of Tiberius, as the adopted son 
of Augustus ; and then of the successors of 
Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, and Nero, who 
had by descent or adoption some relationship 
to 0. Julius CsBsar the great dictator. After 
Nero, succeeding emperors usually prefixed 
the name of Osesar to their other names, and 
placed that of Augustus after them, ^lius 
Vems, adopted by Hadrian, was the first 
person who bore the name of Ceesar without 
being emperor. From this time it became 
usual for the heir to the throne to bear the 
same ; and later, for many of the emperor's 
kindred to be so-called. It was, in fact, a 
title of honour conferred by the emperor. 

Ver. 22. — And for then, A.Y. ; I also could 
wiah to hear for I would aluo hear, A.Y. ; 
mith for mid, A.Y. I also oould wish 
{ifiov\6ij.riv) ; but the A.Y. " I would " quite 
sufBoiently expresses the imperfect tense 
(ieh imllte) and the indirect wish intended. 
Meyer well compares i\\ixii>-'n'' (Kom. ix. 3) 
and ¥ief\ov (Gal. iv. 20). 

Ver. 23. — So for and, A.Y. j they were for 
wa», A,\.; the principal for principal, A. Y. ; 
the command of Festus for Fettus' command- 
ment, A.Y. ; brought in for brought forth, 
A.Y. With great pomp ; fiprh woWrls ijiav- 
rmrias, here only in the New Testament. 
In Polybius it means " display," " show," 
" outward appearance," " impression," 
"effect," and the like. It ia of frequent 
use among medical writers for the outward 
appearance of diseases. In Heb. xii. 21 
ri ^raQ6nfvoii is "the appearance," and 
(piiirairiia (Matt. xiv. 26; Mark vi. 49) is 
" an appearance," " a phantom." The place 
of hearing. The word ixpoarripiov (from 
oMpodo/xai, to bear, whence aKpodrtis, Bom. ii. 
13 ; Jas. i. 22, 23, 25) occurs only here in 
tiie New Testament. It is literally an 
" audience-hall," and means sometimes a 
■' lecture-room." Here it is apparently the 
hall where cases were heard and tried before 
the procurator or other magistrate. Chief 
captains (x'^'apx"')- Military tribunes, as 
ch. xxi. 31, and very frequently in the Acts. 
Meyer notes that, as there were five cohorts 
garrisoned in Csetarea, there would be five 
chiliarchs, or tribunes. At the command of 
Festus. These minute touches suggest that 
8t. Luke was most likely in the hall, and 
saw the " great pomp," and heard Festus 
give the order for Paul to be brought. 
Brought in (iix^'n)'. see ver. 6, note. 

Ver. 24. — Saith for said, A.Y. ; behold for 
lee, A.V. ; made euit to me for have dealt 
with me, A.V.; here for also here, A.Y. 
That he ought not to live (ch. xxiL 22) 
This had evidently been repeated by the 



Jews before Festus himself (ver. 7X mmI ii 
implied by Paul's words in ver. II. 

Yer. 25. — I found . . . I determined for 
when I found ... J have determined, A.Y. 
and T.B.; a* for that, A.Y. and T.R.; 
appealed for hath appealed, A.Y. ; the 
emperor for Augufdus, A.Y. Nothing 
-worthy of death (see ch. xxiii. 29; and 
comp. Luke xxiii. 4, 15). I determined. 
The A.Y., "when I found ... I have 
determined," is hardly good grammar 
according to our present usage. It should 
be " determined," unless " when " is 
equivalent to " inasmuch as." If " when " 
expresses a point of past time from which 
the act of determining started, the perfect is 
improper in modem English. The same 
remark applies to the next verse, " I have 
brought him forth . . . that I might." 

Yer. 26. — King for king, A.Y.; may 
for might, A.Y. My lord (t^ Kvplip). 
Suetonius tells us (' Life of Augustus,' 53) 
that Augustus abhorred the title of " lord," 
and looked upon it as a curse and an insult 
when applied to himself. Tiberius also 
(' Life of Tiberius,' 27), being once called 
" lord " (dominus^ by some one, indignantly 
repudiated the title. But it was frequently 
applied to Trajan by Pliny, and the later 
emperors seem to have accepted it It was 
likely to grow up first in the East. Exami- 
nation; ivaKplaews, here only in the New 
Testament ; but it is found in 3 Mace. vii. 4 
in the same sense as here, viz. of a judicial 
examination (the complaint being that Jews 
were put to death fiyew Trdirris avaxplcreais «a! 
i^erdiretDsy, specially thejjretiioMS examination 
of the prisoner made for the information ol 
the judge who was to try the case. At 
Athens the avditpiais was a preliminary 
examination held to decide whether an 
action at law should be allowed. The verb 
ai/aKptva, to examine, occurs six times in the 
Gospel of St. Luke and the Acts (Luke 
xxiii. 14 ; oh. iv. 9 ; xii. 19, etc.), and ten 
times in St. Paul's Epistles (see also Hist, 
of Susanna 48). 

Ver. 27. — In sending . . . not for to send 
. . . and not, A.Y. ; charges for crimes laid, 
A. v. irnreasonable ; &\oyov, only in 2 Pet. 
ii. 12 and Jude 10, "without reason," 
applied to the brute creation ; but found in 
the LXX. ofExod. vi. 12 and Wisd. xi. 15; 
and also frequent in medical writers. The 
opposite phrase, Karci. \6yov, " reasonably," 
in ch. xviii. 14, is also of very frequent use 
in medical writers. 'AA070J, a,\6ya>s, ahoyla 
are also not uncommon in Poljfbius, and in 
classical Greek generally. The charges 
against Mm (tos kkt' outoD aMas). The 
technical legal term for the " accusation " 
or " charge " formally made against the pri- 
soner, and which was to form the subject ol 
the trial (comp. Ma tt.zxvii. 37; Mark xv. 26) 



2W THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [wi. xit. 1— 27 



HOMILETICS. 

Vem. 1 — 12. — Persistent hatred. There is a bitterness and a dogged persistency in 
the enmity of an Oriental, and an inextinguishable thirst for revenge, which are unlike 
anything we know of among ourselves. Some knowledge and perception of this are 
necessary to enable us to understand many things in the Old Testament, including 
allusions to his enemies in some of the Psalms of David. The conduct of the Jews to 
St. Paul is a remarkable example of this persevering hatred, whieh nothing could 
avert or mollify. Passing over the previous displays of it at every place in Asia and 
Europe where the apostle preached the gospel, from the first outbreak of it at Damascus 
to the last conspiracy against him at Corinth (ch. ix. 23 ; xx. 3), we notice the allusiim 
to its existence, and to the cause of it, by James in ch. xxi. 21. We then saw the 
steps taken by St. Paul to conciliate those enemies, and to convince them that their 
prejudice against him was unfounded. But how vain these efforts were soon appears. 
In the very temple court where he was taking pains to humour their prejudices and tc 
soften their hatred, that hatred broke out into a flame of unparalleled violence. In an 
instant the whole city was upon him, and would have torn him to pieces had not the 
Roman soldiers rescued him from their hands. A momentary lull while they listened 
to Paul's Hebrew speech was followed by a more furious burst of passion than belore. 
When violence had failed to take away the hated life, they had recourse to guile and to 
the arts of the secret assassin. Baffled again at Jerusalem, they followed him to Caesarea. 
They hired an advocate to vilify him before the Roman judge. They heaped charge upon 
charge and lie upon lie in hope to compass his condemnation, and when for two whole 
years their malice had been defeated, while the object of their hatred remained a 
prisoner out of their reach, and at a time when the miseries of their country called for 
all their attention and solicitude, far from time having dulled the edge of their malice, 
or the calls of patriotism having diverted their thoughts from the object of their 
revenge, they were more intent than ever upon Paul's destruction. Their first thought 
on the change of government seems to have been, not thankfulness for the cessation 
of the oppressive tyranny of Felix, but the hope of working upon the inexperience oi 
Pestus 80 as to get Paul into their power. Again the baiHed assassins were ready tc 
fall upon the doomed man by the way ; again the restless hatred of the chief priests 
carried them to Ossarea to try what false accusations could biing about. But this 
spectacle of unwearied and unscrupulous hatred and persistent malice, hideous as it is, 
acquires a value of its own when we contrast with it the love and the kindness of the 
gospel of Christ. Whence must those precepts of patience and foigiveness and love for 
our enemies have sprung, which shine like precious jewels in the pages of the Bible ? 
Or look at St. Paul. He was a Jew like them : were they Hebrews? so was he. And 
yet, while they were cursing, and conspiring, and persecuting, and blaspheming, he was 
loving, enduring, forgiving, striving to overcome evil with good. They were moving 
heaven and earth to take away his life who had never done them any wrong ; and his 
heart's desire and prayer to God for them, his cruel persecutors, and the labour of hi& 
whole life as well, was that they might be saved. It is a wonderful contrast. It sete 
out the Divine origin of the gospel and its heavenly character with singular force. It 
is a most luminous comment on our Lord's words, " Ye are from beneath ; I am from 
above" (John viii. 23). The bright star of love shines all the brighter in our eyes 
from being thus, as it were, surrounded by the thick darkness of a persistent hatred. 

Vers. 13 — 27. — " Aiidi alteram partem.'' It is a noble principle here ascribed by 
Festus to Roman justice, never to condemn upon the accusation of any one without 
giving the accused the power to face his accusers and answer for himself. English law 
is so conspicuous for its fairness to prisoners that theie is no need to insist upon this 
maxim in regard to courts of justice. But there is great need to urge that the same 
just principle should rule our private censures and judgments upon our neighbours. 
It should not be the manner of Christians to believe evil of others, still less lo spreac 
reports against them, upon one-sided statements and undefended charges. An accuse j 
person has a right to defend himself before he is condemned. A fair judge will suspend 
his judgment till he has heard the defence. The English law is unwilling to condemn 



OH, XXV. 1—27.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 255 

except upon the clearest evidence of guilt. Let tliere be the same unwillingness to 
censure a neighbour unless blame be unavoidable. Some charges are made in malice, 
some in ignorance ; some things are positively false ; some are true, but lose their truth 
by being separated from their concomitants; some things are bad if done from ona 
motive, but good if done from another; an explanation may make the whole difference 
in the aspect of an action. Therefore it should be a settled principle with every just 
man to condemn no man unheard, even in thought, and tn give everyone against whom 
a charge is made an opportunity of defence before the chaige is believed to his hurt, or 
acted upon to his prejudice. "Judge not, and ye shall not be judged : condemn not, 
and ye shall not be condemned." 

HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — ^16. — The enlightened, the unenlightened, and the great Overruler. This 
piece of sacred history suggests — 

I. That sometimes the blackest deeds lib at the dooh of the enlightened. 
Who more enlightened than these Jews, so far as outward privileges were concerned ? 
They had the fullest opportunity of knowing the truth and of acting uprightly. They 
"had the mind" of God; revelation had shone on their path with full, strong light. 
Yet we find them (vers. 2, 3) endeavouring to get Paul into their power, that they 
might deliberately assassinate him. And we again find them fiercely preferring charges 
against him which they could not prove (ver. 7). And again we find them demanding 
judgment against him when no crime had been established (ver. 15). In how dark a 
light does their action appear I The men that would have shuddered at a small and 
venial impropriety or omission do not scruple to do rank injustice, to commit murder ! 
They were neither the first nor the last to make this fatal mistake (Luke xi. 42 ; Matt. 
vii. 21 — 23). There have been, and are, many souls who have accounted themselves, 
and have been reckoned by others, peculiarly holy, at whose door lie the most serious 
sins, who are living lives utterly evil in God's sight, and who will awake to condemna- 
tion and retribution at the last (Ps. cxxxiz. 23, 24). 

II. That sometimes the unenlightened exhibit admirable virtues. The Roman 
had been far less favoured than the Jew in the great matter of religious privilege. Not 
unto him had been " committed the oracles of God ; " not to him had psalmists sung 
and prophets prophesied. Yet we find the Roman sometimes exhibiting virtue of au 
excellent order. We find this here. Pestus, indeed, desired to " do the Jews a pleasure " 
(ver. 9). What governor would not ? But he did not commit any act of illegality or 
injustice in order to do this, and we find him on two occasions resolutely declining to 
yield to pressure when he could not do so without departing from fairness (vers. 4, 5, 
15, 16). This worthiness of behaviour may have been due to respect for law rather 
than regard for individual right ; but it was honourable and excellent, as far as it went. 
The self-control it indicates contrasts strongly with the abandonment to passionate 
hatred which disgraced the Jews. Virtue is sometimes found unassociated witl 
religion. (1) It may be the indirect and unconscious result of religious influence: 
(2) or it may be the outgrowth of nobility of nature originally bestowed by the 
Creator ; (3) or it may be the lingering consequence of early habits in which the life 
was traineii. In any case, not rooted in religion it is (a) unsatisfactory to God in ils 
nature, and it is (b) uncertain in its duration. All moral excellency should be built 
on spiritual convictions. Then, and then only, is it pleasing to God and certun to 
endure. 

IIL That Divine pbovidbncb is presiding over all events. Had Pestus, " willing 
to do the Jews a pleasure," consented to Paul's being brought to Jerusalem (ver. 3), 
he would have fallen a victim to their murderous machinations. Then the Church of 
Olirist would never have had some of those Epistles which now enrich our sacred 
literature, and which we could ill spare from the sacred volume. But " his hour was 
not yet come " — his hour of martyrdom, his hour of holy triumph, his hour of deliver- 
ance and redemption, " Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints," 
and vainly is the persecutor's arm uplifted if God does not mean that the blow shall 
lAiL So with all events. The Divine Overruler is " shaping the ends " of all tilings, 



256 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xxt. 1— 27. 

directing the course and tracing the hound of our activities, compelling even the wrath 
of man to praise him, conducting all things to a rightful and blessed issue. — 0. 

Vers. 17 — 21. — Mismeasurement of the great and small. There is something ludi- 
crous as well as instructive in the scene which Festus here describes to Agrippa. 
Nothing could well be more incongruous than a Roman judge presiding at a tribunal 
before which " niceties of the Jewish religion " were brought up. He would feel 
utterly unsuited for the work, and he gladly enough availed himself of the presence oi 
Agrippa to gain some notion of the subject which had so completely perplexed him. 
It appeared to him that the men over whom he was called to rule were permitting 
themselves to be passionately absorbed by questions not worthy of a moment's con- 
sideration. It probably also occurred to him that one at least was strikingly and 
unaccountably indifferent to those things to which alone he himself attached impor- 
tance. How thoroughly he mismeasured everything we see if we consider — 

L That his own position as Peocubator of Jud^a was a mattes of the least 
IMPORTANCE. Doubtless to him that seemed the one substantial fact in comparison 
with which "certain questions of the superstition" (religion) of tlie Jews and of "one 
Jesus" were small iiKieud. Now, we are only interested in Festus because of his 
accidental association with these questions. Hut for this connection not one in a 
thousand who now know something about him would have even heard of his name. 
How important to each one of us seem his own personal affairs — his income, his 
position, his reputation, his property 1 In how brief a time will these things be as 
nothing — his possessions scattered, his name forgotten, his ofiBce handed over to 
another 1 It would do us all good to be occasionally asldng of ourselves — What wiU 
be the value of the things we prize so highly "when a few years are come"? 

II. That matters pertaining to the Hebrew faith aee of no slight 
IMPOETANCE. " Certain questions of the religion " of the Jews would seem very trivial 
to a Roman ruler. But we know that they are worthy of the attention of mankind. 
Not only the great question of the Jewish Messiahship, but other and inferior matters 
respecting sacrifices and ordinances, have a place in our record which has outlived and 
will outlive proudest dynasties and mightiest empires. Students will read and investi- 
gate Leviticus and Deuteronomy when the annals of the empire are disregarded. 
Everything which bears on our relation to God, and everything which is even remotely 
related to that "one Jesus," has an interest which will not die. 

III. That the " one Jesus," to whom Festus so slightingly alluded, was the 
DESTINED Sovereign of the race. Nothing could exceed the contemptuous indiffer- 
ence with which Festus sieaks of the Saviour (ver. 19). Nothing was further Irum 
his thought than that this One would live for ever in the honour and luve of the 
world. But the Stone which the Jewish builders refused has become the Headstone 
of the cointr, and the Prisoner whom the Roman soldiers crowned and clothed in 
cruel mockery now reigns in such majesty and wields such power as golden wreath 
and imperial purple will not symbolize at all. He who was dead, and whom Paul, the 
prisoner, so innocently and unaccountably "affirmed to be alive," is now worshipped 
as the risen, the reigning, the living Lord and Sovereign of mankind. How have Pro- 
curator and Malefactor changed places ! How has the first become the last, and the 
last become the first! Let us (1) rejoice in the exaltation of our once crucified Lord; 
(2) bless God for the exaltation of many of his servants, once held in disregard or 
derision and afterwards honoured ; (3) hope and strive for our own exaltation ; for to the 
humblest servant of the Saviour there is the prospect of a throne of honour, a crown of 
glory, a sphere of blessedness and usefulness (2 Tim. ii. 12 ; iv. 8 ; Eev. iii. 21). — 0. 

Vers. 22 — 27. — Power, degeneracy, and consecration. That was a striking scene 
which is suggested to our imai^ination by these verses. The sacred narrative does not, 
indeed, waste words on a desoiiption of it, but it supplies enough to place the picture 
before our eyes (see Farrar's ' Life of St. Paul,' in he). It invites om- attention to three 
subjects, ^\'e have — 

I. The representative of worldly power. "At Festus's commandment " (ver 
23). The Roman procurator may not have been present with " great pomp," tut he 
could afford to dispense with glitter and show ; for he had authority in his band — It 



OK. XXV, 1—27.3 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 2ST 

represented the power of the world. He waa a citizen of the kingdom which had " in it 
of the strength of iron " (Dan. ii. 41). He was a successor of another Roman who had 
lately said, confidently enough, " Knowest thou not that I have power to crucify thee, 
and have power to release thee?" (John xix. 10). As a Roman ruler, he felt that he 
held a sway over those around him, to which they could lay no claim and which the}' 
were unahle to disturb. Human power is: 1. Coveted by many thousands. 2. 
Within the reach of very few; it is therefore continually sought and missed, and the 
failure to attain it is a source of a large amount of human disappointment and unhappi- 
ness. 3. Much less enjoyed, when realized, than its possessor anticipated; for it proves 
to be limited and checked by many things invisible from without, but painful and 
irritating when discovered and endured. 4. Soon laid down again. The breath which 
makes can unmake ; men are often giddy on the height and they stagger and fall ; years 
of busy activity quickly pass, and then comes sovereign death which strikes down 
power beneath its feet. 

II. The bepbesentative of spiritual deqeneraot. (Ver. 23.) Both brother and 
sister, Agrippa and Bernice, were instances of this. They " saw the better thing and 
approved ; they followed the worse." They " believed the prophets " (ch. xxvi. 27) ; they 
knew the holy Law of God, but, instead of keeping it, instead of living before God and 
before the world in piety, in purity, in heavenly wisdom, they saorifiLod everything to 
worldly advancement, to earthly honours, and even to unholy pleasure. How pitiable 
they seem to us now 1 That " great pomp " of theirs does but serve to make their moral 
littleness the more conspicuous. To rise in outward rank or wealth at the expense of 
character and by forfeiture of principle is : 1. Grievous in the sight of God. 2. Painful 
to all those whose judgment is worth regarding. 3. A most wretched mistake, as well 
as a sin. 4. An act, or series of acts, on which the agents will one day look back with 
deep and terrible remorse. 

III. The representative of Christian consecration. " Paul was brought forth " 
(ver. 23), he "had committed nothing worthy of death" (ver. 25), but yet "all the 
multitude of the Jews " (ver. 24) were " crying out that he ought not to li\e any longer." 
By his attachment to the truth and his devotion to the cause of Jesus Christ, he had placed 
himself there in captivity, charged with a capital offence, the object of the most bitter 
resentment of his countrymen. He had done nothing to deserve this ; he had only 
taught what he honestly and rightly believed to be the very truth of God. He accepted 
his position, as a persecuted witness for Christ, with perfect resignation ; he would not, 
on any consideration, have changed places with that Roman judge or those Jewish 
magnates. Christian consecration is : 1. An admirable thing, on which the minds of 
the worthiest will ever delight to dwell, lifting its subject far above the level of earthly 
power or worldly dignity. 2. Acoeptalsle service in the estimation of Christ ; to it the 
fullest Divine approval and the largest share of heavenly reward are attached. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 12. — Tenacity in right. Paul is brought before a fresh judge. He defends 
the principles of duty and right in the same spirit as before, with perfect boldness, as 
the state of the matter demands, and at the same time with due respect to the office 
of the judge. 

I. Constancy in the defence of right. Let us view this in contrast : 1. To the 
audacity of the hypocrite. They brought many and heavy charges against Paul, which 
they were unable to prove. Again, " the servant is as his Lord." Tlie substance of the 
charges, too, ever the same : transgression of the Law, desecration of the temple, revolt 
against the emperor. Simple and sincere is the defence, in both cases (comp. ver. 8 
with John xviii. 20, 21). 2. To the insolence of the knave. Paul refuses no legal 
investigation. He stands firmlv on the constitution of the state, before the tribunal of 
CsBsar. The " powers that be he taught were divinely ordained for the repression of 
evil-doers and the defence of the righteous. 3. To the ohitinacy of the contentioui man. 
He willingly subjects himself to any fair investigation and just decision of his case. 

n. The appeal to the emperor. Some general allegorical lessons may be derived 
from this. The Christian may and should appeal: 1. From the sentence of the unjust 
man to the judgment of the just. 2. From the passions of the moment to the calm 
verdict of posterity. 8. From the opinions of the external world to the testimony of 
the inner wwld of conscience. 4 From the homaa tribunal to the eternal throne. 

AOTB— II. ■ 



25a THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xrr. 1— 27. 

And as to the decision. : " To Caesar thou shalt go ! " It was partly Pestus's, partly Paul's, 
and above all, that of Providence. So in our own life-crises. There is a coincidence of 
our own wishes with the external decision of another. Below or above both is the 
divinity that shapes our ends, the hand of him who causes all things to work t()gether 
for good. — J. 

Vers. 13 — 27. — Worldly judgment on religiout matteri. I. Its shobt-sioetbdnbbs. 
It sees no further than the principles of civil right (vers. 13 — 18). Herod Agrippa II. 
had come to pay his greeting to the new procurator (see Josephus, ' Life,' § 11 ; and 
' Bell. Jud.,' ii. 1). It was only after Agrippa had arrived some days, that Festua 
seized the opportunity of bringing the matter before him, probably hoping, from his 
acquaintance with Jewish affairs, that he would help him to a decision concerning Paul. 
Pestus states the rule of equity, the Roman custom of impartiality (ver. 16). He 
makes a parade of justice, but his secret feelings are hardly in harmony with his pro- 
fession. He wanted to be popular with the Jews (ver. 9), and was only withheld by 
Paul's appeal to Csesar from sending him to Jerusalem. Festus would trim his sails to the 
wind. He is worldly in purpose, but would act on plausible grounds and render the 
show of the forms of justice. 

II. Its contemptuous attitude towards ebligion. (Vers. 19 — 21.) The word 
used by him is literally, " fear of divinity," not necessarily conveying the contemptuous 
sense of " superstition." But his whole tone is that of contempt : " Concerning one 
Jesus, who had died, whom Paul said was living." He looks upon the turning-point 
of Paul's preaching and of his contest with the Jews as a trifling matter, im worthy the 
seiious consideration of educated men. And yet — apart from mere personal opinion^ 
how much in the history of the world has turned upon this question 1 Agrippa's 
family had had much to do with " this Jesus," and the mention of his Name is like a 
renewed solicitation to the heart of the king. Festus's bearing is that of a man who 
rather prides himself upon superiority to all religious and ecclesiastical matters ; and 
perhaps no wonder, considering the mixture of religions in the Eoman world of the time. 

III. Its idle curiosity. This is represented by the bearing of Agrippa (ver. 22). He 
would like to listen to this remarkable prisoner, and his story and confession of faith. 
And, perhaps, there was something more than curiosity — a gleam of higher interest, a 
presentiment of the truth. The next day Agrippa and his sister enter the audience- 
chamber of Festus with great pomp, which is soon to pale before the simple majesty zl 
the Divine Word and its messenger. 

IV. Its want of intelligence of the spiritual ohaeactbr. " Behold the man I " 
(ver. 24 ; comp. John xix. 5). Brought before Agrippa, as Pilate had sent Jesus to 
Herod (Luke xxiii. 7). It justly seems to the statesman unreasonable to send a prisoner 
without stating the charges against him (ver. 27). But statesmanship got the better of 
fairness in the case of Pilate (Matt, xxiii. 3). Unless rulers take care to make them- 
selves fully acquainted with the facts, the show of fairness goes for nothing. How can 
a man without sympathy for conscientious convictions in religion, judge justly of a man 
who professes them ? Here, then, worldly judgment is called to pronounce on facts 
which resist the judgment of the world. The hall at Caesarea is the scene of pompous 
worldly display, soon to be converted into the place of bearing of holy doctrine, and a 
judgment-seat of the Divine majesty. — J. 

Ver». 1 — 12, — The way opened to Some. I. A way which had to be out thbouob 
Jewish cbaft and malice on the one hand, and Roman indifference and avarice 
on the other. Festus : a true heathen, ignorant, worldly, ready to use power for self- 
aggrandizement, hating the provincial strifes. The Jews : inveterate haters, keeping up 
their spite for two years ; subtle-minded plotters, using Festus's visit to Jerusalem to 
get Paul into their power ; absolutely unprincipled and false, ready to perjure themselves ; 
and shameless in their fanaticism. 

II. Providential interposition to remove obstacles. Festus desired to remain 
but a short time in Jerusalem. Felix had probably left information which induced 
him to be cautious in dealing with Paul. Roman pride was roused by the transparent 
hy [lucrisy of the Jews. A rebuff of the Jewish leaders at the onset might be of aerrice 
iu ruling the province. 



OH. XXT. 1— 27.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLEa 259 

■ — 

in. The appbaeanok of Paul in ooubt won upon the ruler's mind, and helped him 
to listen respectfully to his assertion of innocence. But the critical poiEt was the 
reference of the case to Roman justice as such. Festus was forgetting himself; Paul 
brought him back to his duty, " I stand at Caesar's judgment-seat." One stroke of 
honest truth smites down a host of lies (cf. Luther at Worms). The assessors were at 
hand. Festus might have done wrong had he been by himself, but with his council to 
bear witness, his own life was at stake. " Appeal unto Cajsar" was the gate at last opened, 
and no man could shut it. There was a voice speaking to Paul which he knew could 
command Home itself to obey. — B. 

Vers. 13—27. — Paul in the presence of King Agrippa. I. A gbeat opportunttt for 
the Christian ohabactbb to be shown forth, as unabashed in the presence of worldly 
splendour, as simple-minded and modest, as untempted by that fear of man which 
bringeth a snare. 

II. An occasion eagerly seized by the apostle fob TBACHiNa both the heathen and 
the Jew, that the gospel was not a mere idle question, or fanatical dream, or delusion, 
but a great reality, for which its preacher was ready to die if need be. 

III. A STRIKING CONTRAST between the spiritually minded Jew, and the apostate and 
mere worldling, such as Agrippa. 

IV. A PROVIDENTIAL PREPARATION for the future. The examination would both 
remove prejudice against Paul and put the whole matter more favourably before the 
emperor, where mere Jewish bigotry and intolerance would have little weight. — B. 

Vers. 10, 11. — Courage to live. Paul knows that he is " standing " (see Eevised 
Version) already at the bar of Csesar. There he elects still to stand. And his formal 
appeal to Csesar is but the public and legal registration- of his deliberate and decisive 
choice to that effect. There were, no doubt, two sides to the question that had been 
before Paul, though it savoured ever so little of the nature of a question with him. The 
two sides were these — that justice was nearer him when he was before Casar than when 
he might be before them of " Jerusalem ; " and that nevertheless to consent to go, and 
to choose to go, to Caesar, to Rome, and to the likeliest prospect of justice, begged, in 
Paul's special case and character, very real courage — the courage to live. Notice, then, 
that the decision recorded in these verses was the decision of— 

L The oonsoiodsnbss or innocence. It is not imfrequently the case. In instances 
that do not touch the question of life, but do touch those of principle and duty, 
that even conscious innocence prefers the easier path of non-resistance and non-defence, 
when resistence and seZ/-defenoe would be the right course. Nature, beyond a doubt, 
should often be mortified. But there is a nature also which should be observed and 
followed and obeyed. To stand up for one's own innocence is sometimes to stand up for 
all innocence. 

II. Christian patiencb. The Christian soldier, racer, workman, must fight to the 
end, must run to the goal, must labour till the nightfalL And this requires some- 
times great patience. With Paul and others of the early Christians, whose names are 
now nowhere else but in that best place — " the book of life," this was true to such an 
extent, that a Divine maxim became formulated in Scripture for the behoof of it, and so 
it was written, " For ye have need of patience, that, after ye have done the will of God, 
ye might receive the promise " (Heb. x. 36). Paul must have often felt, what he once 
said, " To depart and be with Christ were far better." Many a craven spirit faints. 
Many fail long before they have " resisted unto blood." 

III. Christian wisdom. The true apostle, of whatever day, will consider many a 
question, not in its reference to his own individuality, but in its bearing upon the cause 
he has at heart. Many herein may err, therefore, " lacking wisdom." Paul saw that 
it was wisdom's dictate not to allow himself and his cause to be bafBed. Let alone other 
aspects of the case, it was policy, and a right and holy policy to appeal to Csesar. 

IV. Christian duty. There yet awaited Paul some of the grandest opportunities 
of usefulness, all along the way to Rome and in Rome. His bonds were to be manifest 
** in the palace and in all other places " (Phil. i. 13). He was to gain many converts 
even " of Caesar's household." A " great door and effectual " was yet to be opened before 
him and the gospel he preached and loved so well, so faithfully. So it was duty tu 



2€0 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLE! [oh. xxv. 1— 27, 

stand to his colours, though men might possibly taunt him that he was rather standing 
for his life. 

V. The Spirit'b own guidance. Already we have once heard that Paul was assured 
by the angel of the Lord, who stood by him at night, that " at Rome also " he should 
bear testimony to Jesus, as be had at Jerusalem. It is an infinite satisfaction to the 
heart's uncertainty, to the occasional distrust that a conscience feels with regard to its 
own verdicts, when Heaven's guidance is borne in upon one. This satisfaction Paul had. 
And though the vista which his own choice revealed to him terminated in a very 
arena of conflict most visible, but its severity, its amount, its terrors unseen, and not 
to be estimated, yet nor tongue nor heart falters. He appeals to Cassar, and " if he perish, 
he will perish " there. — B. 

Ver. 19. — Spiritual deprivation. The translation which gives us the word " super- 
stition " in this verse of our English Version, cannot be accepted as conveying the 
meaning of Festus. He would not have spoken of that which was, at all events 
nominally, the religion of Agripjia, as a "superstition." We may safely adopt the 
ordinary word " religion " — a word, even from the Jews' point of view, little enough 
appreciated by a Boman official — as found in the Revised Version. Great as was the 
practical injustice in some diiections of Festus, for instance, in keeping Paul in prison; 
yet we cannot fail to note a certain truthfulness of his lip. He has already spoken 
sufficiently the acquittal of his prisoner. This he does again, privately, in conversation 
with Agrippa ; and yet again to-morrow, without disguise, in the publicity of the open 
court. To that same lip it was also given to utter, at all events, the central truth 
about Jesus in his relation to men, however little he believed or understood it. We 
may notice here — 

I. The wide distanctb that separates the man who has no knowledge of 
EEVELATION FROM HIM WHO HAS SOME SUCH KNOWLEDGE. Presumably, Festus had 
not the slightest inclination to speak slightingly to Agrippa of the religion of the Jews 
ef Jerusalem. But nevertheless his tone is that of a man who speaks of what is 
utterly unintelligible to him. A Roman's worship was a strange thing ; his religion a 
strange product under any circumstances — perhaps in nothing so strange as in this 
disabling quality of them. But the piienomenon, after all, is most typical. It is typical 
of all thiise in their measure, i.e. the measure of their time and place in the whole 
world's history, who are without true revelation. It shows these in the twofold aspect, 
and apparently contradictory aspects, of believing far too much and far too little. 1. 
They believe far too much ; for they are sure to construct their own superhuman and 
supernatural. They will have their own pantheon in some sort. 2. And they believe 
far too little ; foj the verities of the true revelation of the superhuman and super- 
natural they are most averse to receive. Be the account of this what it may, it is but 
the expression of the thing of perpetual recurrence. The domain so wide, so dreary, of 
superstition lies where ignorance of true revelation is the appointed signal for men to 
make the materials of revelation unreal and incongruous for themselves. " Pro- 
fessing themselves to be wise, they become fools," not less in what they accept than in 
what they reject. What a world of thought and feeling, of meaning and of truth, was 
shut off from Festus, as his present language betrays him I And what a world of 
thought and feeling, of meaning and of truth, is shut off from any man and every man who 
is destitute of true revelation 1 If it have not yet travelled to him, it is at present his 
mysterious lot. If it have, and he reject it, it is his undeniable folly and guilt. Religion 
tad superstition are not differenced by one not introducing the supernatural, while 
the other does introduce it. They both introduce it, and they both earnestly believe 
in it. They are differenced in that the one acquaints with what things are . ,.1 and 
which, it concerns us to know, beyond the ken of mortal eye or reason ; but the othei 
offers us imaginations, perhaps in every groiesquest form, for truth and stones for 
bread. 

II. Briefly expressed, the vital fact ok all Christian truth, of all Christian 
FAITH, or all Christian impulse. " One Jesus, who was dead and whom," now ni 
longer Paul alone, but a vast portion of the world, " affirms to be alive." It were past 
all his merit that it should be given to the lip of Festus to utter these words, th* 
charter of our faith and hope and religion, that day, and to have them recorded ai 



ea, xxT. 1-^7J THE ACTS 0? THE APOSTLES. 26S 

hi^ Yet there they were spoken by him, and here for ever they will lie. The dead 
and anon living One is the centre of Christian faith, hope, love. It is the description 
he gives of himself: "I am he that liveth, and was dead, and, behold, I am alive for 
evermore" (Rev. i. 18). Three perennial springs — springs of heavenly truth and influ- 
ence, issue out of these simplest and coldest words as uttered by Festus. 1. The 
death of Christ has (1) a meaning all its own ; (2) a boundless fulness of meaning ; (3) 
an endless continuance of meaning. 2. The life of Christ, alter his death, has a very 
lustre of light for ns, if we think of it simply for what it teaches us about himself. It 
proclaims him, when all is considered, different from any other, unique among men, 
Prince of life, Victor over death. These are his own dignities. He shines wonderful 
in the midst of them, did we all but worsliip far away in wonder and admir.ition but 
mystery lost. 3. That risen life, and what followed it — the ascended life, have floods 
of joyful meaning for us, when we remember all that is distinctly revealed as involved 
in it for mankind and ourselves. (1) He is every way to be trusted, since he has 
proved himself true herein. (2) He gives us the life he has for himsulf. (3) He is 
the very Specimen, the Earnest, the manifest Firstfruits of the life thut shall be, for all 
them that sleep in him. (4) He is even now, though invisible, somewhere surely, and 
mindful of his people, and watchful over them, their one ever-living sympathizing 
Mediator and High Priest. (5) He lives above, waiting to receive, to judge, and then 
to bless his own people for ever and ever. Yes, the vital germs of all the highest 
Christian hope and faith lie in the words of Festus. — B. 

Ver. 3. — SeeJcing favour to cover wicked devices. Taking advantage of the anxiety 
to please his new subjects which would characterize the fresli governor, the enemies of 
St. Paul came to Festus asking a favour ; not, however, that they directly asked for 
what they really wanted. They asked for Paul's trial at a Jerusalem court, where the 
ecclesiastical offences, with which he was charged, could alone be properly considered. 
They intended to take advantage of his journey to attack the party and kill Paul — a 
scheme which only religious bigotry could devise, for it was one which promised little 
success. Eoman soldiers were nut wont to lose their prisoners. The i ncident gives a pain- 
ful illustration of the miserable servility of religious bigotry. Parrar says, " Festus was 
not one of the base and feeble procurators who would commit a crime to win popularity. 
The Palestinian Jews soon found that they had to do with one who more resembled a 
Gallic than a Felix." " Festus saw through them sufiBciently to thwart their design 
under the guise of a courteous offer that, as Paul was now at C»sarea, he would return 
thither almost immediately, and give a full and fair audience to their complaints. On 
their continued insistence, Festus gave them the haughty and genuinely Uoman reply 
that, whatever their Oriental notions of justice might be, it was not the custom of the 
Romans to grant any person's life to his accusers by way of doing a favour, but to place 
the accused and the accusers face to face, and to give the accused a full opportunity for 
self-defence." Felix may have given Festus some intimation of the enmity felt against 
this particular prisoner, and some account of the plot to assassinate him, from which he 
bad been preserved by Lysias. Examining the character and schemes of these enemies 
of St. Paul, we note — 

I. Their unrbasonablb prejudices against him. They were thoroughly " pre- 
judiced," and religious prejudices are the most blinding and most mischievous tliat men 
can take up. No kind of argument, no statements of fact, ever suffice to correct such 
prejudices, as may be illustrated from both religious and political spheres in our own 
day. Things corrected or denied a hundred times over, prejudice will persist in 
believing. When prejudice says, " It must be," all the world may stand in vain and 
plead, " But it is not." The prejudice of these men declared that Paul had defiled the 
temple, but he had not ; it said that he insulted the honoured system of Moses, but he 
did not. Their eyes were blinded, their hearts were hardened, and all argument was 
lost upon them. 

II. Personal fbelino ktbnsified religious pkejudiob. Recall the scene in the 
court of the high priest, when the person occupying that office temporarily was reproved 
by the apostle. Nothing increases the hate in an evil-disposed man like his being 
publicly reproved or humbled. The Sadducees, who were the party to which the higli 
priest belonged, would consider themselves insulted in the insult offered to him. An^' 



3«a THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [ch. xxv. 1— 27 

the Pharisee party were, no doubt, intensely annoyed by being drawn, on the sam« 
occasion, into a mere ttieologioal wrangle, which showed themselves up, and led to 
their losing their opportunity of killing Paul. So often personal feeling, injured pride, 
is at the root of religious prejudice and persecutioa. The fancied loyalty to God ol 
the religious persecutor is really an extravagant anxiety about self. 

III. Failure of some schemes aggravated the evil purpose. The scheme to kill 
Paul had been thwarted through Paul's nephew and the Roman officer ; but the annoy- 
ance of failure prevented their seeing in the failure a rebuke. What the malicious 
cannot accomplish by open methods they will seek by secret ones, lowering them- 
selves to any depths of meanness to accomplish their ends, even fawning upon new 
governors and begging personal favours. Beware of the debasing influence of cherished 
prejudices. — E. T. 

Ver. 8. — Protestations of innocence. The contrast between the two trials needs 
careful attention. "On the second occasion, when Paul was tried before Festus, the 
Jews had no orator to plead for them, so the trial degenerated into a scene of passionate 
clamour, in which St. Paul simply met the many accusations against him by calm denials." 
The Jews seem to have brought no witnesses, and the apostle knew well enough that 
no Roman judge would listen to mere accusations unsupported by testimony. On the 
one side was accusation without witness ; it was enough if, on the other side, there was 
the plea of " not guilty," and the solemn protestation of innocence. The charges so 
clamoiously made were : 1. Of Paul's heresy. He was declared to be a renegade Jew, 
whose teachings were proving most mischievous, and striking at the very foundations 
of the Mosaic religious system. St. Paul answered with an emphatic denial. He was 
but proclaiming those very truths for the sake of which the Mosaic system had been 
given, and of which it had testified, and for which it had been the pieparation. 2. Of 
Paul's sacrilege. This was, in the view of formal religionists, the height of all crime. 
Their charge rested on a statement of fact: this Paul had brought Trophimus, an 
Ephesian, into the temple, in order to pollute their temple and offer them an open 
insult. This Paul simply denied. There was no such fact. He had not brought 
Trophimus into the temple; and, if the Roman governor took any notice at all oi 
this charge, he would certainly have demandid witnesses to prove the fact, and have 
thrown the burden of finding the necessary witnesses on the accusers, and not on the 
prisoner. 3. Of Paul's treason. This the Jews could only insinuate, but this point 
they hoped would especially influence Festus. Such a man must be dangerous to the 
state ; popular tumults have attended his presence in every city where he has gone. 
He ought not to be set at liberty. Festus was not in the least likely to be frightened 
into doing an injustice, and could read the character of his prisoner too well to pay 
any heed to their clamour and their insinuations. " If there was a single grain of 
truth in the Jewish accusations, Paul had not been guilty of anything apprcjaching to a 
capital crime." It may be impressed that (1) there are times in a man's life when he 
is called upon to make a full defence of himself against any charges that may be 
brought against him. This is especially necessary when the charges take definite shape, 
and seem to have sanction and support. But (2) there are times in life when a man 
should attempt no defence, but stand firmly on his plea of innocence, and wait his 
time for his righteousness to become clear as the noonday. This is best when the 
charges are vague, and evidently the results of misrepresentation and slander. It is 
hopeless to attem[it the correction of such evils; we can only live them down. Our 
conduct must depend on the nature of the attack that is made on us. Even if specific 
charges are made, we may find it wisest to do as the apostle did, and throw the burden 
of proof altogether upon our accusers. — R. T. 

Ver. 11. — Appeal to Ocesar. In Introducing this subject, the difficulty in which 
Festus was placed should be shown. His predecessor had just been recalled, through 
the opposition of these very Jews who were now seeking a favour from him, and to 
resist them in their first request would be sure to excite a strong prejudice against him. 
So even Festus attempted the weakness of a compromise. He saw that the matter was 
not one with which a Roman tribunal could concern itself. It was really a locally religious 
dispute. So be thout'ht he could meet ttie case by persuading Paul to go to Jerusalem 



•H. IXT. 1—27.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 263 

to be tried, under the security of his protection. But the apostle knew the Jews much 
better than Festus did. Perhaps he was quite wearied out with these vain trials and 
this prolonged uncertainty. It seems that he suddenly made up his mind to claim his 
right of appeal as a Roman citizen, which would secure him from the machinations of 
his Jewish enemies. There are times when Christians may appeal to their citizen 
rights in their defence. This may be illustrated from such a case as that of the Salva- 
tion Army, and their right of procession through the streets. In times of religious 
persecution men have properly found defence and shelter in a demand for legal and 
political justice. Their hope has often lain in having their cases removed from the heated 
passionate atmospheres of religious courts to the calm atmospheres of strictly legal 
ones, though even our law-courts do not always keep due calmness when questions related 
to religion are brought before them. In this incident we may notice — 

I. St. Paul's safety as a Eomak. Explain the privileges of Roman citizenship. 
No governor could give him up to the Jews apart from his own consent (ver. 16). 
Recall the circumstances under which Paul's citizenship had proved his defence. 

II. St. Paul's bight as a Roman prisoner. A right of appeal from any inferior to 
the supreme court at Rome over which the emperor presided. Theoretically, this was 
a safeguard to justice, but in practice it proved rather a furtherance of injustice. The 
apostle was not likely to know all that was involved in his appeal. " There is obviously 
something like a sneer in the procurator's acceptance of St. Paul's decision. He knew, 
it may be, better than the apostle to what kind of judge the latter was ajipealing, what 
long delays there would be before the cause was heard, how little chance there was of 
a righteous judgment at last." The appeal must have been a surprise to all who heard 
it. (1) To Paul's friends, who lost the last hope of having him released to them. 

(2) To Paul's enemies, who knew that he was now altogether beyond their reach. 
And (3) to Festus, who felt that the prisoner recognized his inability to follow out 
what he knew to be the right, and who could not help being ashamed of his suggested 
weak compromise. Still, in this we may feel that the apostle was divinely directed, 
&;cording to the promise, " It shall be given you in that hour what ye shall speak." 
Through this appeal Providence opened the way for what seemed to be an unlikely, and 
indeed almost an impossible, thing, that St. Paul should see Rome, and even dwell there 
aa a Christian teacher. We are often showing that circumstances work out Divine 
providences ; we need also to see that the free actioni of men, freely taken, work out 
the Divine providences quite as certainly. — E. T. 

Vers. 18, 19. — Party accusations. From Festus we learn what were the accusa- 
tions made against the apostle by his Jewish enemies, and we see plainly that they 
cared only for the interests of party, not for the truth. It becomes evident that the 
point of difficulty was our Lord's resurrection, upon which St. Paul always so firmly 
Insisted. That fact is the central fact of Christianity ; and upon it the whole scheme 
of Christian doctrine rests. Note— 

I. Whbbein Paul's accusers failed. They could not prove any crime that was 
cognizable by the Roman authorities. They were in danger of being themselves 
charged with violence done to a Roman citizen. 

II. Wherein Paul's accusers were weak. They brought before a civil judge only 
matters of opinion. On these freedom was allowed, so long as that freedom did not lead 
to acts of rebellion or disorder. They did not even bring matters of opinion that were 
of public concern, but only such as were made subjects of party contention. Their 
little isms they thought of more importance than the government of the empire. Festus 
haughtily says that the questions concerned their own superstition. 

III. Wherein Paul's accusers confirmed his teaching. They set out promi- 
nently Paul's great truth, that Jesus was alive, and had present power to save. From 
his enemies we learn what Paul preached — Christ risen ; Christ living ; Clirist saving 
now. Christ, ae " alive from the dead," is declared (1) innocent, (2) accepted, 

(3) Divine, (4) related to us as Mediator. We know clearly what made the Jewish 
party so mad against the apostle. No other apostle or disciple had shown, aa he had 
done, what was involved in our Lord's resurrection. Still if our preaching is to be a 
saving power on men, we must declare Christ risen from the dead, and " able to sav« 
unto the uttermost all who come unto God by him." — R. T. 



264 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. xxn. 1—321 



Ver. 22. — Interett in the prisoner for Christ. For the necessary accounts d 
Agrippa and Bernice, see the Expository portions of this Commentary. We only dwell 
on Agrippa's interest in St. Paul, as giving him an opportunity to preach the gospel 
before kings. Gerok gives the following outline as suggestive of a descriptive dis- 
course, from which general practical lessons may he drawn : — The audience-chamher of 
the governor at Csesarea may be regarded from three points of view. 

I. It was a drawinq-eoom of worldly globy, by reason of the splendour of th« 
assembled nobility. 

II. It was a lectube-rooh of holy dootbine, by reason of the testimony mad« 
by the apostle. 

III. It was a judgment-hall op Divine majesty, by reason of the impression pro- 
duced by the apostolic discourse. The speech and its effects will be dealt with in the 
succeeding chapter. — B. T. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XXVL 



Ver. 1. — And for then, A.V. ; his for the, 
A.V. ; made his defence for answered for 
himself, A.V. Agrippa said. It was by 
the courteBy of Festus that Agrippa thus 
tool£ the chief place. It was, perhaps with 
the like courtesy that Agrippa said, im- 
personally. Thou art permitted, without 
specifying whether by himself or by Festus. 
Stretched forth his hand. The action of an 
orator, rendered in this case still more im- 
pressive by the chains which hung upon 
his arms. Luke here relates what he saw. 
Made his defence (ciTrtAoyeH-o) ; ch. xxv. 8 ; 
xxiv. 10, note. 

Ver. 2. — That I am to malce my defence 
before thee this day for hecause I shall answer 
for myself thi* day hefore thee, A.V. ; by for 
of, A.V. 

Ver. 3. — Thou art expert for I know thee 
to be expert, A.V. and T.E. Ezpert; 
■yviiiTTitv, here only in the New Testament, 
but found in the LXX. (Daniel, i.e. Hist, 
of Susunna 42) applied to God, b ratv KpvwTwy 
yiiA<jri\s : and 1 Sam. xxviii. 3 and 2 Kings 
xxl. 6, as the rendering of '3j)T> ^ wizard. 
It is seldom found in classical Greek. Ao- 
eording to the R.T., which is that generally 
adopted (Meyer, Kuinocl, Wordaworth, Al- 
ford, etc.), tlie accusative yvJiirrnv ivra ai is 
put, by a not uncommon constniction, for tlie 
genitive absolute, as in Eph. i. 18. The 
marginal rendering;, because thou artespecially 
expert, seems preferable to that in the text. 
Customs and questions. For the use of i6ri 
and (riTruj-ara applied to Jewish customs and 
controversies, see ch. vi. 14 ; xvi. 21 ; xxi. 21, 
etc. ; and oh. xxv. 19, note. 

Ver. 4. — Then from my youth up {oi from 
my youth, A.V. ; from the beginning for at 
the first, A.V. ; and at for at, A.V. and T.K. 
My manner of Ufe, etc. The same testimony 
of a good conscience as that in ch. xxiii. 1 
and xxiv. 16. TIjO word $ia<ris occurs only 
licie in the Kew Testament. But we find 



the phrase, tJj fwSum pt&gfttt, "the 
mannar of life according to the Law," in 
the Prologue to Eeclesiasticus and in 
Syramachus (Ps. xxxviii. 6), though not 
in classical Greek. The verb k^ic occurs in 
1 Pet. iv. 2, and not unfrequently in the 
LXX. From my youth up, which was from 
the beginning among my own nation, etc., 
having Imowledge of me from the first (in 
ver. 5). No appeal could be stronger as to 
the notoriety of his whole life spent in the 
midst of his own people, observed and known 
of all. The T.E. implies that his youth 
was spent at Jerusalem, according to what 
he himself tells us in ch. xxii. 3. The K.T. 
does so less distinctly. (For St. Paul's 
account of his early Pharisaism, comp. GaL 
i. 13, 14 ; Phil. iii. 5, 6.) 

Ver. 5. — Having knowledge of me from th» 
first for which knew me from the beginning, 
A.V. ; be willing to for would, A.V. ; how 
that for that, A.V. ; straitest for mod straitest, 
A.V. Straitest (aKpi^Seo-TiiTijv); see oh. xxii. 
S; xviii. 26, etc. Sect (a'/peo-is): see oh. 
xxiv. 14, note. He does not disclaim being 
still a Pharitee. On the contrary, in the next 
verse (ver. 6) he declares as he had done in 
ch. xxiii. 6, that it was for the chief hope 
of the Pharisees that lie was now accused. 
He tries to enlist all the good feeling that 
yet remained among the Jews on his side. 

Ver. 6. — Sere to be judged for and am 
judged, A.V. To be judged (6Vt7)ko Kpiv6- 
nevos); rather. Island on my trial. The A.V. 
seems to give tlie sense well. The hope of 
the promise. The hope of the kingdom of 
Christ, which necessarily implies tlie re- 
surrection of the dead. This hope, which 
rested upon God's promise to the fathers, 
Paul clung to; this hope his Sadducean 
persecutors denied. He, then, was the true 
Jew; he was faithful to Moses and the 
prophets ; he claimed the sympathy anrl sup- 
port of all true Israelites, and specially of 
King Agiippa. 

Ver. 7. — Earnestly for instantly, A.V. f 



JH. XXVI. 1—32.] TEE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



266 



night and day for day and night, A.V. ; 
attain for come, A.V. ; and concerning this 
hope I am accused by the Jews, King ! for 
for which hope's sake. King Agrippa, lam 
accused of the Jews, A.V. and T B. Our 
twelve tribes. AaSeKjL<t>u\ov only occurs 
here, in the Sibjlline oracles, and in the prot- 
evangel. Jacob., 3, and in Clement's 1 Cor. 65, 
but is formed, after the analogy of such words 
as SuSiKaETtjs, SuSeKd^wtpos, SajSe/caV'I^oy, 
TeTpil,(j)v\os, SfKd<pv\os (Herod., v. 66), and the 
lite. The idea of the twelve tiibes of 
Isi'ael is part of the essential conception of 
the Israel of God. So our Lord (Matt. xii. 
28 ; Jas. i. 1 ; Eev. vii. 4, etc.). St. Paul 
felt and spoke like a thorough Israelite. 
Earnestly ; iv iKriveta, only here and in 2 
Mace. xiv. 38 (where Eazis is said to have 
risked his body and his life for the religion 
of the Jews, ;ti6To itiar\s ^xrevlas, " with all 
vehemence," A.V.), and Jud. iv. 9, where the 
phrase, 4v ^kt€j/ioi jut7a'\j;, " with great 
vehemency," « with great 'fervency," A.V., 
occurs twice, applied to prayer and to self- 
huniiliation. The adjective ^KTei/rjs occurs 
ii: oh. xii. 5 ; Luke xxii. 44 ; 1 Pet. iv. 8 ; and 
fKrevas in 1 Pet. i. 22. Serving (Karpeiov') ; 
i.e. serving with worship, prayers, sacrifices, 
and the like. The allusion is to the temple 
serrjce, with its worship by night and by day 
(comp. Ps. cxxxiv. 1 ; 1 Chron. ix. 33). 

Ver. 8. — Why is it judged incredible with 
you, if for why should it be thought a thing 
incredible with you, that, A.V. ; doth for 
should, A.V. Why is it judged, etc. ? The 
use of el is somewliat peculiar. It cannot 
stand for in, but it is nearly equivalent to 
"whether," as in ver. 23. The question 
proposed to the mind is here whether God 
has raised the dead ; and in ver. 23 whether 
Christ has suffered, whether he is the first 
to rise. In the latter case St. Paul gives the 
answer by his witness to the truth, aflSrming 
that it is so. In the former case he chides 
his hearers for giving the answer of unbelief 
and saying that it is not so. 

Ver. i). — I verily. He gently excuses 
their unbelief by confessing that he himself 
had once felt like them, and insinuates the 
hope that they would change their minds as 
he had, and proceeds to give them good 
reason for doing so. Contrary to the Name 
(Gal. i. 13 ; 1 Tim. i. 13). Jesus of Nazareth. 
Byso designating the Lord of glory, he avows 
himself a member of "the sect of the Naza- 
renes " (see oh. ii. 22 ; iii. 6 : iv. 10 ; z. 38, 
etc.). 

Ver. 10. — And this for which thing, A.V. ; 
I bcth shut up for did I shut up, A.V. (with 
a change of order) ; prisons for prison, A.V. ; 
vote for voice, A.V. I . . . shut up. The ^yii is 
emphatic. The verb KaraKKdai, peculiar to 
St. Luke (see Luke iii. 20) is much uned by 
medical writers. Were put to death ; avai- 



pov/i^fuv, » word frequent in St. Luke's 
writings, and much used in medical works, 
as well as i,valf.€iris(_eh. viii. 1). The phrase 
KaTa<p4pitv rl/rj<j>ov is unusual; ipe'pftv if/^cpoy 
is the more common phrase, both in Jose- 
plius and in classical writers. I gave my 
vote, etc. Not, as Meyer and others take 
it, " I assented to it, at the moment of their 
being killed," equivalent to avvevSoKuy of 
ch. xxii. 20 ; but rather, " when the Christians 
were being punished with .death, I was one 
of tliose who in the Sanhedrim voted for their 
death." 

Ver. 11. — Punishing them oftentimes in all 
the synagogues, I strove to make them blas- 
pheme for I punished them oft in every 
synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme, 
A.V. ; foreign for strange, A.V. In all the 
synagogues. Tliose in Jerusalem, as the 
contrast of the foreign cities shows. (For 
the facts, see ch. viii. 1, 3.) I strove, etc. 
The " compelled " of the A.V. is the natural 
rendering of {ii/dyKa^ov (Matt. xiv. 22 ; Luke 
xiv. 23 ; ch. xxviii. 19, etc.) ; but it does 
not necessarily follow that the compulsion 
was successful. It might be in some cases, 
and not in others. Pliny, in his letter to 
Trajan, says that those who were aconsed of 
being Christians cleared tliemselves by 
calling upon the gods, offering to the 
image of the emperor, and cursing Christ, 
none of which things, it is said, true Chris- 
tians (" qui sunt revera Christiani ") can be 
compelled to do (' Epist.,' 10, 95, quoted by 
Kuinoel). Mad against them ; ifi/iaivo/ievos 
ouToiF, only here; but the adjective iftjiav^s, 
frantic, is not uncommon in classical writers. 

Ver. 12. — Journeyed for went, A.V. ; with 
the authority . . . of for with authority . . . 
/roTO, A.V. and T.E. Commission; iiriTpoirrjs, 
here only in the New Testament. But 
iiriTpoitoi is a " steward " (Matt. xx. 8 ; 
Luke viiL 3) ; and hence the Koman pro- 
curator was called in Greek, iirlTpoiros, and 
so were governors generally, as those who 
acted with a delegated authority. The 
chief priests. In ch. ix. 1 Saul is said to 
have applied to " the chief priest " for 
authority. The high priest, as president of 
the Sanhedrim, acted with the other chiei 
priests (ch. ix. 14). 

Ver. 13.— 0» for in, A.V. ; that for which, 
A.V. At midday. " About noon " (ch. xxii. 
6). It enhanced the wonder of that light 
from heaven that it should be seen above 
the brightness of the stm at midday, in 
such a latitu<le. 

Ver. 14. — Saying unto me in the Hebrew 
language for speaking unto me, and saying 
in the Bebrew tongue, A.V. and T.E. ; goad 
for pricks, A.V. I heard a voice saying, 
etc. (see ch. ix. 7, note). In the Hebrew 
language. This is an additional detail not 
mentioned in ch. ix. 4 or oh. xxii. 8 ; but 



L'tte 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. XXVI. 1 — sa 



recalled here, as teading to confirm St. 
Paura claim to be a thorough Jew, a 
Hebrew of the Hebrews, and, moreover, to 
represent Christianity as a thing not alien 
from, but rather in thorough harmony with, 
the true national life and spirit of Israel. 
It is hard for thee to kick, etc. This, also, 
according to tlie best manuscripts, is an 
idditional detail not mentioned before. The 
proverb Uphs KsVrpa \aKTi(eiv, to kick 
against the ox-gnads, as the unbroken 
bullock does to his own hurt, instead of 
quietly submitting, as he must do at last, 
to go the way and the pace his master 
chooses he should go, is found in Pindar, 
.lEsehylus, Euiipides, Plautus, Terence, etc. 
The passages are given in Bochart, ' Hiero- 
zoieon.,' part i. lib. ii. ch. xxxix. ; in Kuinoe], 
and in Bishop Wordsworth. The passage 
in Eurip., ' Bacch.,' 1. 79.3, 794 (750, 751), 
brings out the force of the proverb, viz. 
fruitless resibtanoe to a superior power, 
most distinctly : " Belter to sacrifice to him, 
than, being mortal, by vainly raging against 
God, to kick against the goads." Saul had 
better yield at once to the constniining 
grace of God, and no longer do despite to 
the Spirit of grace. It does not appear 
clearly that the proverb was used by the 
Hebrews. Dr. Donaldson ('Christian Or- 
thodoxy,' p. 293) affirms that " there is no 
Jewish use of this proverbial expression." 
And this is borne out by Lightfoot, who 
adduces the two passages, Deut. xxxii. 15 
and 1 Sam. ii. 9, as the only evidences of 
the existence of such a proverb, together 
with a rabbinical saying, " E. Bibai sat and 
taught, and R. Isaac Ben Cahna kicked 
against him " (' Bxercit. on Acts,' ix. 5). It 
is, therefore, a curious question how this 
classical phrase came to be used here. 
Bishop Wordsworth says, "Even in heaven 
our Lord did not disdain to use a proverb 
familiar to the heathen world." But, per- 
haps, we may assume that such a proverb 
was substantially in use among the Jews, 
though no distiuct evidence of it has been 
preserved; and that St. Paul, in rendering 
the Hebrew words of Jesus into Greek, 
made use of the language of Euripides, 
with which he was familiMr, in a case bear- 
ing a strong analogy to his own, viz. the 
resistance of Pentheus to the claims of 
Bacchus. This is to a certain extent borne 
out by the use of tlie words Beo/idxos and 
9eo/uoxf ly (ch. V. 39 ; xxiii. 9) ; the latter of 
which is twice used in the ' BacehsB ' of 
Euripides, though not common elsewhere. 
It is, however, found in 2 Mace. vii. 19. 

Ver. 15.— Tlie Lord for he, A.V. andT.R. 

Ver. 16. — Arise for rise, A.V. ; to this end 
have I, etc., for I have, etc., for this purpose, 
A.V. ; appoint for make, A.V. ; the things 
wherein thou hast seen me for these thivgi 



which thou hast seen, A.V. and T.R. ; tht 
things wherein for those things in the Khich, 
A.V. Tor to this end have I appeared, etc. 
On comparing this statement with those in 
ch. ix. 6 and ch. xxii. 10, 14, 15, it appears 
that in this condensed account given before 
King Agrippa, St. Paul blends into one 
message the words spoken to him when the 
Lord first appeared to him, and the in- 
struction subsequently given to him through 
Ananias, and the words spoken to him in 
the trance (ch. xxii. 17 — 21). This may 
especially be inferred from oh. ii. 6, an? 
again from comparing oh. xxii. 15 with this 
verse. 

Ver. 17. — Unto whom for unto whom now, 
A.V. TTnto [the Gentiles]. These seem to 
be the words heard in the trance reported 
in ch. xxii. 21, the sequel to which, as con- 
tained in ver. 18, the apostle would then 
have recited, had he not been cut short by 
the furious cries of tlie Jews. 

Ver. 18. — That they may turn for and to 
turn them, A.V. and T.R. ; remission for 
forgiveness, A.V. ; an inheritance for in- 
heritance, A.V. ; that for which, A.V. ; faith 
in me for faith that is in me, A.V. To open 
their eyes (comp. Luke iv. 18 and the LXX. 
of Isa. Ixi. 1 ; 2 Cor. iv. 4 — 6, etc.). That 
they may turn from darkness to light (comp. 
Col. i. 12, 13 ; Eph. v. 8 ; 1 Pet. ii. 9, etc.), 
Bemission of sins (see oh. ii. 38; iii. 19; x. 
43). 

Ver. 19. — Wlierefore for whereupon, A.V. 
Disobedient (aireiBiis) ; see Luke i. 17 ; Rom. 
i. 80, etc. The turn of the phrase is most 
skilful ; as if he should say, " Can you 
blame me for obeying such a heavenly 
message ? How could I act otherwise, bein g 
thus directed ? " Vision (oirraffia) ; Luke i. 
22; xxiv. 23; 2 Cor. xii. I. Found also 
repeatedly in the LXX. of Daniel and 
Wisdom (comp. the use of SirTiva, ch. i. 3). 

Ver. 20.— Declared for showed, A.V. ; hoth 
to them of Damascus first for first unto them 
of Damascus, A.V. and T.R. ; country for 
coasts, A.V. ; also for then, A.V. ; doing for 
and do, A.V. ; worthy of for meet for, A.V. 
Them of Damascus first, etc. He enumerates 
his evangelical labours in the order in which 
they took place : at Damascus first, as re- 
lated in ch. ix. 19 — 22 ; then at Jerusalem, 
as in ch. ix. 26 — 29 ; and then those on a 
larger and wider scale, among the Jews of 
Palestine and the heathen in all the ooun- 
tries which he visited. Throughout all the 
country of Judaea. This does not allude 
to any preaching in the land of Judaea at 
the time of his first visit to Jerusalem (ch. 
ix. 28), because he says in Gal. i. 22, that at 
that time, viz. before he went into the 
regions of Syria and Cilicia, he was still 
"unknown by face unto the Churches o. 
Juilssa." But he had opportunities later of 



cH. XXVI. 1—32.] TflE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 



26t 



preaching in Jadmi. For instance, the 
language of ch. xi. 29 suggests that such 
an opportunity may have arisen vphen Paul 
and Barnabas carried up the alms of the 
Christians at Antioch " unto the brethren 
that dwelt in Judaea." Another opportunity 
he manifestly had when he passed with 
Barnabas through Phcenicia and Samaria 
to Jerusalem, as related in ch. xv. 3. 
Another, when he went from Csesarea to 
Jerusalem, as related in oh. xvili. 22. Aprain, 
there was room for working among the Jews 
in Palestine while he was staying at 
Csesarea " many days," and journeying to 
Jerusalem, as we read in ch. xxi. 10, 15. 
So that there is no contradiction whatever 
between the statement in this verse and 
that in Gal. i. 22. The clauses in this 
verse are two : (1) " both to them at Damas- 
cus, and at Jerusalem first ; " and (2) " and 
throughout all Judsea, and to the Gentiles." 

Ver. 21. — litis cause for tliese causes, A.V. ; 
seized for caught, A.V. ; essayed for went 
about, A.V. For this cause. Here again is 
a most telling statement. "I have spent 
my life in trying to persuade men to repent 
and turn to God, and for doing sn tlie Jews 
seek to kill me. Can this be right ? Will 
not you, O King Agrippa, protect me from 
such an unjust requital ? " To kiU me ; 
Stax^'plc'^eSai, here and in ch. v. .SO only 
in the New Testament ; notintheLXX.,but 
in Polybius, and in Hippocrates and Galen, 
of surgical operations. 

Ver. 22. — The help that is from God for 
help of God, A.V. ; stnnd for continue, A.V. ; 
testifying for viUnei'sing, A.V. ; nothing but 
what for none othia- things than those which, 
A.V. Help, etc.; iiriKovpia, here only and 
in TVisd. xiii 18, still of Divine help ; in 
medical writers frequently, of aid from 
medicine and phytioians ; common also in 
classical writers, of auxiliary forces. It is 
properly spoken of help and allies from 
without (Bengel). I stand ; i.e. I continue 
unmoved, steadfast, and, by God's help, not 
cruslied by my enemies. Testifying. The 
natural rendering of the E.T. ij.apTvp6iJ.ems. 
The T.R. fiapTvpoifievos, followed by vwh, 
would mean " borne witness to," " approved," 
as in ch. vi. 3 ; x. 22, etc., and so Meyer 
understands it here. But fiapTvpu/jem 
makes much better sense, and is much 
better supported by manuscript authority. 
It is in close agreement with oh. ix. 15 and 
eh. xxii. 15, that St. Paul should thus 
** testify " to small and great. 

Ver. 23. — How that the Clirist must for 
ttiat Christ should, A.V. ; how that he first by 
the resurrection of the dead should proclaim 
for that he should be the first that should rise 
from the dead, and should show, A,V. ; both 
to for unto, A.V. and T.R. How that (ei); 
gee ver. 8, note. Must suffer; iraBriTis only 



here and in profane Greek writers. Th« 
exact meaning of TtaJdr\T6s is "liable to 
suffering," just aa fli/TiTiJr (from 6i/i)(Txai) 
means " liable to death," i.e. mortal. But 
just as 0priT<lt in use comes to mean "one 
who must die," w TTaBrirSs means " one who 
must suffer ; " and so we read in Luke xxiv. 
26, Oh-xl eSei iradetv rhv Xpiarhv, Kat eicreKSeiv 
fis rijv S6^av avTov ; "Ought not Christ to 
have suffered," etc. ? And so again in Luke 
xxiv. 46 (T-B.^'ESei iraei'iv n-hv XpilTThv, Kal 
ItvaffTTJvM 6K yeKpaSv, " It behoved Christ to 
Buffer, and to rise from the dead," where the 
turn of thought is exactly the same as here. 
The Vulgate renders it by passibUis. The 
Fathers (Ignatius, Polycarp, Justin Martyr) 
contrast the state of Christ in glory with 
his state in the flesh by the words oTraff^s 
and TraflijTo's, " impassible " and " passible." 
That he first by the resurrection of the dead 
should proclaim, etc. Most commentators, 
from Chrysostom downwards, connect the^rsi 
with the resurrection. " First from the 
resurrection," equal to irpanSToKos ix rSiv 
veKp&v (Col. i. 18). As Meyer truly says, 
" The chief stress of this sentence lies on 
vpSyros e| actttTTaVeto?." The A.V. gives the 
sense by a periphrasis; only it must be 
well understood that it was especially by 
being tlie first to rise, and so to bring life 
and immortality to light, that Christ showed 
light to the people. The words may, of 
course, be construed as the K.V. does, but 
such a rendering is not in accordance with 
the spirit of the passage or the analogy of 
other passages. Christ was the first to rise, 
and he will be followed by them that are 
his. But it is not true to say that he was 
the first to give light to Jews and Gentiles, 
and will be followed by others doing the 
same. (For the sentiment, comp. Lulse 
ii. 32.) Note on the whole the enormous 
stress laid by St. Paul on the fulfilment of 
prophecy as a proof of the truth of the 
gospel, following therein our Lord himself 
(Luke xxiv. 2,n, 21, 4i, 45). 

Ver. U.~Made his defence for spalce for 
himself, A.V. (JnvoKoyovix^vov, as ver. 2) ; saith 
for said, A.V. ; raad fur beside thyself, A.V. ; 
thy much for much, A.V. ; turn thee to mad- 
ness for make thee mad, A.V, With a loud 
voice. Another detail, betraying the eye- 
witness of the scene dt scribed. Thou art 
mad (Mai'"!)) i ch. xii. 15 ; John x. 20 ; 
1 Cor. xiv. 23. Much learning (tS; 1ro^Ao' 
ypafj/jara). So John vii. 15, *' How knoweth 
this man letters (ypafiixaTo)?" is equivalent 
to" Whence hath this man this wisdom?" 
(Matt. xiii. 54). And aypa/jfiaTos in ch. 
iv. 13 is "unlearned." Tlie excited inter- 
ruption by Febtus shows tliat he was un- 
able to accept the truths enunciated by the 
apostle. The ideas of fulfilled prophecy, 
and of the resurrection of the dead, and (f p 



26d 



tHB ACTS OF THE APOSTLES, 



[oh. XXVI, 1 — 32. 



cmoifled Jew giving light to the great 
Boman world, were " foolishness nnto him," 
because he lacked spiritual discernment. 
He thought the apostle's glowing words 
must be the outcome of a disordered mind. 
Turn thee to madness (ds ^avtav irepiTpeirei), 
The word ^apla (mania) occurs only here in 
the New Testament. But it is tlie technical 
name in medical writers for the disease of 
navla, mania, and is also common in clas- 
sical writers. The verb for "doth turn" 
(TreptTp4iT€i) is also peculiar to St. Luke, 
being found only in this place. It is used 
by Plato, but specially liy medical writers, 
as is also the substantive formed from it, 
vepLTpovrij, spoken of the " turn " taken by a 
disease, and the simple verb rpeVei and 
rpenerai ' e.g. erpexl/e yyciifi-qv es fiaviTjy I is ffKv- 
Bpairhv T) fiaviti rpeTrerat I rois fiaivofievoiffi 
SAAotc ft-ev is ipyiiv, &?^0Te Se 4s 9vfi7iSiav 
(mirth) Tjyi/difiTi Tpeirerai, etc. (Hobavt, p. 468). 

Ver. 25. — Paul saith for he said, A. V. and 
T.R. ; excellent for noble, A.V. ; viorda for the 
words, A.V. Most excellent (/cpdno-Te). It 
appears to be the proper title to give the 
procurator (see oh. xxiii. 26; xxiv. 3). St. 
Lulce also applies it to Theophilus (Luke i. 
3). In classical Greek oi Kpana-Toi are the 
aristocracy. Soberness {ca^ppoaivri); sound 
or sober mindedness ; just the opposite of the 
Umla of which he was accused. See the use 
of aa(^poviiv (Mark v. 15 ; Luke viii. 85 ; 2 
Cor. V. 13, etc.), and of ata^povi^^iv, (nw<^p«- 
vifffi6s, ffurppctjv, etc. So also in Plato, awcppo- 
aivii is opposed to fiayia. 

Ver. 26. — Unto for before, A.V. ; is hidden 
for are hidden, A.V. ; this hath not been for 
this thing was not, A.V. For the king, etc. 
Siimething in Agrippa'g manner showed St 
Paul that he was not unaffected by what he 
had heard. And so with his usual quick- 
ness and tact he appeals to liim to confirm 
the " words of truth and soberness " which 
he had just addressed to the sceptical Festus. 
I speak freely. He was indeed a prisoner 
and in chains, as he so touchingly said (in 
ver. 29), but the word of God in his mouth 
was not bound. Tla^pTqaia^iincvos (see ch. ix. 
27 ; xiii. 46 ; xiv. 3 ; xviii. 26 ; xix. 8 ; and 
the frequent use of irapj)7iaia). 

Ver. 28. — And for then, A.V. ; with but 
little persuasion thou wouldest fain make me 
a Christian for almost thou per suadest me to be 
a CItrislian, A.V. With but little persuasion 
(iv oXiytf, K.T.\.). This saying of Agrippa'g 
is obscure and variously explained. The 
A. v., following Chrysostom, Beza, Luther, 
etc., takes eV ohiyif to mean "within a little" 
or " almost," like the Hebrew oyns, which is 
very suitable to the context. The corre- 
sponding ill TrSWcp, or, as otherwise read, iy 
HPY<^1>j would then mean, as in the A.V., 
"altogether," and the sense of tlie whole 
rassage is striking and appropriate. But 



there is some difficulty in getting thii 
meaning out of the words. The natural way 
of expressing it would be trap' oKlyov, or 
b\iyov, or 0^(701' SeZ Hence many other com- 
mentators take iv o\lyif to mean " in a short 
time," and the sense to be either " you are 
making short work of my conversion : you 
are persuading me to become a Christian ai 
suddenly as you yourself did ; " with a cor- 
responding sense for iy TriKKcp, "in a long 
time," i.e. whether it takes a short or a long 
time, I pray God you may become a Christian 
like myself; " or, "you are soon persuading 
me," you will soon persuade me if you go 
on any longer in this strain. Others, again, 
preferring the reading iv fieydka in ver. 29, 
take iy o\tyif to mean " with little trouble," 
or " with few words," as Eph. iii, 5 (under- 
standing \iy^ or n6ytji), " lightly " (Alford), 
and then the opposite iy inydxcf would mean 
" with much trouble," " with many words," 
i.e. " with difficulty." But this is rather a 
flat rendering. Another difference of opinion 
is whether the words of Agrippa are to be 
taken ironically, or sarcastically, or jestingly, 
or whether they are to be taken seriously, 
as the words of a man shaken in his convic- 
tions and seriously impressed by what he 
had heard. The whole turn of the narrative 
seems to favour the latter view. Another 
view, started by Chrysostom, is that Agrippa 
used the words in one sense, and St. Paul 
(mistakenly or advisedly) took them in an- 
other. Another possible explanation is that 
iy d\lyip is here used in the sense in which 
Thucydides employa the phrase (iL 86 and 
iv. 26), T^y iy okiycp vav/^dxtay and 'Ei/ 6\iya} 
(TTfiaTOTrfSevoiiiyos, viz. " in a narrow place; " 
and that Agrippa meant to say, " By your 
appeal to the prophets you press me hard ; 
you have got me into a corner. I am in a 
<rTfyoxapia, a ' narrow room ; ' I hardly know 
how to get out of it" The iy ii.eyd\tp would 
then mean a " large room," a ivpuxaipla (Ps. 
XXX. 8). This would suppose iv oKlya and 
^y ixcyiX(f to have become proverbial phrases. 

Ver. 29. — Whether with little or with much 
for both almost, and altogether, A.V. ; might 
become for were, A.V. (the order of the words 
is also changed). I would to God; literally, 
I would pray to God. It is not very different 
from the riix^M" of Eom. ix. 3. All acknow- 
ledge the extreme beauty and taste of this 
reply, combining the firmness of the martyr 
with the courtesy of the gentleman. '* Loqui- 
tur Paulus ex seusu suse beatitudinis, cum 
amore latissimo " (Bengel). 

Ver. 30. — And the king rose up for and 
when he had thus spoken, the king, etc., A.V. 
and T.E. They that sat with them. The 
chief captains and principal men and the 
royal attendants of ch. xxv. 23. 

Ver. 3L — Had withdrawn for were gone 
aside, A.V. ; spake one to another for talked 



«JH. XXVI. 1—82.1 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



f6S 



Wtceun (hemselves, A.V, Had withdrawn ; 
riz. from the public hall, the axpoar-lipwy 
»f ch. XXV. 23, into the private room, " the 
withdrawing-room " adjoining it. There 
they freely talked over the trial, and all 
agreed that the prisoner had done nothing 
to deserve either death or imprisonment. 
Paul had made a favourable impression upon 
both Jews and Romans. 

Ver. 32. — And Agrippa mid for then said 
Ayrippa, A.V. Agrippa said unto Testus. 
Festus liad consulted Agrippa, as one con- 
veriant with Jewish questions, about the 



case of Paul (ch. xxv. 14 — 21). And in the 
place of hearing he had publicly stated that 
he had brought him before King Agrippa to 
be examined, that, " after examination had." 
he might know what to write to the emperor 
Accordingly Agrippa now gives it as his 
opinion that the prisoner might have been 
discharged if he had not appealed to Cajsar. 
Festua was of the same opinion, and doubt- 
less wrote to Nero to that effect. The result 
was that he was acquitted liefore the em- 
peror's tribunal at Bome, at the end <^ two 
years. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 26. — Th* apology. We are struck with a contrast between the conduct of 
our Lord when he stood before the bar of Caiaphas and of Pontius Pilate, and that of 
St. Paul when he was brought before Festus and Agripjia. It is written of Jesus, 
when the Jews accused him before Caiaphas, that " he held his peace." And again, as 
he stood before Pontius Pilate the governor, when he was accused of the chief priests 
and elders, that he answered nothing. Aud even when Pilate himself appealed to him, 
he gave him no answer, not even to one word ; but, like a lamb dumb before the shearer, 
opened not his mouth. St. Paul, on the contrary, when his enemies launched vehement 
accusations against him, stood boldly on his defence. With inliuite wisdom, eloquence, 
and spirit, he rebutted their charges, and asserted his innocence of them. Both before 
the Sanhedrim and before Felix, as well as before Festus and Agrippa, he maintained 
his own cause with consummate skill and dignity ; not cowed by their violence, nor 
losing his temper in meeting their attack ; but confronting them with the bold- 
ness of a pure conscience, and with the energy of an invincible courage. Can we 
assign any reason for this remarkable difference between the conduct of the Master 
and the servant under such similar circumstances? It is, of course, possible that the 
patience and silence of Jesus was the result of that conscious innocence and perfect 
sinlessness which belonged to the Son of man alone, and could not be shared by even 
the holiest of his servants. As he would not allow his servants to draw the sword in 
his defence, so neither would he speak a word to vindicate his innocence and uphold 
his cause. It may have been part of his Divine mis.sion of suffering to be absolutely 
passive in receiving injuries by word, as he was in enduring the shame and agony of the 
cross. Unresisted slander, unresentod blasphemies, undenied accusations, may have 
been as truly parts of the Passion, as the spitting, and the smiting on the cheek, and 
the crown of thorns, and the piercing of the hands and feet were. His answer, his 
apology, his acquittal, were to be the resurrection from the dead ; and, awaiting that 
apology at the hands of his Father, silent endurance was to be his part. The difference 
between his sinlessness as the Son and the inferior goodness of the apostle mixed with 
sin, and between the vindication of the Son to be proclaimed by the resurrection and 
the vindication of the' apostle to be effected by ordinary means, may be one ground of 
the difference which we are considering. But there is another obvious difference 
between the two cases. Christ must suffer. According to the determinate counsel 
and foreknowledge of God, Jesus was to lay down his life as a sacrifice for sin. And he 
was willing to do so. His own will was one with the Father's will, that thus it should 
be. As, therefore, he would not pray to his Father to send him twelve legions of angels, 
to free him from his enemies, so neither would he resist his condemnation by assertions 
or proofs of his sinless purity. He was silent before his unjust judges, as he bore hit 
cross, as he stretched out his hands upon it, as finally he bowed the head and gave up 
the ghost. It was otherwise with St. Paul. He had no life to give for the world's 
Bin.i, nor was he yfit to die at all. He had more years to run in his Lord's service, nor 
did he know when his time would come. He must live and work awhile for the souls 
of Jews and Gentiles, and must leave no stone unturned to exhibit his integrity before 
mankind. Ap ^r( icoai the natural feelings of the man, it was his duty to repel those 



270 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. XXTI. 1— 32. 

charges which would hinder him in his work. Hence his noble apology. A free con- 
fession of his errors and his faults ; a lofty assertion of the integrity of his course ; a 
lucid narrative of his wondrous life ; a bold confession of the change in his soul ; a 
holy boast of his faith in Jesus and the works which were its fruit ; a pregnant pro- 
clamation of Christ's gospel in the ears of his accusers and judges ; and a fervent appeal 
to Festus and Agrippa, such as an archangel might address to the sons of men from the 
heights of heaven, so grand is its superiority ; — these make up that apology which has 
a moving eloquence in it as fresh to-day as eighteen hundred years ago ; an apology 
which gives us a portraiture of the apologist well calculated to rivet our aflfection to 
him, and to command our admiration of a character to which, in the whole range of 
secular and sacred history, we can scarcely find quidquam simile aut secundum, worthy 
to be placed by its side as a rival in Christian heroism. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTH0R3. 

Ver. 8. — The eredihility of the resurrection. If it be an incredible doctrine, it must 
be so because to raise men from the dead is physically impossible or morally unlikely 
in a very high degree. But — 

I. It is not physically impossible. 1. The continuance of the spirit in existence 
after death is certainly not impossible ; indeed, it is the discontinuance which has 
seemed so impossible that to many thinkers its permanency appears to be a necessity. 
The difficulty, to many minds, is to understand how a spirit can be dissolved and 
destroyed. 2. Its reassociation with a human body of some kind is also possible, and 
to almighty power and wisdom easy of execution. The same Divine strength and skill 
which created and fashioned man as he is can surely continue his existence and his 
powers under similar conditions to the present ones. He who has made us what we 
are can make us again, more or less closely associated with the bodily frame which is 
our present home and organ. 

II. To BAISE HIS OWN SoN FROM THE DEAD IN OEDBK TO ASSURE THE WOULD OF HIS 

DIVINITY, and of the heavenly origin of the faith he taught, is credible enough. Granted 
that Jesus Christ was the Son of God and Saviour of the world, the resurrection of 
Jesus Christ, so far from being incredible or even improbable, is positively demanded. 

III. To EAISB FROM THE DEAD THE FOLLOWERS OF A RISEN AND ASCENDED SaVIODB is 

perfectly credible. Granted what we have assumed, and that, therefore, Jesus Christ 
is Saviour, Lord, and Friend of believing, loving, and faithful disciples, it follows 
that he would exert his Divine power and raise them to his heavenly kingdom, that 
they might share his honour and his blessedness. The real difficulty is not in the 
resurrection of Jesus Christ or in that of his disciples ; it is in the assumption which 
lies behind — the assumption that Jesus Christ was one who came down from heaven to 
redeem a fallen race. That granted, everything else follows necessarily. We maintain 
that— 

IV. A DlVnJB EEDEMPTION 18 A CREDIBLE AND NOT AN INCREDIBLE IDEA. There 18 

much within us and around us that points to the presence of a holy and living Father 
of spirits. If we make our appeal to our own hearts — and there is nothing higher than 
a living human heart from which to argue to the Divine — we shall conclude that to 
restore his fallen children by the sacrifice of himself was just that very thing which 
the infinite Father would do. There is nothing more probable, more credible than 
that. 1. Redeeming love is a weU-attested fact. 2. The resurrection of Christ is 
involved in that fact. 3. The resurrection of man is an inference from that. 
(1) Regard it as a certainty. (2) Prepare fur it aa an event in which we have all the 
deepest personal interest.— 0. 

Vers. 9, 10. — Gradations in guilt. The old notion that, as sin is committed against 
an infinite God, it must itself be an infinite evil, and that, therefore, all sins are equally 
heinous and offensive, is held no longer. Its logic is unsound, and our moral sense con- 
tradicts the theory. The fact is that the degrees of human guilt in the multitude of 
•ctiona maa perform, under a vast variety of conditions, are indefinitely numerous. 
Unly the Omaiscient can possibly discriminate and compute them. But there are 



OH. ixyi. 1—32.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLEa 271 

Bome simple principles on which we may lafely rely for our spiritual guidance. We 
judge— 

I. That dblibekatb akd raBEOT antaqonism to Cheist is tee guiltiest of all 
rosiTiONS. " Doing tliicgs contrary to . . . Jesus Christ," when these things are done 
by an agent who knows what he does, reaches the very summit of iniquity. " This is 
the condemnation, that light is come," etc. When men oppose themselves to Christian 
truth because " their deeds are evil," because " their craft is in danger," because they 
hate tlie light which exposes their sin and robs them of their gains or their enjoyments, 
then they stand in the very front rank of criminality ; they deliberately take up arms 
against their Maker ; " They take counsel together, against the Lord, and against his 
Anoiuted, saying, Let us break their bands asunder," etc. ; they say, " This is the Son ; 
come, let us kill him," etc. Surely God will trouble these " with his sore displeasure " 
(Ps. IL 6). 

IL That dblibbbate neutrality is a most serious sin. When men refrain from 
taking an active part against the cause of Christ and his truth, doing " nothing con- 
trary," etc., they shun the very worst possible thing. But when they attempt to take 
neutral ground, and either (1) reject the claims which Christ makes on their personal 
subjection (Matt. ix. 9; xi. 28, 29, etc.), or (2) refuse to render the help they 
can bring to his cause (Matt. xxi. 30 ; xxv. 18, etc.), then they fall into great con- 
demnation, and must " bear their inic^uity " (see Matt. vii. 26, 27 ; Luke xiii. 25 — 28 ; 
Judg. v. 23). 

IlL That igkorance changes the chaeacteb and materially affects the 
DEGREE OP GUILT. Clearly Paul was not so guilty in his acts of persecution as he 
would have been, had he not " thought that he ought to do many things contrary," etc. 
He himself tells us that this ignorance of his was a great mitigation of the sinfulness of 
his act (see 1 Tim. i. 13). Our Lord also gave his own Divine sanction to this truth 
when suffering the pangs of crucifixion (Luke xxiii. 34). 1. Ignorance changes the 
character of the sin. What Paul was guilty of in those days was not the deliberate 
attempt to crush the work of a Divine Kedeemer; he would have recoiled from so 
doing, had the act presented itself thus to his mind. His mistake, his condemnation, 
was that he had not fairly and impartially considered the claims of Jesus of Nazareth ; 
that he had blindly assumed that his teachers were right, guiltily neglecting all the 
proofs which the Saviour bad given that he was the Messiah " that should come into 
the world." 2. It also greatly reduces its turpitude. Not to have inquired as we should 
have done — this is wrong and blameworthy. But it is not so serious an offence, in the 
sight of God or of man, as wilfully and wantonly to conspire against the Lord, and to 
seek to positively hinder the coming of his kingdom. It may rightly comfort those 
who, like Paul, have to look back on offences which they have comniitted, when they 
can gay, with him, " I verily thought," etc. ; when it can be said to them, " Brethren, 
I wot that through ignorance ye did it " (ch. iii. 17). 

IV. That only absolute ignorance exonerates from blame. It is conceivable 
that men may be so circumstanced that their ignorance is absolute, and therefore wholly 
faultless. In this case there is no guilt. But how seldom is it of this kind I Usually 
when we do " things contrary " to truth, righteousness, God, we might have known 
better if we had inquired more promptly or more purely. We may not excuse our- 
selves if we have kept out of our mind any light we might have admitted. We may 
apply this to (1) the doctrines we are accepting ; (2) the leaders we are encouraging ; 
(3) the business we are conducting ; (4) the family we are training. — 0. 

Vers. 16 — 18. — Minister and messenger. The charge given by the manifested 
Saviour to the stricken and awakened Saul is one which, in a true sense, though in 
smaller measure, we can apply to ourselves. We look at — 

I. The twofold relation in which he was to stand. " To make thee a minister 
and a witness." Paul was to be (1) related to Christ as his servant, and to be (2) related 
to hb fellow-men as their teacher. We are to engage in every Christian work as those 
who carry with them everywhere a sense of obedience to a Divine Master. We are to 
do and say nothing which we feel that he does not desire us to do or to say. We are also 
to feel that, in regard to our fellows, we are as those who have a Divine message to deliver. 
[f we are content to expound our own views, to establish our own position, or to secure 



271 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. xxvt 1— 32. 

a large following for ourselves, we fall miserably short of our true vocation: wo are 
called to convey Christ's message to mankind. 

II. The twofold source whence he was to draw his message. He was to beai 
witness " both of these things which he had seen, and of those things in the which 
Christ would appear unto him " (ver. 16). Not only was he to narrate what he already 
knew, but he was to convey and enforce the truths which were soon to be revealed to 
him. We are to draw continually on this double source. We are (1) to repeat the 
facts and truths with which past experience and study have made us familiar ; and also 
(2) to unfold those later and maturer views which our Lord will be revealing to our 
open and inquiring minds. 

III. The twofold protection of which he was assured. " Delivering thee from 
the (Jewish) people, and from the Gentiles " (ver. 17). He was to encounter serious 
perils and difficulties, but he would escape the one and surmount the other. He would 
find himself opposed and thwarted by the Jews and the Gentiles, by those who were 
" nigh " and by those who were " afar off," by the children of privilege from whom he 
might have hoped to receive help, and by the sons of ignorance from whom he 
might have expected to endure hostility. By whomsoever assailed, the Divine Saviour 
would be his defence. We, too, may expect to bo opposed by two parties — by those 
within and by "them that are without," by the heirs of privilege and by the aliens 
and strangers. If we are faithful and trustful, we may safely cast ourselves on the care 
of our Divine Friend, who, if he does not save us from, will assuredly save us in, the 
disajipointments and the sufferings which will threaten us as champions of his cause. 

IV. The twofold issue or his work. 1. Spiritual illumination. Those to whom 
he was to go would turn " from darkness to light," their " eyes having been opened." 
[laving been blind to the existence, or to the nature and character, or to the claims of 
God ; or blind to the worth of the human soul, or to the true end and aim of human 
life, or to the solemnity of death and judgment ; or bhnd to the excellency of holy 
service, to the beauty of hohness, to the blessedness of consecration and self-denial ; 
they were to perceive, to understand, to rejoice in the truth, to walk in the light. 
Iheir experience in the spiritual realm would answer to his in the material world who 
should awake from blackest night to brightest day. 2. Deliverance. "From the 
power of Satan unto God " (ver. 18). In ignorance and sin men are the bondmen of the 
evil one, held in his cords, subject to his sway. Delivered from the power of sin, they 
become the freedmen of Christ; they walk in " the glorious liberty of the children of 
God." From a degrading bondage they are rescued, that they may rejoice in a holy, 
elevating freedom. 

V. The twofold blessing he was to promise. 1. Forgiveness of sins. 2. Sancti- 
fication — "that they may receive," ete. (ver. 18). Immediately on the exercise of 
faith they were to receive the abounding mercy of God, that " forgiveness " which means 
not only the not holding them under condemnation, but also the positive reception of 
them into Divine favour, the admission of them to the Father's table, the reinstatement 
oi them into all the privileges of sonship. And gradually they were to rise into a state 
of sanctificatioQ, leaving old and evil things behind, and reaching forth to that which 
is before ; attaining to the stature of Christian manhood, becoming holy even as God is 
holy (1 Pet. i. 16). 

VI. The one condition on which he must insist. " By faith that is in me." Every 
blessing promised was and is to be attained by faith in Jesus Christ himself. Not the 
acceptance of a creed, nor admission to a Church, nor submission to a ceremony, but a 
living faith in a hving Saviour ; the cordial acceptance of Jesus Christ himself as the 
Divine Saviour, the rightful Lord, the all-sufficient Friend of the human heart. — 0. 

Ver. 19. — " The heavenly vision ; '' a termon to the young. When Paul was " appre- 
hended of Christ Jesus " on his way to Damascus, he was yet a young man. He was 
still at the outset of his career; his life was still before him. When that heavenly 
vision came, and he saw the Lord, he himself and his whole life were absolutely 
changed. The current which had surged so swiftly in one line then turned and flowed 
steadily and uninterruptedly in the opposite direction. That vision from God revolu- 
tionized, transformed his whole self and all his plans and hopes. What visions have 

•^ now, and what influence have they on our hearts and lives? We reply — 



OH. xxvL 1— 32.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 273 

L That to the touno theeb oommojtlt oooubs some visiok feom hbaten. We do 
not expect the miTaculous now. God may, and probably does, make known his \dll in 
ways that are outside and above the ordinary and the natural ; but we have no right to 
reckon on these. He does come to us by the illuminating influences of his Holy Spirit, 
and he thus elevates the mind, awakens the soul, subdues the will, renews the nature, 
transforms the life. God visits us through various means, acts upon us by many 
instruments, wins us in dififerent ways. The heavenly vision is sure to come during 
the days of youth, when the mind is more open and the heart more tender ; " for of 
such is the kingdom of God." 1. It may take the form of a vision of Jesus Christ — 
his excellency and claims. The young heart may see him, as it had never before, as 
One who is infinitely worthy of trust, of love, of service, of submission. 2. Or it may 
take the form of a vision of human life — ^its seriousness and responsibility. The mind 
may awake to this great fact : having regarded human life as nothing better than a 
thing to be enjoyed, or as an opportunity for making money, or gaining a brief reputa- 
tion, or attaining to some social position, it comes to see, in the light of God's 
revealing truth, that it may be something immeasurably more and higher — that it may 
be made a sacred opportunity of spiritual culture, of holy usefulness, and of Divine 
service. 3. Or it may take the form of a vision of the human soul — its greatness and 
value. It may suddenly become conscious of the fact that God has created us for 
himself, that we may possess his likeness, live his life, and share his immortality ; that 
within the humblest human frame resides a spirit whose worth the wealth of a planet 
will not weigh. 

II. That then comes the time fob the gee at deotsion. There are other occasions 
in the course of human life when a decisive choice is made ; -when it is resolved what 
vocation shall be pursued, what life-companion taken, what country adopted for a 
home, etc. ; but there is no occasion which compares with this in sacred interest, in 
lasting issues. It may be even said that " on this winged hour eternity is hung." 
Obedience or disobedience to the heavenly vision makes all the diflferenoe between 
success and failure, between peace and unrest of soul, between life and death. Obedience 
means (1) becoming right with God ; (2) spending a life in accordance with his will and 
in harmony with our true and deeper cravings ; (3) a title to everlasting joy in the 
future. Disobedience means the sad and dark opposites of these : (1) remaining under 
God's displeasure ; (2) living a life at variance with his purpose and the true end of 
man ; (3) rejecting the offer of eternal life. — 0. 

Vers. 20 — ^23. — The penalty and the resources of a devoted life. There is no trace of 
egotism, in the offensive sense of the word, in this simple sketch of the apostle's 
course. He is simply telling the truth concerning himself out of a pure heart. But in 
so doing he gives us the picture of-^ 

L A DEVOTED LIFE. 1. He began at the earliest possible time to carry out the 
Master's will — " showed first unto them of Damascus " (ver. 20). 2. He laboured in 
the most difficult and dangerous sphere — " and at Jerusalem." 3. He went wherever the 
guiding finger pointed — " throughout all the coasts of Judasa, and then to the Gentiles.'' 
4. He was not afraid of those who were high not disregardiul of those who were low— 
" witnessing both to small and great " (ver. 22). 5. He preached everywhere unpalat- 
able but indispensable truth — " that they should repent . . . and do works meet for 
repentance " (ver. 20). 6. He was undeterred by any obstacles from continuing in his 
career — " I continue unto this day " (ver. 22). We are not all charged by our Master 
to do the kind of work for which Paul was his " chosen vessel ; " but we are all called 
upon to devote our powers to his holy service, our lives to his praise and glory ; and it 
behoves us, as it became him, to begin early, to accept whatever duty the Lord may 
lay upon us, to shrink from no service because it seems uninviting or perilous, to ba 
thorough in all we do for him, and to persist through good and evil report even to the 
end, until he shall take the weapon from our hand. 

II. The penalty of dbvotedness. " For these causes the Jews caught me," etc. 
(ver. 21). Paul's faithful and fearless devotedness to the will and the cause of Jesus 
Christ led him into the utmost danger, and caused him the severest losses and trials. 
The less of consecration the less of persecution j the more of the one the more of the 
other. So, in some degree, now. " Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus 
ACTS — u. I 



274 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [on. xrn. 1—32. 

shall suffer persecution" (2 Tim. iii. 12), All are not expected to face the same trials. 
The apostle had his own difficulties to surmount and dangers to front. The mission- 
ary has his ; the mimwwsr has his ; the reformer has his. The Christian man in every- 
day life has his own penalties of devotediiess to pay. Enthusiastic zeal, perfect purity, 
unswerving truthfulness, incorruptible fidelity, — these qualities, and such as these, 
cannot be continually manifested without calling out and calling down the hostility, 
condemnation, and opposition of the world. If we take not up the cross thus and 
follow Christ, we are " not worthy of him." 

III. Two sounoES of bteenqth. 1. The help to be had of God: "having obtained 
help of God " (ver. 22). Christ appeared to him at Jerusalem, at Troas, at Corinth, and 
sustained him by special visitations. All along his path he had the upholding hand ot 
the Almighty about him. 2. Consciousness of integrity. There was no ground for 
this hatred of him, this relentless persecution. He was not really the renegade his 
enemies took him for. His conduct could be fully justified by their own authorities ; 
he had been saying " none other things than these," etc. (vers. 22, 23). He had a con- 
science void of offence toward man as well as toward God ; he was as guiltless before 
his own countrymen as he was before 0«sar. Here we have two sources of strength 
under those persecutions which are the inevitable outcome of our fidelity. Divine 
sustenance — the guidance of the heavenly Father, the watchful care of the Divine 
Saviour, the comfort of the Holy Ghost. Consciousness of rectitude — the feeling that 
we are saying and doing "none other things" than the Word of God will justily, and 
than those who abuse and injure us would themselves approve if they would only judge 
us with open and impartial mind. — C. 

Vers. 24 — 28. — The Christian's detirt. The point of deepest interest in this scene is 
Paul's reply to Agrippa. There the nobility of the apostle is conspicuously present. 
But it is worth while to glance, first, at — 

I. The blindness of sin. (Ver. 24.) It makes mistakes of the greatest magnitude ; 
it looks at the wisdom of God and mistakes it for madness. So it judged incarnate 
wisdom (John x. 30). Bo we are to expect it will judge us ; for " the things of the 
Spirit of God are foolishness to the natural man " (1 Cor. ii. 14), whether he be Greek 
(1 Cor. L 23) or Eoman (text). That the whole Gentile world should be redeemed 
from sin and led by repentance into the kingdom of God by means of a suffering 
Saviour — this, which is the wisdom of God, deep and Divine, seemed to the proud man 
of the world nothing better than insanity itself. Enlightened by his Spirit, we detect 
in this the very essence of Divine wisdom. If the eternal Father, looking down upon 
us, sees his own wise procedure mistaken for and spoken of as madness, may we not be 
content that our humnn schemes and plans should sometimes receive the faint approval, 
or even the direct condemnation, of our fellows ? 

II. The Christian attitude under attack. Paul was not abashed by the sudden 
outbreak of Festus, nor did he give way to unsuitable and injudicious resentment. He 
replied with calmness and dignity to the insulting charge of his Roman judge (ver. 25). 
When assailed in this way — when charged with folly, error, fanaticism, or even 
madness — the best thing we can do is to bear ourselves calmly, retainmg mental and 
moral equability. This is the best way to disprove the allegations that are made. 
(1) First let us be well assured of our position, not taking our ground until we have 
made all necessary inquiries and have every possible guarantee that we ore on the side 
of " truth and soberness ; " and then (2) let us refuse to be disconcerted by abuse, oppose 
quiet dignity to angry crimination, and show a conscious rectitude which is far superioi 
to violence, whether of word or deed. 

III. The Christian's debikb for all whom he can beach. Paul turned appealingly 
from Festus to Agrippa, Some points in common there must be, he felt, between him- 
self and his royal countryman (vers. 26, 27). The king put off the prisoner with a 
courtly sarcasm (ver. 28); but the apostle was not thus to be silenced. In noble 
language and with touching allusion to the fetters he wore, he expressed the earneit wish 
that, whether with ease or with difficulty, not only the king himself, but all who heard 
him, might be " such as he was." A pure and passionate desire filled his soul that all 
wliom he could anywise affect might be elevated and blessed by that ennobling truth 
which the risen Saviour had revealed to him. This holy earnestness of his mny remind 



OH. xivi. 1— 32.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 275 

as: L That the truth of the gospel is that which can he indeSnitely extended without 
making any man the poorer. If a man divides his gold among the poor, he loses it 
himself, but he who imparts heavenly wisdom, Christian influence, f;ain3 as he gives. 

2. That it is the tendency of Christian truth to maku its possessor desire tc extend it. 
The contemplation of a God of love, the study of the life and spirit of the self-sacrificing 
Saviour, the purity of the joy which it inspires in the human heart, — these are fitted to 
produce in the soul a holy yearning to extend to others the blessedness we enjoy. 

3. That it becomes us to put forth all our talents to difi'use the knowledge and to spread 
the kingdom of Jesus Christ. The thought of millions of souls starving that might feed 
on the bread of life should animate us with keen desire and seud us with elastic step in 
the path of deliverance and of life. — C. 

Vera. 1—32. — Paul before Festiu and Agrippa. His address may be divided as 
follows : — 

I. The remarkable stobt of hi8 life. (Vers. 1 — 18.) 1. Eis life in Judaism. 
He had been brought up, as all knew, in the strictest sect of his religion, a Pharisee. 
Paul's example, it has been remarked, lends no countenance to the fallacy that disso- 
lute students make the best preachers. He had been conscientious from the first, a 
friend of virtue, and a servant of the Law. He had not sacrificed his youth to vice, 
nor wooed with unabashed front the means of weakness and debility, physical or 
moral. " One cannot believe that men of this kind are so quickly converted. Ordina- 
tion does not change the heart, nor is the surplice or gown a means of grace." 2. The 
charge against him. Notwithstanding that an evil leaven of passion or zeal had 
worked in him in those unconverted days (and he does not conceal it), he had retained 
the Pliarisaic hope of the resurrection of the dead. The zeal of the Jews, on the other 
hand, against the gospel, tended to cut them off fi:om living connection with the 
religion of their fathers, and from the blessings of the better covenant which superseded 
the old. And this zeal of unbelief was blind. What was there incredible in the idea of 
the resurrection of the dead ? The question may he generalized to the unbeliever — What 
is there at bottom so incredible in any of the great objects of Christian faith? The 
form of the belief may change, the substance remains from age to age. 3. Sis own 
resistance to conviction. He can speak feelingly to these sceptics, for he has known the 
most stubborn doubt and resistance himself. He had been under an illusion. He had 
thought it a duty to oppose Jesus. There is a deep and pure joy in confession, and iu 
the knowledge that one's own sincere experience will be profitable as guide and warning 
to others. He is ever ready to speak on this matter ; it is one of his noblest traits 
(ch. ixii. ; 1 Tim. i. 16). The blessed change he can never forget ; he is a living 
wonder to himself and to many. Let preachers derive their best material from the 
experience of their heart and life. 4. His conversion. (Vers. 13 — 18.) The splendour 
of that light from heaven shining on his path of blind fury can never be forgotten. 
And the first l)eam which breaks through the night of our sin and stubbornness is 
worthy of eternal recollection and meditation (2 Cor. iv. 6). The glory of the once 
humiliated but now enthroned Saviour sm^asses all. With the light comes the voice, 
which humiliates and raises, rebukes and cheers. The voice echoes the secret voice of 
his conscience, hitherto, in the intoxication of his passion, half heard or not heard at 
aU. But it is also a voice which is loftier than that of the self-condemning conscieoce — 
Divine, pardoning, and cheering. " Stand up 1 " God slays and makes alive. The like 
voice was heard upon the holy mount (Matt. xvii. 7). From that moment Saul rose 
up a new creature in Christ Jesus. And it is the revelation of the love of God, a 
thought mightier than all our own doubt, a force in the soul irresistible against our 
passion and hate, which must conquer us and in our lowliness make us for the first 
time truly great. 5. Sis ordination. It may be viewed as an example of true ordi- 
nation to the saored calling. (1) It is a Divine act. The prayers and the laying on 
of hands will not sufiice to turn the worldling into the spiritual man. There must be 
the inner sanctification and anointing. "Power from on high "must be received, by 
which a man may stand and witness and serve. (2) It appoints to service, and only to 
honour through service. Neither dignified titles nor riches are promised to Paul, but 
coil and suffering even unto death. The best orders a man can have are to be found in 
liis ability to teach and in the evidence of fruit from his teaching. (3) Paul was to bt 



27« THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh, xxvi. 1— 82. 

a ydtness, not only of that wMch he had already Been, but of that which was yet to b« 
shown to him. And so with every genuine preacher. The Lord hath yet more light 
and truth to brenk forth from the consciousness of the Christian thinker and student, 
from the practical experience of life as well as from his Word. Along with the com- 
mand there goes the blessing ; with the commission the promise of protection in its 
discharge. And the faithful servant of Christ may be assured in like manner that 
when he is to be employed he will be defended ; " the good hand of God " will be upon 
him (m with Kehemiah) until his work is done. (4) Sketch of his life-work. Its aim 
is instruction — " to open eyes ; " conversion — " to turn men from darkness to light," 
etc. ; induction into the new covenant, or kingdom of grace — " that they may receive for- 
giveness of sins ; " glorification — " a lot among them that are sanctified." Faith in 
Christ the means to all. He had been following out this Divine programme. He had 
obeyed without hesitation the heavenly vision, and in various places had been calling 
men to repentance and to the new life. In the faithful pursuit of his calling and 
because of it, he had encountered opposition ; yet had been supported by God's help to 
tiie present day. His teaching was but a continuation and fulfilment of the ancient 
teaching of the prophets. The three great points of his preaching weie — the humilia- 
tion of Christ, Ms resurrection, and the gospel for aU nations. So clear, straightforward, 
manly, and consistent was the tenor of his address. 

II. Effect upon the listeners. 1. On Festus. He represents the cynic or indiffer- 
entist in matters of religion, or the worldly view of the unspiritual man. Character is 
" spiritually discerned " only by inward and outward sympathy. The best in Paul was 
misunderstood, as his worst had been. Says Luther, " The world esteems others as 
prudent so long as they are mad, and as mad when they cease to be mad and become 
wise." Saul passed for a wise and able man in the days of his persecuting fury. When 
he " came to himself," and was clothed in a right mind, he was reckoned mad. One 
day the tables will be turned, and the children of this world virill say, " We fools held his 
life to be senseless, and now he is numbered among the children of God " (Wisd. v. 6). 
The deep truth is that the exaltation of the poet, the prophet, the mystic, and the 
believer are hardly distinguishable to the superficial glance from madness or from 
sensual intoxication. So was it on the day of Pentecost. And of the Christ himself 
they said, " He is mad, and hath a devil" (John x. 20). But Paul replies to Festus 
that the substance of his words is true, and the temper in which he has spoken is 
rational. The history of Christianity has proved the truth of this. The world in the 
long run is not governed by unreason, but by reason struggling against unreason. In 
every popular revival of Christianity there may be seen a njanifestation of what looks 
like folly and unreason ; but to a deeper view there is a " method in this madness." 
2. On Agrippa. Here is an awakened conscience. Paul recognizes in him the 
stirrings of faith, and boldly aims a blow at his conscience. " Those are the true coiirt 
preachers who will not be detei red by the star on the breast from asking whether the 
Morning Star shines in the heart." But Agrippa fences. What he feels he will not 
avow. He would lead a double life — representing one thing to the world, thinking 
another himself. He is the type of a numerous class, who would gladly be blessed, 
were it not for the strait door and the narrow path, which they will not tread (Luke 
xiii. 24). How near we may be to blis';, yet how far from it ! The heart may be touched, 
the intellect illuminated, the will aroused, the hour acceptable, and yet — some deep 
stream of passion runs at our feet, which we will not ford; some "cunning bosom 
sin" keeps out the good angels of repentance and faith that would enter. The reply 
of Paul to Agrippa's light words again brings out a sharp contrast. Better be the 
" prisoner of Jesus Christ " than the prisoner of passion 1 Better the regal freedom of 
tiie redeemed man's soul, in poverty and chains, than the splendour of the potentate 
enslaved by lust and by the fear of men ! In the audience-chamber we have thus the 
most diverse attitudes of mind towards Christianity represented. Paul, in the full 
inspiration of faith and life in the Son of God ; Agrippa, convinced but not converted ; 
Bernice, probably recalcitrant; Festus, hardened in indifferent cynicism. Some wjmt- 
ing little, others much, to make them Christians. But what is the practical difference 
between almost saved and quite damned? And so, the sermon ended, the audience 
dispeises with commendations on the eloquence of the preacher and the manliness of 
tijs bearing. There is a certain tragedy in every such break-up of a congregation. 



«. XXTL 1— 82.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 2TJ 

Every man goes to his own place ; and a savour of life unto life or of death unto deatii 
has been tasted by many. — J. 

Vers. 1 — 32. — The apostolic defence in the preaenee of Fesius and Agrippa. L Thb 
BEAKINO OF THE MAN. Dignity, gentleness, courtesy — a true Christian gentleman. 

II. The appeal to pacts. The incontrovertible evidence. " Once I was a persecutor ; 
now I am a disciple." 

ILL The proclamation of a Divine mission. Showing that there was reason in his 
firmness and confidence ; he was divinely sent and would be divinely cared for. 

IV. The challenge to thy his doctiiine and work by the standard op Mosks 
AND THB PROPHETS. Those who oppose liim are the offeuders. He is simply a witness. 
This is the true strength of all God's people. They build on the Word wluch is already 
given. They show the harmony between Scripture and fact. 

y. The PERSONAL APPEAL included in the address, both to the Jews and to the heathen. 
" Would to God you were such as I." 

VI. The different effects or the address on the two different men. To the Gentile 
it was simply foolishness ; to the apostate Jew it was a voice of God speaking to the 
slumbering conscience. Agrippa's irony meant resistance to the Holy Ghost. Although 
neither were converted, they were both impressed with the simplicity and sincerity ana 
harmlessness of the man. But again the hand of God was over him. Had he been set 
at liberty, his life would soon have been sacrificed. So Luther's imprisonment in the 
Wartburg was his protection from enemies. — B. 

V«. 8. — Besurrection in the light of revelation. " Why should it be thought," etc. ? 
Grounds of the incredible. Contradiction of reason. Contradiction of experience. 
Absolute isolation of a fact. A statement is creaible because it is rational, because it has 
been predicted, because it is analogous to and harmonious with experience, because it is 
morally and practically serviceable to humanity. 

L Thb appeal to faith. You believe so much ; why not this ? The Jewish Scrip- 
tures contained the doctrine of resurrection. Enoch. Abraham's anticipation of Isaac's 
resurrection. Moses. Elijah. The teaching of the Psalms and prophets. The growth 
of the doctrine through the post-Exilian times. Even the heathen not without much that 
prepared the way for the truth. Doctrine of the dead and of the future life. Longing 
for the perfection of humanity. Moral helplessness. 

n. The ohallenob of Christianity to personal acceptance. 1. The credible 
ought to be accepted, if it comes with the evidence of fact. 2. The real root of unbelief 
is personal and moral. Paul refers to himself, " I was once as you are ; but the facts 
were too much for me." 3. The resurrection is not a mere speculative doctrine or 
unpractical mystery, but it is the root of the whole system of Christianity ; it stands at 
the entrance of the new way, into which we are all invited, both as sealing the testi- 
mony of Christ, and as opening the new world to our faith and setting our affection on 
things above. — E. 

Ver. 18.-2^ mission of the gospel to the worlcl. " To open their eye«," etc. 

I. The state of the world without Christ. 1, Darkness. Intellectual. Moral. 
No exceptions. The light of the Greek and Koman worlds turned by sin into grosser 
darkness. Superstition. 2. The rule of evil spirits. The power possessed by false 
teachers. The dominion of the senses. The reign of fear. 3. The condemnation of 
Divine righteousness. Impossibility that such ignorance should remain. The visita- 
tions of judgment. Awful calamities of the ancient world, the working out of sin. 

II. The dispensation of mercy. 1, The preparation of light through the ages reveal- 
ing the Divine purpose. 2. The advent of Jesus Christ and the lifting up of the light 
into the heavens. 3. The mission of the gospel through its preachers, so different from 
anything seen in the heathen world. " How shall they hear without a preacher? " 4. 
The fulfilment of the mission from age to age, and its prospects of speedy accomplish- 
ment. They are turning to the light, and all the world shall see the salvation. — E. 

Var. 22. — The helieving retrospect. "Having therefore obtained help of God, I 
eontinus unto this day." Times when retrospect and the grateful acknowledgment 



278 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [««• xxvi, 1--32. 

which flows from it are especially profitable. At the critical junctures of life. When 
a testimony for God is demanded of us for the sake of others. " Unto this day." 

L The higher vruw op life. 1. A mission, a testimony. 2. A co-operation with 
the Divine work, running parallel with the line of infinite wisdom and righteousness. 3. 
A gracious fruit of heavenly bestowment. " Help from God." 4. A life lived by 
prayer, linked on to the throne of grace. 

II. An kncouraging and stimulating example. The profitable use which should 
be made of biography. The lessons of Paul's life. Divine strength made perfect in 
human weakness. Teaching us : 1. To follow the Spirit. 2. To depend upon the 
Divine control of circumstances and of the oppositions of men. 3. To maintain confidence 
and courage by laying hold of a great future. 4. To be bold in speaking for Christ, 
especially when we can say, as Paul could, that he " said nothing but what the prophets 
and Moses said." The sure ground is the written Word. To preach our.selves is to 
obtaiq no help from God ; to magnify his Word is to ensure his blessing and be sust^ned 
to the end. — R. 

Ver. 28. — The great decision. "Then Agrippa said unto Paul," etc. Times when 
the attitude and bearing of one person wonderfully set forth the majesty of truth. 
Jesus before Pontius Pilate. Luther at Worms. Paul at Caesarea. Agrippa face to 
face with the sincerity he despised ; Festus with a religion altogether different from 
that of Home. The assembly of courtiers and soldiers and abandoned people in the 
presence of spiritual reality. The reversal of the appearances. Paul really trying the 
offenders against God at the bar of Christ's truth. The effect of the simple narrative of 
facts and its powerful appeals. Though scorn and mockery in Agrippa's words, stiU 
confession of his inability to reply. Whether as in Authorized or as in Revised Version, 
the meaning is the same : " I am not persuaded, though I cannot deny anything 
you say." 

L Decided Christianity is the only true position. " To be a Christian " is to be 
fully persuaded. 1. Decided faith. Not belief about truth, but persuasion that Jesus 
is our Saviour. 2. Essential change. " To be " that which we were not before. Not a 
mere change of external position towards Christianity, but the surrender of the whole 
self to the Law of Christ. 3. Public prof esaion. The name" Christian " distinguished 
the man from others. It was assumed as a pledge of fellowship and united action. The 
Church is the voice of Christ, his living representative and witness. We must identify 
ourselves with his body, by being grafted as members into it. 

II. Chribtianitt appeals to those who are open to PERstTASioH. 1. It is possible 
to be unpersuaded, because inwardly resisting truth, because self-deceived, because 
demanding that which is not reasonable, as the hardened sceptic, the trifler with 
opportunity, the proud intellect, the light-minded and pleasure-loving. 2. The com- 
monest and yet most responsible of all positions is that which, like Agrippa's, is near 
persuasion, yet distinctly waiving off the appeal. It is an awful spiritual danger to 
turn away from an open door. 3. It is better to be persuaded by the gracious appeal than 
compelled to acknowledge the truth by the overwhelming evidence of judgment. Paul's 
position before Agrippa a prediction of the future trial of all men, when they shall be mani- 
festly brought into the presence of those who have been persuaded, and the unreasonable- 
ness and guilt of their unbelief will be shown forth in contrast with the simple laith and 
loving obedience of those who shall be honoured with Christ's name and gloiy upon 
them. The obstacle to full persuasion should be sought within. There is little more 
required. Neither the truth itself, nor its method of presentation, nor the circumstances 
of our life, nor the difBculties of our profession, are any excuse for our remaining unper- 
suaded. The reality behind the veil of external appearance in the court at Csesarea. 
Paul's good conscience, strength, hope, comlbrt, final victory, all should persuade us 
to be altogether such as he was then and is now. — B. 

Ver. 3. — The conditioni of hearing to profit. " Wherefore I beseech thee to hear me 
patiently." The occasion of these words of the apostle may be justly viewed all round 
as a model occasion of public speaking for the preacher, and of listening for the hearer. 
A certain amount of result, and of very powerful result, was gained, though confessedly 
not all that could have been wished. It is not the less to be noticed that just that, 



ott. ilti. 1— 31] THfe ACTS OF THE APOSTLSS. 27t 

however, was gained which may be supposed obtainable by the faithful use of the best 
human means. And for the rest, the work was stayed where, in the very truest sense, 
we are warranted to say, " Permitte cetera Deo," or the results belong to God. The 
occasion, perhaps unintentionally enough, reveals the great standing conditions of 
effective preaching and profiting hearing. There must be — 

I. One competent to speak. 1. He must know his subject. 2. He must feel deeply 
his subject. 3. He must handle a subject which concerns his hearers, and is neither 
above them nor beside their needs. 4. He must know the graces of speech, but specially 
that of respectfulness and courtesy towards those whose ear he wishes to gain. Who 
might command may sometimes better " beseech " (Philem. 8, 9), and so much the 
more if one thing that he asks for is the thing so rare, so difficult, patience. 

II. Those prefabed to heab. Different considerations will determine the question 
in what such preparedness may most truly consist. We have here to do with only a cer- 
tain human range of preparedness. 1. The hearer must be open, ready, willing to hear and 
capable of understanding. Paul does not speak hollow words. He knows he can make 
much greater progress with Agrippa than with Pestus, because Agrippa was really not 
unversed in matters of revealed truth. 2. The hearer must be prepared to give his 
miaA patiently to the great subjects that may be exhibited to him. They are what 
may well require patience. 3. He must be honest to make decision and to take 
action on what he has heard. So far Ai;rippa went a long way towards being " a good 
hearer" of the Word. 4. If the case be such, he must be readv to give fall public 
profession of his decision. In this Agrippa failed. He and Festus only "talked 
between themselves." — B. 

Vers.'6 — S.^The hope of the promise. It is a thing of deepest interest and signifi- 
cance that we can note so clearly, so repeatedly, what it was ever lay so close to the 
heart that craved the better, that was not dead, that reached towards light. It was 
ever that one transporting hope that grows out of the death and resurreciinn of Jesus, 
the hope of future and eternal life, the vista of an abiding city, a heavenly Canaan, ami 
for their behoof " an house not made with hands." We learn here that, under whatever 
various aspects and with whatever needful accompaniments — 

I. The old obioinal eevelation was a eevelation of what should be the con- 
TBADICTION OF sin's PRONOtTNCED WORK, DEATH. The hope of the promise was the hope 
of eternal life and of heaven. 

II. That this rnisT real revelation shaped itself in the form of a " pro- 
UBK,'' " MADE OF God," to a certain few, vtho would hallow it above all 

ELBE THEY HAD. 

III. That it was one lono remembered, oluno to tenaciously, and in these 

EEBPB0T8 WELL JUSTIFYING ITS DiVINB ADAPTATION. 

IV. That, misunderstood though it might be, it tubnbd on the besurrection 

OF the dead, in one TEEMEND0U8 INSTANCE OF IT, NAMELY, THE RESURRECTION OF 

Jesus. 

V. That, the fatal weakness and sin of those to whom this fromisb, an 

HEIRLOOM 80 PRECIOUS, WAS GIVEN, REVEALED THEMSELVES, WHEN THE VERY HOUR 
OF UNSPEAKABLE GLORY CAME, AND WITH IT THE TEST CAME, AND NATURE REGARDED 
REVELATION AS "INCREDIBLE," AND THE EYES OF NATUEE DISCREDITED THEIR OWN 
TESTIMONY, THOUGH THE DiVINE FACT WAS THERE, THE RESURRECTION OF JeSUS ! 

One of the correctest commentaries on the letter and the spirit of this striking and 
beautiful passage and the similar parallel passages, is found in the exquisite little poem 
of J. H. Newman, entitled " Moses seeing the Land." 

"My father's hope i my childhood'i dieamf 
The promise from on high I 
Long waited for I its glories beam 
Now when my death is nigh. 

"My death is oome, but not decay; 
Nor eye nor mind is dim ; 
The keenncM of youth's vigorous day 
Thrills in each nerve and limb. 



280 THE ACTS OJ" THE APOSTLES. [cat xXTi. 1— 8l 

* Blest scene I thrice welcome after toil— • 
If no deceit I view ; 
Oh, might my lips but press the loil. 
And prove the vision troel 

" Its glorions heights, its wealthy plainly 
Its many-tinted groves. 
They call I But he my steps lestraina 
Who chastens whom he lovei. 

** Ah I now they melt . . . they are bnt shade* . . «' 
I die 1 — ^yet is no rest, 
O Lord I in store, since Canaan fades 
But seen, and not possest 7 " 

a 

Ver. 11.— !ro« recMesi rushing to assume the moral responsibiUUes of others — an 
emceeding madness. We are to understand this extraordinary verse to reveal rather what 
Paul confesses it was in his heart to do, and in the nature of his own actions to cause 
others to do, than what he succeeded in doing, in all respects. The two or three touches 
give us a wonderfully and strangely vivid picture. And suggest, not so much for Paul 
who confessed and forsook his evil way, but for many others who do neither the one nor 
the other, how suicidal their course, when, uncontent with the weight of their own 
responsibilities, they would presume to tamper with the conscience of others, and lade 
themselves vrith some share in all that is most dread of the moral nature of their fellows. 
Let us notice that those who will forcibly seek to interfere with the moral and religious 
convictions of others do — 

I. Run the gbbat bisk or influbnoino othbbs to bin against theib own 

OONSOIENCE. 

II. PbESUMB to STJPPOSB THBIB own OONSCIBNCB to KB THE ABSOLUTBLT 8ArB 
STANDARD. 

III. Expose themselves, on no grbatbb wabbant, to stating a good wobk 

THAT OTHBEWISE WAS GEOWINO IN THE HBABT OP ANOTHER. 

IV. VeET possibly avail to make PEONOUNOED BLASPHEMERS, BAOKSLIDBBS, 
APOSTATES. 

V. Become at least stumbling-blocks to others, and causes or loss and 

PEEHAPS of INFINITB mental pain and DIBA8TB0US CONFLICT TO THEM. Against 

every one of these courted responsibilities Christ's own clearest warnings are offered, 
and his calmest, most solemn judgments pronounced upon those who taught them. — B. 

Ver. 18. — The ascended Saviour's description of his own work among men. From 
the suddenly opened window of heaven into the suddenly opened ear of Paul, the 
ascended Jesus conveys in very brief the description of the work his gospel is to accom- 
plish in the heart and life of the saved. The present description is fivefold. Each 
various representation of Christ's work in the world invites our grateful, loving atten- 
tion. Each such fresh representation throws fresh hues of beauty and of loveliness 
upon our own appreciation of the work. Jesus says here that he sends Paul to do five 
things for men, in his Name, by his warrant, through aid of his power. 

I. To EESTOEE A FAOULTT. Whatever things men see, who see not Christ, Divine 
truth, the deep needs and grand opportunities of their own souls, they see the unim- 
portant instead of the all-important. This is not to have the eye open, but shut. 

II. To TURN EESTOEED VISION FEOM THE DREAD VANITY OF DARKNESS TO ALL THB 

WEALTH OF LIGHT AND OF WHAT LIGHT CAN SHOW. The power Jesus givcs he Satisfies, 
The craving he implants he provides for. The hope he awakens he will not deceive. 
The eye he opens shall not wander and grope and bemoan darkness, dimness, vague 
mist, but field after field of higher light and Diviner prospect shall leed its rejoicing 
tense. 

m. To BESOUB KEN FEOM A FIBEOE, LONG, CONFESSED THBALDOU AND 8TABTLB 
THSM WITH RENEWED TITLE OF SONS OF GoD, INSTEAD OF SLAVES OF SaTAN. 

IV, To GIYB THEM TnK HBALiNG, COMPORTING, ASSUEOIO PEBSKNT GIFT OF rABDOV 



OH. xxvfc 1— 32.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLEa 281 

OF THB PAST. Of what a fearful load will this at once relieve them 1 How dreadful the 
outlook still is made, whatever it might be, if it is haunted by the visions of the past, 
nay, far more, overtaken by the dead hand of the past, and stricken down m. every 
attempt of its own hand, because of the overwhelming arrears due ! That which might 
be the brightest future is dashed by memories only sometimes, but much more by 
memories that come barbed with sternest actual pains and with demands that cannot 
be satisfied. 

V. To FIND THEM A PLAOB AMONG A FEOPLB TRAINED BY A NEW, A SPECIAL, A 

HI0HE8T KIND OF TEAININO. The place is found beyond a doubt here, as truly as there 
can be, as there is a " heaven on earth." In its perfection itris to he found, when years 
npon years have rolled ; ever till then, holding out the thought of home, the haven of 
rest, the heart of perfect peace, the Church of ravishing worship, the unimaginable bliss 
of heaven, whatever that may be, and of God himself. How vast that contrast! What 
a change and growth from the first to this fifth stage I Now first our eye needs to be 
opened, then what will it be when each blessed one may say, " As for me, I behold thy 
face In righteousness ; I am satisfied, awake, with thy likeness " ? — B. 

Ver. 18 (end). — Christ's own stress laid on faith in a personal object. "And an 
Inheritance among them that are sanctified," etc. The utterances of the ascended 
Saviour to the man who was to be in a double sense the great first apostle of his religion 
to all the world cannot but be regarded by us as invested with the very fullest interest. 
The philosophy of religion is simple with Jesus; and he throws into clear prominence 
certain things, which may surely mark for us the prominence we should give them. 
Notice-^ 

I. The MANIFEST STBESS lAiD ON FAITH IN THE Peeson Christ. " Faith, that which 
centres in me." So we may justly expound the words of Christ. Jesus speaks thus 
emphatically to protect against mysticism, defeat, deviation. 1. Faith in a living 
person can mean nothing short of general trust in him (unless particular qualification 
be expressed, e.g. faith in a person as a financier, etc.) and great trust in him, unless 
some qualification of measure be expressly stated, as is never done to Christ. Faith in 
Jesus Christ will include, therefore, (1) trust in his teaching ; (2) trust in his example ; 
(3) trust in his loving, sympathetic guidance ; (4) trust in all that he says, in all that 
in his providence he does ; (5) trust in the worthiness of his service ; as well as (6) 
trust on the part of the soul's deepest demands for him, in his last " power to save." 
2. The service or office of faith is here suggested. It is not remarked on here in its 
elevating infiuence on the individual character, and in its present points of superiority 
over sight for such a nature as ours. But it is instanced in its function as the link of 
connection, real, vital connection, between Christ and any man. It has, in itself, 
elevating as are the conception and the gradual training inherent in it, no sufBcient, 
no sovereign, certainly no saving, efficacy. It is nothing that is to be depended upon, 
of and in itself. But it leads to One, unites to One, keeps an open communication 
with One, and clings mightily to the end unto One, who is to he depended on, with all 
the heart, and mind, and strength, and soul. 3. The great calm, peace, divinest 
content and foretaste of heaven's own happiness that are commanded by real trust 
should always be credited to faith in Christ. If these fail and when they fail, it is not 
that faith fails of its office, or that Christ fails of his goodness, but that men sever 
this golden link awhile, or let this golden conduit pitifully leak awhile. 

II. The place given to faith in the personal Christ in relation to bancti- 
FIOATION. It appears from this pronouncement of Jesus that " faith that is in him " 
ig responsible for our sanctification. There is no limitation to the statement that 
sanctification depends on faith in Jesus. 1. It rises out of that faith or trust already 
spoken of. Without the real and living connection with Christ, there would be no 
entrance possible to the knowledge and the privileges which come with him. 2. It is 
fed the whole way along by the truth, the example, the guidance, the sympathizing 
love, of Jesus. 3. It avails to take away that surest foe of all to sanctification, trust ir, 
self, at one stroke, but a stroke that must be felt life's length. 4. Up to the very last, 
it is that simplest, purest, most depending trust of the soul on Jesus when it facet 
"the valley," and " the river," and "the shadow," and " the unknown," which com- 
pletes, «o far as we can trace it at all, the sanctification of man. If at that last moment 



282 tHB ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. foH. xiti. 1— 3^ 

the bond of faith should break, alas I all would break. But in that last moment, what 
reason we have to think that there is One who makes its strength equal to all tha 
strain which by any possibility could be put upon it I 

III. The place belonging to faith in the personal Christ ab the Wat to " the 
KHEKITANCB." " The inheritance," it distinctly appears, is that of a prepared place foi 
a prepared people. The preparation is one ; it is that of sanctiflcatiun attained by 
faith only. The way to " the inheritance," therefore, cannot be found, except by the 
paths of faith, the " faith that is in Christ." And the review of the whole would teach 
us that it were well-nigh impossible to summarize more forcibly and briefly in one 
the offices of " faith that is in Christ." His own is the emphasis here given to it. And 
he shows that it runs like a golden cord through the whole work of redemption. — B. 

V«r. 19. — The make of a heavenly vision, and iU use. These words are part of 
Paul's own description of his conversion. He has been telling the fact, and explaining 
the manner and circumstances of it. In fewest words he has spoken of the blinding 
light from lieaven at midday, but far above the brightness of a midday sun ; of the voice 
which he heard when prostrate on the earth ; of its summons to him to rise, and to be 
ready promptly to begin a career of activity and of danger perhaps, alike unparalleled. 
Then calling it altogether a " vision," and a " heavenly vision," he says, " I was not 
disobedient to it." For three days he remained blind ; for three days, so complete was 
the mastery of mind over body, he did neither eat nor drink. They led him by the 
hand to Damascus ; there the Divine will and purpose concerning him were farther 
unfolded to him by Ananias ; and there he found a grateful shelter awhile with Christ's 
disciples — those very persons whom he had set out to discomfit and persecute. Twenty- 
seven years, or thereabout, have now passed away, and looking back on that time, 
Paul says — and the trial of those twenty-seven years amply bear him out — " Where- 
upon ... I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision." It will be instructive to 
notice — 

I. What it is which Paul here terms a "heavenly vision." The charm of 
words often beguiles, sometimes misleads, and, like distance, lends enchantment to the 
view. A heavenly vision — must not every one covet it? Certainly every one would 
not covet this of Paul's. A " heavenly vision," if given, must it not be irresistible ? 
Will it not be made of fairy forms, of rainbow colours, of angel movements, of seraphs' 
music ? Poetry and dream, imagination and the refinedness of inspiration, — these will 
be the material and make of it. But, no, it is not so ; it was not so now. A heavenly 
vision may be as practical, of matter as hard, of manner as unceremonious and 
unwelcome, as the most ordinary reality of our everyday vexed and harassed life. In 
this, every one of us finds occasionally the hard knocks of hard facts, and so we may in 
a heavenly vision. And this was the kind of which Paul here speaks. The light was 
bright, but not with fancy's brightness, but with blinding effect. For the rest, judge 
in one moment the characteristics of the heavenly vision that, beginning with blinding, 
goes on by giving the strong rider a heavy fall to the earth. No dreamy whisperings 
succeed, nor strains seraphic, but summons short and sharp, with his name twice 
repeated. The remonstrant and upbraiding questions succeed, and fear and trembling 
and unknown astonishment are the result. This sort of vision, whatever it may be 
coiled, is, according to our general thought, not so much of heavenly as of earthly 
things. Yet these were the facts of Paul's vision, and equally fact is it that he terms 
it heavenly. And here is our lesson, that the warnings from heaven, and the per- 
suasions that come from heaven, and the instructions that date from heaven, may, 
while we stay here, savour and have to savour much of the material and the methods 
of earth, so far as regards the instruments of them. The heavenly vision shall best 
justify its name often for you, when it apprizes you experimentally, not of the 
delicious sensations of angels, but of the fear and trembling and anguished amaze- 
ment that pertain to sinful hearts and injured consciences. Paul was right ; for his 
vision did come from heaven, and it pointed up to heaven, end it led him back with 
it to heaven, and an innumerable host of others also. Hard fare brought the prodigal 
back to himself and home to his father ; and it was so with Paul, severe and uncere- 
monious handling brought Paul to himself and his Saviour and his life-work ; and it 
may be so with us, that hard blows and smarting wounds and crowding cares may b« 



OH. xxTi 1— 32J THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 283 

the appointed means of calling us to ourselves, our God, and our home. So also when 
these come to me, even me, me myself, is it not the equivalent of the name named, and 
sharply named twice, "Saul, Saul"? We often individually douht our mercies, and 
fail to give God praise for them ; seldom do we fail to cry out individually hecause of 
our pains, or to murmur at God because of them. 

II. How Paul bats he treated it. The treatment which Paul returned for his 
most merciful, but so to call it rough, usage in this heavenly vision, was prompt 
attention, practical obedience. The kindest, gentlest providences you may so abuse 
that they turn into bitter, hard experiences, and memories of pain and shame. The 
hardest, sternest providences may be so accepted, so treated, that they become trms- 
mutod into the brightest spots of memory, the happiest realities of a painful life, 
and the undoubted points of departure for a new and holier life. Of what seem the 
unlikeliest materials, it is possible to secure heavenly advantage — ^by obedience to the 
cov,vii.tions, the thoughts, the suggestions that come of the pain and darkness and 
fearful care that were inwrapt in them. For what reason, however, does Paul say, " I 
was ' not disobedient,' " instead of " I was obedient " ? 1. Perhaps he chooses his 
expression of real, deep modesty before God. " Disobedient," he thought to himself, 
" I will no longer be," and that thought lingered still with him, though, as to being 
fully and adequately obedient, " who is sufficient for it ? " The twenty-seven years that 
have now sped away have just done this for him, made him feel that to be perfectly 
obedient will need an energy and an unfalteringness never seen below the sun, except 
in the one Lord and Master himself. 2. Or was the mode of Paul's language rather 
due to the thought, perhaps all but unconsciously felt, that disobedience was the broad 
road and wide gate, whereat the many go in, the million to one I and he had been long 
of the number ? But Paul would say, " Being ' by the grace of God what I am,' I 
would no longer be disobedient, nor ' walk in their counsel.' " Use we then our provi- 
dences, though dark and stern, and let us not be unfaithful to their suggestions. It 
will be a great step towards baulking the fruitfulness of evil, and towards producing an 
abundant fruitfulness of good. To be not disobedient may soon usher in the ambition 
and iSae joys of a real and hearty obedience. The word may tremble on human lip, to 
say, " I have been obedient," but with a good conscience before man and God, Paul 
prefers to say, " I was not disobedient." — B. 

Ver. 20. — The mission and hurden of the evangelist. Three great themes are here 
announced by Paul. They stand in close relation with one another. The chain of 
truth and of highest duty is short, of three links, but most strong and most useful. 
The apostle, describing his own great work as the first evangelist to the wide world, 
describes for all time and for all place the work of the evangelist. However far 
beyond religion may go, may be taught, may develop itself to an opening eye, a 
quickened imagination, a deepening heart, and an inspired outlook, it begins here, and 
rests on these three things. The preacher of Christ to humanity must preach — 

L Ebpentance. 1. Conviction of sin. 2. Deep sorrow for sin. 3. Confession of sin. 

II. The condition — that man " tubn to God." There is, no doubt, a crisis in the 
inner life, in the very man himself, called fitly the turning to Ood. Let it be produced 
as it may ; let it be concealed or manifest as it may ; let it be short and sharp and 
very defined to day and hour, or the reverse; yet this is a fact in the moral sjiritual 
history of one called by Christ and obeying that call. So much so that the call itself 
shall in part be worded thus : " Turn ; " " Turn to God ; " " Q'urn ye, turn ye ; why 
will ye die?" The reversal of the old life, old character, old principle of action, 
cannot be more plainly asserted as a necessity. 

III. The necessity — op peactioal holiness or life. Christ will not allow pro- 
fession, will not accept mysticism, does not acknowledge vague dreaming, nor admit 
the idler. Change from the old, honest departure from the past, reality of a new future, 
are his watchwords. — B. 

Vers. 22, 23. — A good confession. j.f Festus and Agrippa had known half of what 
Paul had been passing through since his journey to Damascus was so peremptorily 
stopped, they would well understand why he interposes the acknowledgment, so full of 
diipendence and of humble gratitude, " Therefore having obtained help of God, I con- 



SM THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oa. iiTi. 1— Sa 

tinue unto this day." Paul takes credit to himself for neither his work, nor suffering, 
nor safety. These are all due to his sovereign "Leader" and "Commander" and 
Protector. But he makes a good confession indeed, one, if true — and none deny its 
truth — ^most worthy of imitation, of all and every one who would in any measure be a 
follower in his work. He claims justly, and not boastfully, but lor manifestly other 
reason, that he has maintained-* 

L A PEBSEVEBINO WITNESI. 
n. An mPABTIAL WITNESS. 

IIL An UNCHANaiNO consistbn* goRiPTOBAL wiTNBSS. Paul wishes to lay stress on 
this, that he had been to " the Law and the testimony and the prophets ; " and had 
been true to them ; had not gone beside nor beyond them, and had not fallen short of 
them, as his people and opponents were, in fact, guilty of doing. 

IV. A BTKONO WITNESS TO FOUB THINGS IN ESPECIAL. Theso Were tht four grand 
truths imbedded in the Law, enshrined in the testimony, and many a time bursting out 
like hope's own light firom the prophets. These were (1) the death, (2) tlie resurrection, 
of Christ^; (3) the " great Light" he would be to " his people," (4) to all the world. 

V. A WITNESS MABVEixousLT OWNED BY THE "HELP OF GoD." In a lower sense, no 
doubt, but in a very true sense, Paul had done and suffered the things that none other 
eould, " save God were with him." — B. 

Vers. 24 — S2.—A threefold illustration of the irrepressible energy of the truth. This 
paragraph has its value, and that a great value, in the grouping of its contents. And 
the three members that make the group are worthy each of individual consideration 
as well. But here we notice only certain great though general facts. 

L The enerqt of truth. It will not let Festus remain silent in the court. 
Immediately afterwards it shows that Agrippa cannot persuade himself to hold his 
peace before the prisoner and the court. And lastly, it finds them something to say 
" between themselves," in private, and that something was certainly a witness to the 
right. 

IL The bucoesb of the enerot of truth m test various chabactebs. Festus 
and Agrippa were as different in race, religion, character, as perhaps could be. But 
while the force of truth makes them both find an utterance when it had been wiser for 
them had they kept silence, yet how amazingly different those utterances were I Festus 
taxes Paul with madness. Agrippa, whether utterly serious or not, bears testimony to 
the influence he feels from what Paul says, in its persuasiveness. Neither of them 
refuse, even though the case is involved in all possible publicity, to leave the last word 
with Paul. He does, as it were, hold the field, and in a very real sense finds himself 
left, not only in his own heart, but in the " pomp " of that open court, master of the 
field. 

IIL The kevbngb that the bnbeqt of tbuth takes. When open honour is not 
done spontaneously to it, its victory not proclaimed, and its rights smothered, how 
superficially soever, it secures its own in a yet more emphatic way. It secures a place 
indelible for itself, and on a page that shall endure to all time ; and it owes nothing to 
human favour, no thanks to human patronage, no atom of indebtedness to any lifting 
hand of the great, the wise, the mighty, the proud. Never mind all the suppression of 
these, it transpires, and it gets all it needs from tha very rehearsal of how they 
•uppressed (vers. 30^32). — B. 

Vers. 24 — 26. — An unwitting contribution to the truth. The phenomena presented 
by Festus when, in struggling to insult the truth, he strengthens the body of testimony 
to it, are to be noticed. They are simply as follows :— 

I. Festus cannot dent the signs of learning in its advocate. How many a 
time gospel truth has been decried because of the signs of ignorance in its advocates I 
The enemies of the gospel of almost all kinds love learning, would appraise if highly, 
and times without number have professed that this is their desideratum. But now it 
b all the contrary. 

IL Festus notes obseevantlt the signs of a fuIiL, deep enthusiasm in thb 
advocate op the truth of the gospel. 

m. Fksxds jiwih himself uxseblt out of bymfatht wits such 6101T8, 



CH. xxvL 1— 32.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 28* 

lY. TeSTUS UCBT FIKD BOMSTHINa TO BAT AKD Fii TO £■ SAID 7B0H THB 8BAV 
OF AUTHOBITT. 

V. In hib dipfioultt Festus is betrayed into the huoest ekeob. 

VI. The " LODD voice " or Festds dies out, and gives place to firm thouoh 
BESPECTFTJL coNTEADiCTiON OF THE PBisoNEB. The theory of the " madncss " of Paid — 
nut a whisper is heard of it again. — B. 

Vers. 28, 29. — A mournful " almost," on a light lip. If these words of Agrippa wera 
spoken satirically, as some think, or wefb intended to express even the essence of satire, 
yet after all, this would make very little difference to the standpoint from which we 
consider them. It would make a great difference indeed to Agrippa himself, but wovdd 
scarcely diminish aught from the many lessons we may guther from them. Agrippa, 
too, like Pestus, it would appear, felt compelled to make some pronouncement from the 
chair of authority, but again (notable to observe), the last word lay with Paul. And 
"a word" indeed it was! This episode, consisting of Agrippa's behaviour on this 
occasion, may be justly viewed in the followinc; lights. It illustrates— 

I. The amazino energy of gospel tbdth against wonderfully significant 
OBSTACLES. Mauy of these obstacles are most easily imagined. But take this one, as 
typical of the rest, that from Agrippa, being who he was, where he was, and closely 
surrounded by the company in which he was, should be wrung, and yet without aay 
appearance of its being wrung, such a confession ! Supposing that the language of 
Agrippa does not mean to own to the experience of any deep emotion or of any powerful 
impression produced upon him, still that Agrippa can put these words, spiced with 
taunting, as they then were, upon his lips, was indicative of something very different 
from scouting and scorning (as Festus would have done) the most distant approach to 
the thought. 

II. The amazing bneegt of an opposing human nature. For the practical issue 
of all was that Agrippa remained himself. He did not come over to Paul or to Paul's 
Master. He did remain with Festus, himself and his sins both "secret" and "pre- 
sumptuous." 

III. The point where this human natdbe won. Human and sinful nature won, 
either at the point of " almost " — that so well-known " almost " of conviction, inborn, but 
for all that still-hovn 1 — or at the point of a very trifling easy gibe made to do duty for 
the hour, nay, it was only the moment. Paul has just, undenied, claimed Agrippa, as 
versed both in Law and in fact. Agrippa cannot, does not, deny it. But that his know- 
ledge may seem to make him look a little less small in the eyes of Festus and the 
court around, at what he cannot deny, he can indulge in a fling — the fling that of a man 
who says, " You'll find it no so easy matter to make me real, true, sincere, and ready to 
give in to what nevertheless I cannot deny." Paul must have thought now of the 
heart that is in man, " We are not ignorant of its devices." 

IV. The position which the bikierb advocate of gospel truth holds even 
WHEN most oppbessed. For the closing language of Paul — so pitying, so meek, so 
Saviour-like, so yearning — was indeed a triumph of God's grace and of goodness in 
man. At the unlikeliest moment the lips of Paul breathe out what sounds like nothing 
else so much as a parting benediction, a forgiving prayer, an irresistible argument of 
most pathetic affection. He would pour oil on the troubled waters, he would reduce 
the storm to a Divine calm, he would cover up all a sinful, shameful, humiliating past 
with the love and forgivingness and hope that must in a moment overspread all the 
scene, if only Agrippa were such in the salvation of Jesus as he was, less his chains. 
Why, there was no comparison for one moment then between the real glory of Paul 
and the varnished brilliance of Agrippa. So God secures his own. So Jesus is 
mindful of his true servants. So the Spirit puts wisdom into the heart and words 
into the lips of those faithful to his inspiration. And the insulted prisoner dispensej 
reward and punishment to his judges. — ^B. 

Vers. 30 — 32. — Secret acquittals. These closing verses of a chapter thrilling with 
Interest suggest the subject of the various acquittals that men both good and bad 
obtain. The range of value belonging to acouittals received by men from men is vast 
indeed. They stand in strange contrast to the one acquittal or one condemnation whick 



t9» THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xxvi. 1— 82. 

awaits each and every man in his turn, on the threshold of the hereafter. The present 
passage, however, will confine attention to one class of acquittals rather than invite 
thought to range at large. And we may think — 

I. Of the beobet acqitittal of man by men. 1. The man is innocent : hia 
judges know it ; their inner judgment acquits him ; their very lips acquit him, but 
only "between themselves." They say it not to the innocent accused, not to the 
accusers, not to the world. Their real verdict transpires — God takes oars of that — but 
it is no thanks to them, and it is not the good it should be to him, the victim of their 
injustice, who was given to them that they might do justice. This is one sort of 
secret acquittal. 2. The man is guilty : his judges know it ; their deepest judgment 
finds him guilty ; their lips pronounce it " between themselves." And circumstances 
are such that they pronounce their verdict of guilty before man also. Yet for all that, 
the secret thought of their heart is that they will acquit, and their covered deed is 
acquittal. They mete not out equal justice. Their weights and balances are not fair 
and jiist. They condone and countenance — the criminal. And this is another sort of 
secret acquittal, as mischievous and disastrous as any can be. For such as these 
nothing can be said except the words of rebuke, of unsparing condemnation, of well- 
visited scorn. 

II. Op the secret acquittai. of a true man's own conscience. The brightest 
pages of history are written with instances of this kind of secret acquittaL From 
Joseph — and, were all the truth known, from a much earlier than Joseph — to the perfect, 
the sublime, the spotless innocence of Jesus, and again with fresh impulse onward by 
Stephen, and Paul, and Peter, and John, and the martjrrs, and an unnumbered host, of 
whom the world was not worthy ! — the record of such acquittal is safely written. What 
a wonderful resource an innocent conscience 1 What a store of peace it means I What 
a defence against misery, anguish, remorse, and hell on earth 1 It is already the bud of 
Heaven's unspeakable bliss. 

IIL Of the secret acquittal op God'b own verdict. At present, God's verdict 
is often veiled from view, silent for the ear as the star that shines the most distant and 
the coldest — and all the scene seems filled up with sight and sound of human judg- 
ment. Yet two things are to be said. 1. That the man who thinks knows that this is 
only the surface appearance ; that a time far otherwise conditioned hastens to meet this 
present scene, and prepares a strange reversal. 2. That to the heart of the humble. 
God-fearing man, there is given the individual and most precious earnest of Divine 
approval and complacency and love many a time. That peace which the world cannot 
give God's secret acquittal does give, and it is the sort of peace that both " sheds 
itself abroad" with all the swiftness and persuasiveness of fragrance itself, and 
preserves the sacred secret of its sweetness. Whatever else Paul had or had not, he 
had three acquittals, and they were all for the present secret — the acquittal of the unjust 
judges, and this was no usual honour ; of his own conscience ; and of the holy Master 
and God. — B. 

Ver. 5. — St. Paul a Pharisee. Very remarkable is the skill shown by the apostle 
in the adaptation of his defences before different rulers. This Agrippa prided himseli 
upon his Jewish knowledge, and would be quite familiar with the Jewish sects. The 
offences charged against St. Paul related chiefly to Jewish ceremonial and rights, so the 
apostle could make no answer which would influence Agrippa so certainly as the answei 
given in the text, " After the most straitest sect of our religion I lived a Pharisee.' 
Agrippa would know that a man born and brought up as a Pharisee was not in the least 
likely to offend against the customs and rites which that body so jealously preserved. 
Conybeare and Howson say, " Not only was Paul a Pharisee, but his fathers and teachers 
belonged to this sect. This is nearly all we know of St. Paul's parents. We can 
conceitre of the apostle as born in the Pharisaic family, and as brought up from his 
infancy in the ' straitest sect ' of the Jewish religion. His childhood was nurtured 
in the strictest belief, as he had before him the example of his fathers, who prayed 
and walked with broad phylacteries, and were scrupulous and exact in their legal obser- 
vances. He had, moreover, the memory and tradition of ancestral piety, for he tells us 
that ]m served God 'from his forefathers.' Everything, therefore, tended to prepare 
bjra to be an eminent member of that theological party to which so manv of the Jews. 



OH. XXVI. 1—32.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 281 

were looking for the preservation of their natural life, and extension of their natural 
creed." Compare St. Paul's account of himself as given in Gal. i. 14 ; Phil. iii. 6, 6. 
Ws dwell on the fact of St. Paul's Pharisaic birth, education, and sympathies, in order 
to show — 

I. How THESE AFFECTED HIS BELATIONS WITH THE JeWS. He OUght tO have been 

peculiarly acceptable to the Jews. The bias of his life was wholly in favour of cere- 
monial Judaism. He might have been looked to as one of the noblest champions of 
Mosaism. He did come out as a leader of the party which persecuted the followers of 
Jesus of Nazareth. He had never separated himself from the Jewish rites and ordi- 
nances. To the close of life he maintained his Pharisaism. He pleaded, indeed, for 
liberty from ritual bonds on behalf of the Gentile converts, but he did not take the 
liberty for himself; so that, if the Jews had not yielded to blinding prejudice, they 
might have found in this Christian Pharisee the conservator of all the essentials of 
Mosaism. It should be clearly seen that St. Paul at once admitted the new light that 
came from God, and jealously conserved the old, which had also come fiom him. No 
doubt the apostle saw that the Jewish system would fade away, and give place to a 
spiritual religion for which simpler forms would suffice ; but it was no part of his 
mission to hurry on the time of the passing away. His point was this — Jewish bonds 
must not be laid on Gentile converts. Judaism cannot be aggressive ; it must keep 
well within its own lines and limits. 

II. How St. Paul's Pharisaism bore upon the charges made against him. 
It made those charges seem ridiculous. One brought up as a zealous Pharisee insultingly 
defiling the sacred temple was simply absurd. Such a man could not have done such a 
thing. And the assumption further was that the public teachings of such a man could 
not be out of harmony with true Judaism. Men aie true to themselves : they do not 
make themselves ridiculous by such open inconsistencies, St. Paul may plead in 
answer to all their charges, " I was, I am, a Pharisee." 

III. How St. Paul's Pharisaic education became a pebpabation fob his 
Christian faith and life. Such an education established a strong conviction con- 
cerning three things. 1. The direct ruling and intervention of Jehovah, so that, at any 
time, any of his servants might have direct and personal communications from him. 
The fathers and the prophets had received such revelations, and revelations and 
visions may come to men still. 2. The importance of Holy Scripture, as given by 
inspiration of God. 3. And the expectation of Messiah, as fulfilling Scripture projjhecy 
and promise. It may easily be shown how these Pharisaic sentiments prepared for 
(1) the vision at Damascus ; (2) the key which that vision gave to Scripture, and 
especially to the figure of Messiah presented in the Scripture. Compare the difference 
of rebult if St. Paiil had been by birth and education a doubting, sceptical Sadducee. 
True Christianity is the natural and proper outcome of true Pharisaism. Those who 
were loyal to the idea of the theocracy, and to the Scripture as the human expres- 
sion of the Divine will and purpose, ought to have been led to a full acceptance of 
Jesus of Nazareth as Messiah, the Saviour, the Son of God. Illustrate and impress 
that in a man's early years is displayed the character that is to distinguish his 
whole life ; and that we are all greatly dependent on the tone of the influences that 
surround our infancy and childhood. Manhood should not, indeed, witness the mere 
continuance of childhood's prejudices, it should be the true and worthy development, 
adaptation, and application of childhood's principles. — E. T. 

Ver. 6. — The Messianic promise. " The words of this verse include the whole 
expectation of a Divine kingdum, of which the Christ was to be the Head, as well as the 
specific belief in a resurrection of the dead." It is said of the early revelations of God, 
by the writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews, " God, having of old time spoken unto the 
fathers in the prophets by divers portions and in divers maLners " (Eevised Version). 
And the presentation of Messiah in the Old Testament Scriptures has been likened to 
the painting of a great picture, on which, durhig the many ages, many hands have 
worked. At first we have but the barest outline figure, drawn by God himself in the 
promise to our first parents. Then patriarch, lawgiver, judge, kmg, poet, and prophet 
in their turn become artist-painters, and help to fill in the wondrous outline, until in 
the later days of Isaiah the Messiah stands forth full and cles^r before us, the sufl'ering, 



288 VHE ACTS OF THE APOSTLEa [oh. xxvL 1— 82, 

conquering King, Dealing with the scriptural promise of Messiah, the Prince and 
Saviour, we note — 

L That it was baelt given. In the world's very morning. In the first hours of 
the world's sin and woe. Almost before the shadow of man's sin could fall upon his 
life, God sent forth this great ray of hope. 

II. That it was often benbwbd. For every generation ; for every new set of 
circumstances. In ever-varied forms. With a gracious advancing clearness and fulness. 
The actual instances provide the illustrations. For lists of them, see appendices to 
modern Bibles. 

III. That it was strangely misconceived. Because men would not take the 
Messianic figure as a whole, but chose the parts of it which they preferred. And 
because men did not take the revelation in its simplicity, but read it in the light of 
their circumstances, and especially of their temporal necessities. So a nation whose 
liberty had been taken from them only saw in Messianic promise a liberator, a Judas 
Maccabeus, a triumphing prince, after the pattern indicated by Daniel. Messiah ia for 
men, not for Jews only, for tinners, and not for an enslaved nation only. — B. T. 

Ver. 8. — The ineredib lity of the resurrection. This sudden appeal appears to be 
made for two reasons. 1. Because Agrippa professed to believe in the Scriptures, which 
certainly contained records of resurrections (see 1 Kings xviL 17 — 23 ; 2 Kings iv. 
18 — 37). 2. Because the Sadducee party was the one which was most active against 
the apostle, and they were chiefly offended by his preaching the doctrine of the resur- 
rection, based upon the resurrection of Jesus, the Messiah. Possibly St. Paul may 
have known that the doctrine of resurrection was a stumbling-block and hindrance to 
Agrippa. Men in all ages have stumbled at the difficulty of resurrection. It appears 
to be so contrary to the order of nature; and, so far as human power and skill are 
concerned, death is so manifestly an irremediable woe. But is resurrection incredible ? 
Three answers may be given. 

I. That depends upon the evidences op the fact. It is credible enough if it can 
be adequately proved. And the test case must be the resurrection of our Lord. It is 
not enough to dismiss this case as miraculous ; we must fairly consider the proofs of 
the fact. Review them as given by St. Paul in 1 Cor. xv., and set them alongside the 
historical details given in the Gospels, showing the credibility of the witnesses, etc. 
The position taken by Hume is a very presumptuous one, that it is more likely the 
evidence is false than that the miraculous event is true. No fact of history can be 
received unless its testimony is accepted without prejudice. 

IL The ebsureection is not the geeatest op mieacles. If we can accept greater, 
it cannot be unreasonable to accept it. St. Augustine well expresses this point. He 
says, " It is a greater miracle to make that which is not than to repair that which js. 
Why cannot God raise us after we are turned into dust, who, if we ever were reduced 
to nothing, could give us a being?" To create man is a greater miracle than to re-create 
him; and we are not unreasonable in asserting that he who can accomplish the one can 
certainly accomplish the other. 

III. The wokld is full op analogies which help to make eeasonable the 
BELIEP IN eesueeection. These are fully given in works on the resurrection, and are 
fiimiliarly used in sermons on this topicj Especially may analogies be found in spring- 
time resurrections and insect changes. Science, too, finds analogies, for it discovers that 
nothing really is destroyed, but all things reappear in otlier and varied forms. It is 
but a beginning of argument on behalf of the sure and sublime truth of the resurrection, 
but it is an important beginning to be able to say — It is not a thing incredible that God 
should raise the dead. — R. T. 

Ver». 22, 23. — St. Paul'* message compared with prophecy. Reference to and sup. 
port from Holy Scripture was a characteristic feature of the apostle's pul)lic teachings 
and preachings. To understand the importance of this feature of his work we should 
take into consideration not only the general views entertained of Scripture as the 
revealed and authoritative Word of God, but also, and more particularly, the sentiment 
concerning Scripture cherished by pious Jews. It is almost impossiljle to exaggerate 
in speaking of their reverence for it. It was their final court of appeal. It was the 



OH. xxTt 1— 32.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 289 

roice of their God to them. It was the ground of their hope that Messiah, the Beliverer 
and Prince, would come. It may also be noticed that they much more readily found 
Messianic referencee in prophecy and promise than we can do ; and we find it difficult 
to lee the points which even the New Testament writers make, probably because our 
characteristic logical and critical qualities of mind differ so materially from the figura- 
tive and imaginative characteristics of the Eastern mind. How St. Paul UBed appeal* 
to Scripture, and especially Scripture prophecy, may be illustrated from his speech at 
Antioch in Pisidia (ch. xiii. 16 — tl), and from his Epistles. Further illustratioa of the 
method, as peculiar to the apostles and Christian teachers, may be found in St. Peter's 
speech at Pentecost, and the Epistle to the Hebrews. In our text Moses is mentioned 
with the prophets, because there were some who placed the Pentateuch in a higher 
rank than the rest of the Old Testament Scriptures. St. Paul gives the leading pointi 
of hie preaching, and affirms, what he would be prepared quite fully to illustrate and 
to provo, that these points are not really new, but have been all foreshadowed and 
declared by Jehovah's prophets. He takes three topics. 1. Messiah was to suffer. 2, 
Messiah was to rise iirom the dead. 3. Messiah was to be the Light of life to both Jew 
and Gentile. 

I. Messiah ttab to strFPBB, or should be capable of suffering. " The great body of 
the Jews had fixed their thoughts only on the prophetic visions of the glories of the 
Messiah's kingdom. Even the disciples of Jesus were slow to receive any other thought 
than that of conquest and triumph. It was not until they were led, after the Cruci- 
fixion and the Eesurreotion, into our Lord's own school of prophetic interpretation, and 
taught to recognize the under-current of types and prophecies that pointed to a righteoui 
Sufferer as well as to a righteous King, that they were able to receive the truth." Show 
(1) the prophetic figure of a suffering Messiah from Ps. xxii. and Isa. liii., with referencee 
to passages in Jeremiah and Lamentations ; and (2) point out how precisely the 
historical facts of our Lord's sufferings fit into the preparatory prophecy. 

II. Messiah was to bise from the dead. Illustrate the prophecies on this point 
from Ps. xvi. 10 ; xxx. 3 ; xli. 10 ; cxviii. 7 ; Hosea vi. 2, etc. Show how the fact of 
his resurrection answers to the prophecy. Aid may be found in St. Peter's speeches 
recorded in ch. ii. and iii. 

IIL Messiah was to be the Lisht of life to both Jew and Gentile. This hail 
been one of St. Paul's strongest points, and he had abundant Old Testament referenoefl 
to show that Messiah's mission was not limited to Jews. Befer in illustration to 
Ps. xlv. ; Isa. xL 10 ; xlii. 1, etc. Show that the apostle could direct attention to the 
fact that God had opened the door of faith to the Gentiles by the vision given to 
St. Peter at Joppa, and the admission of Cornelius to the Church. He could also plead 
that in the Gentile cities God had attended the preaching of his gospel with the power 
of the Holy Ghost, and Churches among the Gentiles had been founded on the faith of 
Christ. So prophecy had been fulfilled ; it was satisfied in Jesus of Nazareth, who 
suffered for our sins, rose again for our justifioation, and is preached in all the world m 
the all-sufficient Saviour. — TL. T. 

Ver. 29. — " Both almost, and altogether." By comparing the translation of rer. 28 
in the Bevised Yersion, it will be seen that the traditional associations of the words 
cannot be maintained, and that Agrippa had other thoughts than those which are 
usually supposed. But it is certain that St. Paul made use of Agiippa's words to pomt 
a persuasion, and recognized the possibility of the state which may be described as 
" almost a Christian." And so we are still justified in basing a homily on the condi- 
tion of the " almost persuaded " upon this passage. The subject may be pleasantly 
introduced by a description of the pompous scene. Agrippa prided himself upon his 
semi-royalty, and so Festus arranged for as much of state grandeur as possible. St. 
Paul was brought chained to his soldier-guard, and spoke with but one hand free. His 
fervour and eloquence moved Agrippa more than he cared to admit even to himself. 
He dreaded any further pressure, and therefore tried to turn aside the apostle's pleadings 
with the lightness of a laugh. St. Paul was too much in earnest to take the king 
other than seriously, and so he responds with the passion aAd persuasion of our text. 
He turns the king's words into a plea against continuing any longer in an unsaving 
relation to Christianity. And still we find, in regard to vital personal religion, Aat vei^ 
A0T8 — n. u 



220 THii AUiS OP THE APOSTLEa [oh. xxvn. 1— 44. 

many come up, as it were, to the door, but do not enter in. There are amongst tu 
many — very many — who are only almost Ghristians. 

L Who among its may we think of ab only almost Chbistians ? 1. The child ol 
pious parents, surrounded by gracious influences, led to the house of God, the child of 
many prayers, growing up to manhood or womanhood, yet not wholly Christ's to-day. 
2. The regular attendant at Christian services ; often moved to tears, and, it may be, 
to some passing resolves ; but emotions pass, decision is delayed, and they are only 
almost Christians yet. 3. There may even he aged people trembling down to life's 
close, who, having put off religious decision again and again, seem now unable to make 
the effort, and are in peril of dying only almost Christians. 4. There are parents who 
have converted children, but are themselves the old side of the border-land, yet in 
" trespasses and sins." 5. There are those who have been aroused to religious anxiety, 
but whose experience, varying for years, has never yet risen to full surrender. Each ol 
these classes may be described with precise adaptation to the congregation addressed. 

II. What eeasons can be found fob so many eemainino only almost Chris- 
tians? In the case of Agrippa the message seemed novel and strange, and there 
seemed excuse for requiring time to think it over. In our case the message may seem 
old and familiar, and it may have lost its awakening and persuading power. Some- 
times the hindrance is: 1. Intellectuai. It may be some perplexity or difficulty in 
relation to Christian doctrine. Or it may be the influence of the intellectual tone of 
the society in which a man mingles. 2. Or the hindrance may be lack of sufficient 
motive : especially an inadequate impression of the evil and peril of sin. To use a 
figure, the boat lies rocking just outside the harbour bar, and there is not wave enough 
to lift it over. Therefore must the true preacher find motive and persuasion, urging, 
in Christ's stead, " Be ye reconciled unto God." 3. But the chief hindrances are morS. 
It was Agrippa's self-indulgent and immoral life which really turned the shafts aside. 
The pride of self stands in our way. Decision for Christ involves surrender — a giving 
up of that "self-reliance" which is so dear to flesh and blood. Illustrate from the 
story of the young rich ruler ; and recall our Lord's teachings about the " strait gate 
and the narrow way." This may be the reason why we are not "altogether " Christians. 
There is a cable holding imder the water somewhere, and the ship cannot float out free 
into the ocean of God. Illustrate some cables. The last to yield is ususMy feeling ; 
we wait for feeling, and, waiting, let the golden hours of opportunity slip by. 

m. What beallt is it to be only almost persuaded ? See it in the estimate 
we form of Agrippa's character. He is utterly weak and ignoble. We admire the 
confessor and the martyr; we scorn the hesitating and indecisive — such as Reuben, 
" unstable as water." The people at Athens very properly ordained that every one 
should be fined who would take neither side in politics. It is a condition which dis- 
honours God more than open rebellion, because it assumes that there really are some 
considerations to be set against his claims, some reasons why we should not love and 
serve him. And such indecision effectually shuts us out from the benefits of the gospel 
provision. The " almost Christian " has (1) no sense of pardoned sin ; (2) no joy of 
peace with God ; (3) no strength from the consciously present Saviour ; (4) no title to 
the everlasting heritage. Impress that in religious matters there really is no border- 
land. Illustrate by the story of the wreck of the Itoyal Cliarter. The fore part lodged 
on a rock, the back part, flapped by the waves, broke away and sank in deep water with 
all that were in it. Just at the moment of parting a young man stood on the hinder 
part, and made a leap for dear life. He was saved, for he could decide and act. Then 
plead, as St. Paul pleaded, that, whether by little persuasion or by much, men would 
end their state of indecision, and become altogether Christ's. — "EL. T. 

EXPOSITION. 



OHAPTEB XXVn, 

Ver. 1. — For for into, A.V. ; to a eenturion 
named Juliui of the Augustan band for unto 
ome named Jtduie, a eentmitn ef Atifiutiuf 



band, A.V. That we should sail. Obserre 
the "we," denoting that Luke was of 
the party. Connecting it with the " we " 
of ch. xxi. 17, the inference is obvions 
that Luke was with Paul through th* 



OH. xxvn. 1 — 44.] 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 



291 



whole of these two eventful years, and 
that it is to this presence that we owe the 
detailed circumstantial narrative of ch. 
xxi. — xxviii., as well as, perhaps, the com- 
position of St. Luke's Gospel, for which the 
two years at Ceesarea afforded an admirable 
opportunity. The Augustan band ; or, cohort 
(ir-Keipa) ; as oh. i. 1 (where see note). This 
a-Tretpa Se/SaffT^, cohors Augusta, was probably 
one of the five cohorts stationed at Csesarea, 
consisting of auxiliary troops (though Alford 
does not think so). Its name " Augustan " 
was given, after the analogy of the Augustan 
k'gion, just as there was an " Italian band" 
as well as two or three " Italian legions." It 
has been conjectured (Kuinuel, in 2oc.), indeed, 
that the name may rather be taken from 
Sebaste, Samaria, as consisting of Samari- 
tans, seeing that Josephug (' Bell. Jud.,' ii, 
xii. 5) actually mentions a troop of cavalry 
(jca\ovix.fn)V 'Sf$aiTTi]vSiv) called the troop of 
Sebaste. But the Greekname is 'Se^aa-T-rivav, 
not SE/Sao-T^, which latter designation is not 
supported by any similar example (Meyer). 
Ver. 2. — Smharhing in for entering into, 
A.\. ; which was about to sail unto the 
placet on the coasts of Asia, we put to sea 
for we launched, meaning to sail hy the coast 
of Asia, A.V. and T.E. ; Aristarchus for one 
Aristarchus, A.V. Adramyttium (now Adror 
myti, where ships are still built), on the 
north-western coast of Asia Minor, south of 
Troas, on the gulf opposite which lies the 
Island of Lesbos, was a place of considerable 
trade, situated on the great Boman road 
which connected the Helletipont with Ephesus 
and Miletus. Which was about to sail ; h4k- 
KovTi (not niWovTis, as in the T.E.), describ- 
ing the ship as a coasting-vessel, trading 
between Adramyttium and other ports on the 
coast of Asia. She was now on her homeward 
voyage. Aristarohoa. He is first men- 
tioned in ch. xix. 29, as a Macedonian, and 
one of Paul's companions at Ephesus, pro- 
bably, therefore, the fruit of his first visit to 
Thessalonica. We find him again with St. 
Paul on his last journey from Corinth to 
Asia (ch. xx. 4), and we gather from the 
present notice of him that he kept with 
him till he arrived at Jerusalem, and 
followed him to Ceesarea. It would appear 
at first sight, from Col. iv. 10, that he not 
only stityed with St. Paul during his two 
years' imprisonment at Eome, but was his 
" fellow-prisoner," if at least the word 
tTvvatxi'-iS.u>T6s /lov is to be taken literally. 
This, however, is very doubtful, because 
in the Epistle to the Bomans (xvi. 7) 
St. Paul calls Andronicus and Junius his 
" fellow-prisoners," though he was not then 
in prison himself; and also because, in the 
Epistle to Philemon (23, 21), he gives this 
epithet to Epaphras, with the addition 
fv XjjiorTJ) 'Iriffov ("my fellow-prisoner in 



Christ Jesus"), and does not give it ta 
Aristarchus, who is named in the same 
sentence as his avvepy6s (see Bishop Light- 
foot, on Col. iv. 10, and Bishop EUicott, on 
ibid.). If trtiv!uxii.a.\'eTos is to be taken ol 
a bodily captivity, nothing is known of the 
occasion which gave rise to it in the case of 
any of the persons to whom it is applied. 

Ver. 3. — Treated Paul kindly for courteouslg 
entreated Paul, A.V. ; leave for liberty, A.V. ; 
and refresh for to refresh, A.V. We touched ; 
itoT^X^we" (as Luke v. H ; ch. xxi. 3 ; 
xxviii. 12) of coming from the sea to land, 
contrasted with arhx^l'^^i' in vers. 2 and 4 
(avax^i^vTis) of going out to sea (as Luke 
viii. 22; ch. xiii. 13; xvi. 11; xviii. 21; 
xxi. 1, 2 ; and frequently in this chapter). 
At Sidon ; where doubtless there were 
disciples, as well as at Tyre (oh. xxi. 4), 
though there is no special mention of such. 
Paul was glad to have an opportunity of 
visiting them while the ship was stopping 
there to unload, and set down and take up 
passengers; and Julius, perhaps by the 
orders of Festus and Agrippa, and also from 
the influence Paul's character and conduct 
had on him (oomp. Dan. i. 9), courteously 
gave liim leave to land, probably accom- 
panied by a soldier. And refresh himself; 
literally, to meet with care. 'EmuiKeia occurs 
only here in the New Testament, but is 
found in 1 Mace. xvi. 14; 2 Maco. xi. 23, 
and is frequent in Xenophon and other 
classical writers, by whom it is used with 
TUX"'') ft8 here. Luke also uses the verb 
iiciiie\4ofLai (Luke X. 34, 35) ; and eiri/ic\£s 
(Luke IV. 8). It is in very common use 
among medical writers for the care and 
attention required by the sick. It is very 
probable that St. Paul was suffering from 
his long confinement at Csesarea, and that 
the ivtiiehela here mentioned has reference 
to his invalid state. 

Ver. 4. — Putting to sea {iivdx9et>Tfs, see 
ver. 3, note) for- when we had laurushed, 
A.V. ; under the lee of for under, A.V. We 
sailed under the lee of; uTrEirXfiitra/iEv, only 
here and ver. 7. A nautical term, very rarely 
met with. The winds were contrary. The 
wind apparently was westerly, the prevalent 
wind at that season of the year. Smith 
('Voyage and Shipwreck of St. Paul') 
quotes Admiral De Saumarez as writing 
from near Cyprus, " The westerly winds 
invariably prevail at this season ; " and M. 
De Pages, a French navigator, as saying, 
"The winds from the west which prevail 
In these places (Cyprus) forced us to run to 
the north." This is exactly what the ship 
in which Paul sailed did. Instead of going 
in a westerly direction, and leaving Cyprus 
on her right, she turned due north, having 
Cyprus on her left. It was now late to 
August (Farrar, p. 363). 



292 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



[oh. xxtu. 1 — 14 



Yer. 6. — Aerou for over, A.V. ; which ii 
off for of, A. v. (jh Kori rhv K-iKMlcw, K.T.X.). 
AoiosB the sea. When they got under the 
coagt of Cilicia and Pamphylia, they found 
the northerly wind, as M. De Pages did, 
and that enabled them to take a westerly 
course to Myra, a seaport in Lyoia. The 
modem Turkish name of Myra is Denibre. 
(For an account and drawings of the won- 
derful rock-tombs of Myra, see Fellows's 
' Lyoia,' oh. ix.) 

Ver. 6.— For for into, A.V. _ He put ni 
therein ; ivfPi$aaev, only here in the New 
Testament, and once in the LXX. (Prov. iv. 
11). It is a nautical term for embarking 
men on board ship (Thuoydides, Xenojihon, 
Lucian, 6to.), and is also used by medical 
writers for "placing patients in a bath." 
The corn-vessel (navta frumentaria) from 
Alexandria to Italy may very probably 
Ijave been driven out of its direct course by 
the same contrary winds which forced St. 
Paul to sail under Cyprus (see Howson, 
voL ii. p. 32.5, note 5), or commercial objects 
ma^ have brought it to Lycia, to carry 
Asiatic merchandize to Rome, in addition 
to its cargo of Egyptian wheat — possibly 
"timber from the woody mountains of 
liyoia" (Lewin, vol. ii. p. 188, note). 

Ver. 7. — Were come with difficulty for 
score* teere eome, A.V. ; further euffering for 
suffering, A.V. ; under Ote lee of for under, 
A.V. Had sailed slowly (Ppa^unhJiowTes, 
only here). They were evidently sailing 
near the wind, and would have to tack 
frequently. They made in many days no 
more progress (some hundred and thirty 
uiiles) than they would tiave made in 
twenty-four hours with a favourable wind. 
With difficulty in6\is) they could only just 
manage to do it, the wind not soSering them 
(/iJ) TtpoatavTos, here only). When they 
had with great difficulty got as far as over 
against Cnidus, on the coa»t of Caria, the 
north wind which caught them made it 
impossible to go further north. Accord- 
ingly they struck nearly due south, and 
bore down upon Crete, and passing Cape 
Salmone, its eastern extremity, they came 
along the southern side of the island. 

Ver. 8. — With diffioaUy coasting along it 
for hardly passing it, A.V. ; we came for 
came, A.V. ; o certain place called for a 
plate which it called, A V. ; Fair for tlie Fair, 
A.V. With difficulty coasting along it ; napa- 
\fyilifi/(u, only here and ver. 13. It is a nau- 
tical phrase, meaning to sail alongside of the 
coast. In Latin legere has the same mean- 
ing. The difficulty arose from their being 
under th« lee of the island, which sheltered 
them from the north-west wind, but left them 
without any motive power. However, they 
managed to get as far as Fair Havens, where 
tbey anchored in the roadstead so called. 



near to an obscure and otherwise unknown 
town called Lasea, possibly the same at 
Lasos, mentioned by Pliny as one of the in- 
land cities of Crete (' Nat Hist.,' iv. xii 20), 
or as Elssa (ibid.). 

Ver. 9. — And fortiou, A.V. ; the voyage for 
when sailing, A.V. ; gone by tot past, A.V. 
Much time QKavov xp^^cv Siayevofi^yov). The 
word lKav6s is very frequently used by St. 
Luke, both in the Gospel and the Acts, for 
" much," " many," or " long," but the exact 
quantity of time, or words, or people, etc., 
indicated is of course relative to what might 
reasonably be expected in each case. Judas 
of Galilee (oh. v. 37) drew " much " people 
after him ; the Jews at Damascus conspired 
to kiU Saul after " many " days were ful- 
filled (oh. ix. 23); Paul and Barnabas 
abode "long time" at Iconium (oh. xlv. 3); 
Paul talked a "long" while at Troas (oh. 
XX. 3) ; and they sailed slowly off the coast 
of Asia " many " days (ver. 7) ; the length, 
ie. the "suffloieucy" (i/cav^Tiji) must de- 
pend in each case upon the standard by 
which it is measured. Here " much time, 
measured by the common experience of sail- 
ing-vessels waiting for a favourable wind, 
may mean one or two weeks. It is more 
natural to apply the phrase to the time of 
their detention at Fair Havens, than, as 
Meyer and others do, to the time that elapsed 
siuce they sailed from Crasarea. The voyage 
was now dangerous (roS ir\jo6s, a late form 
tor the older irAov). Dangerous ; 4wt<r^a\ois, 
only here in the New Testament, and in 
Wisd. ix. 14; also occasionally in olassical 
authors, but very frequently in medical 
writers. The Fast. The great Jewish fast 
on the Day of Atonement, in the month 
Tieri, which fell this year on September 24 
(Lewin and Farreir), probably while they 
were at Fair Havens. The Jews considered 
navigation unsafe between the Feast of 
Tabernacles (five days after the Day of 
Atonement) and the Feast of Pentecost 
(Lewin, toL ii. p. 192, note). It became, 
therefore, a very serious question what they 
were to do. Fair Havens was an inconve- 
nient anchorage for the winter, and not near 
any large town. On the other hand, if they 
passed beyond the shelter of Cape Matala, 
which lay a few miles to the east, and where 
the coast of Crete suddenly trends due north, 
they would be exposed to the violence of 
the Eterian westerly wind. They called 
St. Paul into their counsels. Admonished 
them ; irapyvei, only here and ver. 22. In 
classical Greek used especially ot advice 
given by a speaker in a public speech. In 
medical writers it expresses the advice given 
by a physician to his patient 

Ver. 10.— TAe for this, A.V. ; injury for 
hurt, A.V. ; loss for damage, A.V. ; ths ship 
for ship, A.V. Sirs, I peroeive, etc. Su 



OH. xxTii. 1— 44.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



299 



Panl'f) opinion and reasons are evidently 
not fully given; only the result, that he 
strongly advised against the course to which 
they were inclined, and foretold disaster 
as likely to ensue from it. Ipereeive (6ea>p^), 
as John iv. 19; xii. 19; oh. xvii. 22. In 
all these places sumething actually seen or 
heard leads to the inference or conclusion 
stated. So here the angry state of the 
weather and of the sea — perhaps they had 
walked as far as Cape Hatala, and seen the 
rough waves — convinced him of the rash- 
ness of the enterprise contemplated. In- 
jury (SPp^as, and at ver. 21); literally, 
violence, rough usage — properly of persons 
to persons (as 2 Cor. xii. 10), but melaphori- 
3ally here transferred to inanimate objects. 
Compare the use of ifipiCa (Matt. xxii. 6; 
Luke xviii. 32 ; ch. xiv. 5 ; 1 Thess. ii. 2), 
and the phrases i/maiffToyoy vfipiy (Pindar), 
6a\(iTTTis ifipiv (Anthol.), oiiffpay S0pis (Jo- 
sephus), quoted in Kuinoel and Meyer. 
Meyer's explanation of iippts, as meaning 
" presumption " or " temerity " on the part 
of the navigators, is quite inadmissible, es- 
pecially in view of ver. 21. Also of our lives. 
Observe the thorough honesty of the his- 
torian who thus records the words of the 
apostle, though they were not justified by 
the event (vers. 22, 24). 

Ver. 11. — But for nevertheless, A.V. ; gave 
more heed to for believed, A.V. ; to the oumer 
for the owner, A.V. ; than to for more than, 
A.V. The master {KvfiepvijTi\s), in the sense 
of " a commander of a trading-ship " (John- 
son's ' Dictionary ') ; i.e. the navigator and 
helmsman, in Latin magister navit. The 
owner {vaiKXripos), The owner, no doubt, of 
tlie cargo as well as of the ship itself: i Se- 
(TjrijTijs Tov irKoiov (Hesyoh.); ol vaSs kik- 
TTiixivoi (Ammonius). The KufiepviiTiis and 
the vaiK\Tipos are often mentioned together ; 
e.g. in Plutarch, Artemidoros, quoted by 
Alford, Euinoel, etc. 

Ver. 12. — Put to sea from thence for depart 
thence also, A.V. and T.E. ; could reach 
Phcenix for might attain to Phenice, A.V. ; 
winter there for there to winter, A.V. ; a liaven 
for an haven, A.V. ; looking north-east and 
southr-east for and lieth toward the south-west 
and north-west, A. V. Not commodious ; d^'f u- 
Ae'tou (not well placed, or disposed), only 
here. But the simple ejiSetos is used twice 
by St. Luke (ix. 62 ; xiv. 35), in the sense of 
"fit" (also Heb. vi. 7), and is of frequent 
use in medical writers, for "convenient," 
" well adapted to," and the like. To put to 
sea (avax^vai) ; see ver. 3, note. Beaoh ; 
KaTavTrjaai, only in the Acts (frequently) and 
in St. Paul's Epistles. It is generally, if not 
always, used of ooming from the higher to 
the lower place, and from the sea to the 
land (lee oh. xvi 1 : zriii. 19, 24 ; xz. 15 ; 
xxi. 7 ■ xxviii. 13, etc.). Phoenix. It is 



variously written Phaenieus, Phoenice, and 
Phoenix ; and probably derived its name from 
the palm tree, (i(>oim|), which is indigenous 
in (3rete. It is identified with almost cer- 
tainty with the moJerii Lutro or Loutro, 
which is both " an admirable harbour," 
situated exactly where Phoenice ought to 
be, and further by its proximity to a village 
celled Aradhene, and another called Anopolis, 
shown to be the same as Phcenix, or Phenice, 
which is described in ancient writers 
(Hierooles and Stephanus of Byzantium) as 
identical with or close to Aradhena and^no- 
polis (the upper city). Winter; vapax^i- 
lj.da-ai, so too ch. xxviii. 11 ; 1 Cor. xvi. 6 ; 
Titus iii. 12, and ■wapaxfii'-airia in this verse. 
It is found also in classical writers. Look- 
ing north-east and south-east. The margin 
of the E.V. has "Greek, down the south- 
west wind, and down the north-west." This 
phrase has caused considerable perplexity 
to commentators. To say, as a recommen- 
dation of a harbour for winter quarters, 
that it lies or looks toward the south-west 
and north-west, and consequently is exposed 
to the most furious winter storms, is ob- 
viously impossible. If Phoenix was open 
to the south-west and the north-west, it 
would not be as commodius a place to winter 
in as i'air Havens was which was sheltered 
by Cape Matala. Two methods, therefore, 
have been adopted of explaining the phrase 
BO as to make it give a reasonable sense. 
One, that adopted by Dean Howson and 
Bishop Wordsworth, viz. that it looks south- 
west and north-west, from the point of view 
of the sailor, or any one approaching it from 
the sea, the object upon which it looks being 
the land which locks it in and shelters it. 
The other is that supported by Alford, and 
adopted by the B.V., and rests upon the 
observation that \tps and x^'P"' ^^^ ^"^ 
points of the compass, but the names of the 
south-west and north-west winds, and that 
to look down (Kara) a wind is the same as 
looking down a stream. If the harbour looks 
down the south-west wind it looks toward 
the north-east, and if it looks down the 
north-west wind it looks toward the south - 
east. Its open side would be from north- 
east to south-east, it would b* entirely 
sheltered on the south-west and north-west 
side. This is the explanation adopted also 
by Dean Plumptre. Tlie souli-west wind ; 
\i-i/, only here in the New Testament, but 
frequent in classical Greek and in the LXX. 
(see Ps. Ixxviii. [Ixxxii., Septuagint] 26). 
As a point of the compass, it is the rendering 
of a:} (Gen. xiii. 14, etc.), of jd'h (Numb. 
ii. 10,' etc.), of Dill (Deut. xxxiii 23). The 
north-west wind ; x^P" (tli© Latin Caurue or 
Oorut), only here in the New Testament, 
and not found in Greek writers. 

Ver. 13. — They weighed anchor and for 



294 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [os. xxvti. 1—44. 



holing Otenee, they, A.V. ' along Crete, chee 
in ihore for close by Crete, A.V. Blew 
BofUy ; {nroTrvcitravTos, only heie in the New 
TeBtEunent, and not found elsewhere. Sup- 
posing that they had ohtained their purpose. 
A south wind would be quite favourable for 
sailing east or east by north, from Fair Havens 
to Phoenix. They not unreasonably, there- 
fore, thought they could effect their purpose 
of wintering at Phoenix. And so they at 
once weighed anchor ; ipavrfs, without an 
objective case following, " having lifted up," 
understand ras ayxipas, as in Julius Pollux, 
quoted by Smith. It was the nautical 
phrase. Sailed along (vapeKeyovro) ; see 
ver. 8, note. Close in shore (So-ffoy, compara- 
tive of &yxh nearer, meaning " very near "). 
For the earlier part of their voyage they 
would be obliged to keep very near the 
shore, to enable them to weather Cape 
Matala, which lay a little to the south of 
west from Fair Havens. Some take dura-oy 
as the name of a town on the coast, but the 
grammar of the sentence makes this im- 
possible. 

Ver. 14. — After no long time for not long 
after, A.V. ; heat down from for arose 
against, A.V. ; which is called Euraquilo 
for called Euroclydon, A.V. and T.E. There 
beat down from it (epa\e kot' ouTrjs). The 
meaning of this somewhat difficult phrase 
clearly is that given by Alford and Howson, 
and, on second thoughts, by Smith, viz. that 
a violent squall from the north-east beat down 
the heights and through the valleys of the 
island, becoming more violent when they had 
passed Cape Matala, and compelled them 
to alter their course, and run south-west 
before the wind towards the island of 
Clauda ; effaK^v in a neuter sense, " struck," 
or "beat," or "fell," as in Homer (see 
Liddell and Scott). Kot* avrrjs. Fariar 
thinks it " certain " that the right render- 
ing is " against her," viz. the ship, because 
tPa\ey could not be used with nothing to 
follow it," i.e. he thinks you must say 
iPa\eii Kara something. But as irAoiw is the 
word used for the ship, not vavs, it seems very 
difficult to suppose that Luke could say auTfjs, 
and not outoD. It is better, therefore, to 
refer aiiTTJs to Kp^rrj, and either to under- 
stand it " down it," like xar' obKifiiToio 
Kap-I\vav, " down the heights of Olympus ; " 
KOTO TreTpijj, " down the rock," etc., or simply 
" against it," as in the A.V., which obviates 
Dr. Farrai's objection. If taken in the 
sense of "down," there is the same idea of 
a squall "rushing down" from the hills 
into the lake, in Luke viii. 23 ; and again 
in ver. 33 of the same chapter St. Luke 
tells us how the swine rushed Kwrik rou 
Kpri/wov, "down the steep," into the lake. 
A tempestuous wind j ^fe^s rwpioviK6s, only 
are. snH not found in Oreek writers; but 



the substantive rvipdt, rwliSivot, is common 
for a " furious . storm " or "whirlwind." 
Euraquilo. Compounded — after the analogy 
of Euronotui, the south-east wind — of Eurui, 
the east wind, and Aquilo, the north wind, 
both Latin words (like Corns, in ver. 12), 
though Eurus is also Greek. This reading 
of the R.T. is supported by the Vulgate, 
and by " Lachmann, Bomemann, Ewald, 
J. Smith, Hackett, Bentley, Olshausen, after 
Erasmus, Orrotius, Mill, Bengel, and others " 
(Meyer), and by Wordsworth, Allord, Lid- 
dell and Scott, Farrar. On the other hand, 
Meyer, Tischendorf, Dean Howson, and 
others support the reading of the T.K, 
ElipoKXiSav, and Lewin ia doubtful. The 
derivation of Euroclydon would be from 
ESpos, and K\iSav, a wave. Whatever its 
name was, it must have been a north-easter. 
Ps. cvii. 25 naturally arises to one's re- 
membrance, with its fine description of a 
storm at sea. 

Ver. 15. — Face the toind for bear up into 
the wind, A.V. ; gave way to it, ond were 
driven for let her drive, A.V. Was caught ; 
ffvvapvacrdevTos, only here in this sense of 
being caught and carried away by the gale, 
but used in three other places by St. Luke 
(and only by him), viz. Luke viii. 29 ; oh. 
vi. 12 ; xix. 29. It is found more than once 
in the LXX., and is common in classical 
Greek. Sophocles uses it of a storm which 
carries everything away, Uivra ^vvapvaaas, 
eitW' hrus ('Elect.,' 1150). Face; avT- 
o4>Ba\/ieTv, only here in the New Testament; 
but in Polybius and elsewhere it is said of 
looking any one in the face with defiance. 
And so Wisd. xii. 14 ; Ecclus. six. 5 (Com- 
plut. Edit.), h.vTo(p6aK^S)v ridovais, " resist- 
eth pleasures," A.V. Compare the phrase, 
" looked one another in the face " (2 Kings 
xiv. 8, 11, &(p67t(rav npocdntots). Hence 
here it means simply "resist," or "stand 
against," or, as well rendered in the B.V., 
"face." Gave way to it, etc.; iirtUvres 
i<j>ep6fj.e9a, a rather obscure phrase, but best 
explained "giving her" (the ship) to the 
wind, " we were carried " rapidly before it. 
"EiriSlSai/ii is to give, to give up, to give into 
any one's band (Luke iv. 17; ch. xv. 30). 
iiriSivTfs is opposed to avroipBaKiifw, giving 
up to, abandoning her to, as opposed to 
resisting. 'Eipep6nf6a, we were hurried along 
before the wind, without will or choice of 
our own (as ver. 17). Common in Homer 
and other classical writers, for being borne 
along by wind, or waves, or storm, etc 
(For the application of <j>epofiM in the middle 
voice to a wind, see ch. ii. 2.) 

Ver. 16. — Under tte lee of for under, 
A. v.; gmall for certain, A.V. (yi)<nov); 
called Cauda iot which i* called Clauda, 
A.V and T.B: tsera '«, with difficulU/, 
to secure tot had much uork to come by, A V 



CH. xxth. 1 — 44.] 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLEa 



29f 



Kniming under the lee of; iiroBpaiiSvTes, only 
here in the New Testament, but common in 
classical Greek for " running under " or 
" between." (For the use of {m6 in com- 
pound in the sense of " under the lee of," 
see ver. 7.) Cauda, or Caudos, as it is called 
by Pomp. Mela (ii. 7) and Pliny (' Nat. 
Hist.,' iv.xii.20),the modern Gozzo. Ptolemy 
(iii. 7) calls it Claudtis. The manuscripts 
greatly vary. Clauda, or Cauda, was about 
twenty-three miles south-west of Crete. 
With difficulty (fii\is, as in vers. 7, 8). To 
■eoure the boat. The boat was doubtless 
being towed astern. But in the violence of 
the storm, there was a danger every moment 
of her being parted from the ship by the 
snapping of the hawser, or by being broken 
by the waves, and it was Impossible to take 
her up. Under the lee of the little island, 
however, the sea was somewhat quieter; 
and so after greater efforts they secured the 
boat, and, as it is said in the next verse, 
" hoisted it up " on to the deck. 

Ver. 17. — And when they had hoisted it up 
for which when they had taken up, A.V. ; be 
east upon the Syrtis for fall into the quick- 
tands, A.V. ; they lowered the gear for strake 
tail, A.V. Helps; porieeiats, in the New 
Testament only here and Heb. iv. 16 ; but 
freq'jent in medical language, for "band- 
ages," "ligaments," "muscles," and all 
kinds of supports both artificial and natural, 
and generally to medical aid. ITndergird- 
ing the ship ; iiro(avyii>Tes, only here in the 
Bible; but fonnd, as well as its derivative 
iir6Caim, in classical Greek, in the same 
sense as it has here. In medical language 
it ia used of certain membranes which 
"undergird" and so strengthen and hold 
together certain parts of the human body, 
and specially was applied to the -n-Kevpd. 
As regards the nautical sense in which St. 
Luke here uses the word, Dean Howson, in 
his excellent chapter (xxiii.) on the ' Navi- 
gation and Ships of the Ancients,' writes as 
follows : — " In consequence of the extreme 
danger to which the ships of the ancients 
were exposed from leaking, it was custom- 
ary to take to sea, as part of their ordinary 
gear, iiroftSiUOTo, undergirders, which were 
simply ropes for passing round the hull of 
the ship, and thus preventing the planks 
from starting ; " and he adds in a note that 
"within the last twenty years (in 1837) 
marble tables had been dug up in the Firseus, 
containing a list of Athenian ships and an 
inventory of their tackle, and that they all 
carried, as part of their " hanging gear," 
inro(iifiaTa. Another great ship described 
by Athenseus carried twelve such. The 
operation of undergirding is still occasionally 
performed, and is called by seamen " frap- 
ping." The German word is umgSrt«n 
(Howson). Among other recent examples 



(Howson, p. 33) the Albion was frapped 
with iron chains after the battle of Nava- 
rino. Cast upon the Syrtis. The wind was 
driving them straight toward the Syrtis 
Major, "the Goodwin Sands of the Mediter- 
ranean " (Farrar), and another twenty-four 
hours of such a gale might bring them there. 
The Syrtis Major was a wide gulf off the 
northern coast of Africa, now the Gulf of 
Sidra, lying between Tunis and Tripoli, 
considered very dangerous from its rocks 
and shoals. Be cast upon (^mreauiri). The 
verb iKwliTTftv is the classical word (Homer, 
Herodotus, Euripides) for being driven or 
thrown ashore, and is used in this sense in 
vers. 26, 29 of this chapter, and in a slightly 
different sense in ver. 32. They lowered the 
gear ^aKdcravres rh aK^vos). "Zk^vos is a 
very common word, variously rendered 
" goods," " stuff," " vessel," according to th« 
material to which it is applied (Matt. xii. 29 ; 
Luke viii. 16 ; xvii. 31, etc.). In the LXX. 
it is used of agricultural implements (1 Sam. 
xiii. 20, 21), of weapons of hunting (Gen. 
xxvii. 3), of household furniture (Gen. 
xxxi. 37), weapons of war (Deut. i. 41X 
instruments of music (2 Chrou. v. 13) . This 
is the only passage in the Bible where it is 
used in its technical sense as a nautioal 
term. In classical Greek, when applied 
generally to ships, it means the whole tacJc- 
ling, sails, ropes, yards, stores, engines, eta. 
The meaning, of course, is narrowed when 
applied to some particular part of the ship. 
Here, on the whole, it seems to mean tha 
" great yard," or, if that had been already 
lowered, the heavy " head-gear," ropos, 
pulleys, and the like, which, under the oir- 
oumstances, would contribute to Biak* th« 
ship roll and be unsteady. The word ren- 
dered " lowered " is xixaaai. It is rendered 
" let down " in Mark ii. 4 ; Luke v. 4, 5 ; 
oh. LX. 25 ; 2 Cor. xi. 33 ; and ver. 30 of this 
chapter (A.y.). In the B.Y. it is sometimes 
rendered " let down " and sometimss " low- 
ered." In the LXX. it is used in the sense 
of " spreading " a sail (Isa. xxxiii. 23), 
which would be equivalent to " let down," 
if the sails were reefed at the top of the 
mast; and of "letting down" (Jer. xxxviii. 
6). The E.V., therefore, i» correct. The 
object of what they did was to enable tbe 
ship to go as near the wind as possible, 
and with as little straining and rolling as 
possible. The operation is oalled by sailors 
" lying to." Were driver (see ver. 15). 

Ver. 18. — As we laboured exceedingly 
for being exceedingly tossed, -v.V. ; the storm 
for a tempest, A.V. ; began to throw the 
freight overboard for lightened Ae ship, 
A.V. Laboured; x*'/'"''f''/''^>''»"'> only here 
in the New Testament ; but used by I'lato, 
Thucydides, Biodorus Siculus, Josephn*, 
and others, and especially by medical 



id« 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. xxvn. 1— 44* 



vrlteii. It is the paMive voice, and this 
fa belt txjxeeted by the A.V. " tossed." 
They begsn to thiow, eto. The phrase 
iKPo\i)y iroiovrrt ia one of the technical 
phraaes for taking a caigo out of a ship, 
given by Julius Pollux ; ixfioKiiv TtoiiaaireM 
tSv ^ofnlav (Alfoid, &om Smith). It is 
abo the phrase of the LXX. in Jonah i. 5, 
'kjcjSoX^f ivoiiiffawro rSoy ffKevwv tcov iv r^ 
T\a(«. They began to expresses the imper- 
ffeet. It ia inferred from this, and the sub- 
sequent statement (ver. 19) as to throwing 
oveiboard the tackling of the ship, that, in 
spite of the nndergirding, the ship was 
leaking, and therefore heavy with water, and 
in danger of going down (comp. Jonah 1. 
5). The fireigbt here mentioned may have 
been heavy packages of merchandise other 
than the main cargo of wheat (see ver. 6, 
note). 

V«f. 19.— They for we, A.V. and T.B. ; 
thttr for our, A.y. The third day after 
leaving Olaoda. The leak doubtless con- 
tinned, and there was more water in the 
ship. With their (or, owr) own hands; 
ii,bTix"P"t oi>ly ^^^^ ^^ *^^ Bible, but fre- 
qnent in classical Greek. The word seems 
to mark that the sacrifice was very great. 
Implying a very pressing danger. The 
tacUing (riiy VKevfiy}. There is great difier- 
01100 of opinion as to what the trxev^ means 
here. Smith thinks the main spar is meant, 
"tba huge mainyard," and Farrar adopts 
bfa view, which he thinks is strengthened 
by the use of the aorist ifi^t^fiaiifv (for he 
adopts the T.B.), implying one single act, 
and showing, by the use of the first person, 
that it was the act of the whole crew united. 
Alford thinks that it means all the furniture, 
beds, and movables of all kinds, and so 
Wordsworth and Meyer. Wetstein explains 
it of the passengers' baggage. Howson 
thinks ft unlikely tbey would have thrown 
away a great spar which would have sup- 
ported twenty or thirty men in the water in 
the event of the ship foundering. Sohleusner 
renders it "apparatus quo navis erat in- 
struota." Skcu^ is not used elsewhere in the 
Hew Testament, and it is difficult to speak 
decisively. But the addition of toG vKotov, 
and the general use of o-zceu^ in classical 
Greek favours the interpretation "the ship's 
furniture " ( " meublea et nstensiles," 
Benan). 

Ver. 20. — Shone upon ui for many day$ 
tat At many days appeared, A.V. ; now for 
(Aen, A.V. Neither sun nor stars, eto. 
This is mentioned, not only as a feature of 
the severity and length of the easterly gale 
(for the wind had shifted two or three points 
to the east), but specially because in the 
■avigation of that time, before the invention 
of the oompBss, the snn, moon, and stars 
were tiie soly things they had to steer by, 



or by which they could know the direction 
in which they were drifting. Shone upon 
as (iiri<t>aiv6vTav'); ehowed themselves; i.e. "ap- 
peared," as in the A.V., which is the best 
rendering (comp. 4m(l)ca>fla, the appearance, 

01 Epiphany). Now. Aonr6v, rh \om6v, and 
ToS KoiTtov are used adverbially both in the 
New Testament and iu classical Greek. It 
is sometimes rendered "now," t.e. for the 
time that remains ; and sometimes " hence- 
forth ; " sometimes " finally " (Mark xiv. 41 ; 

2 Tim. iv. 8 ; 2 Cor. xiii. 11, etc.). It seems 
that sometimes xf^""" is to be understood, 
and sometimes that it means " as for what 
remaineth" to be said or done (comp. the 
French du teste or a« reste). 

Ver. 21. — And when they had 6een long 
without food for hut after long abstinenoe, 
A.V. and T.B.; then Paul for Paul, A.V.; 
set taU ioi loosed, A.V. ; and gotten for to 
have gained, A.V. ; injury for harm, A.V. 
Long without food (ttoXA.^; aairtas &rap- 
xoiaris'). 'Airirta is only found here in tne 
Bible ; but it was the common medical term 
for loss of the appetite, and such is the most 
natural rendering here. There is nothing 
about "long abstinence" in the text, nor does 
the verb ivapxoiirns admit of being trans- 
lated " when they had been." It describes a 
present condition. The literal rendering is, 
when thare was a great (or, general) loss of 
appetite among the crew. The terror, the 
discomfort, the sea-sickness, the constant 
pressure of danger and labour, the difficulty 
of cooking, the unpalatableness of the food, 
combined to take away relish of their food, 
and they were becoming weak for want of 
nourishment. Have gotten (KepS^mi). 
Bchleusner, Bengel, Meyer, Alford, and the 
' Speaker's Commentary ' explain this as 
equivalent to " have avoided," or " have 
escaped," and qnote Josephus (' Ant. Jud.,' 
ii. iii. 2), Ti fuavSrivai Tcts x^P"' KepSatveir, 
" To avoid staining their hands ; " and 
' Bell. Jud.,' ii. xvi. 4 (towards the close of 
Agrippa's speech), T^s jJttijs 6veiSos KfpSii- 
aere, " You will gain («.e. avoid) the disgrace 
of defeat," like the use in Latin of lucrifacere. 
But it is simpler on the whole to understand 
it in the sense of "getting" as the fruit of 
your own conduct. We should say in 
English, « What have you gained by this? 
Nothing but loss and shame." Compare too 
the phrase Th h^divta t^j afiaprlas Sivaros 
(Bom. vi. 23). So Liddell and Scott give us 
one use of KspSatvciv, to gain a loss, t.e. reap 
disadvantage, and quote from Euripides, 
'Hecuba,' L 518 (516, Soholefield), Snr\a 
SiKpva ttepSarai, " to gain double weeping." 
Injury (i);3p»/) ; see ver. 10, note. In the A.V. 
" to have gained " observe the same idiom 
as in ver. 10, " and there to winter." 

Ver. 22.— Life for any man't life, A.V.; 
tut only for hut, A.V. I exhort you to be 



nH. xxvn. 1 — 44] 



THE ACTS OF IHE APOSTLES. 



297 



of good oheer. Mr. Hobart remarks that 
this " has all the look of a doctor's expres- 
sion, irapaivfiv being the term for a physician 
giving his advice," and " eSSvfios, tiflu/teiv, 
and fSev/iMs being used in medical language 
in reference to the sick keeping up their 
spirits, as opposed to aBv/iia and SvaOvfila " 
(see ver. 25, note). Loss; avo$o\i, only 
here and Eom. xi. 15 ; but found in Plato, 
Aristotle, Josephus, Plutarch, etc. Mark 
how the message of mercy and love follows 
the chastisement and its fruit of self-humi- 
liation. In their prosperity and self-confi- 
dence they rejected Paul's word at Fair 
Havens ; they listen to it at death's door. 

Ver. 23. — An angel of the God whose I 
am, whom also for the angel of God, whose 
I am, and whom, A.V. and T.R. Observe 
Paul's open confession of God before the 
heathen crew. 

Ver. 24. — Stand for be brought, A.V. ; 
granted for given, A.V. Stand ; irapmnTivai, 
the proper word for standing before a judge; 
comp. Rom. xiv. 10, Tlims vapaaTttainiBa, 
Tif piiiiari ToC XpiiTTov : and in the subscrip- 
tion to the Second Epistle to Timothy it is 
said that it was written " when Paul was 
brought before Nero the second time" 
(Greek, Sre e/c Sevrepov irapeffTtj HavKos r^ 
Kalffapi). God hath granted, etc. Doubtless 
in answer to his prayers. Compare the oppo- 
site statement in Ezek. xiv. 14, 16, 18, 20, 
" Though Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it, 
they shall deliver neither sons nor daughters; 
they only shall be delivered themselves ; " 
and see also Gen. xviii. 26, 32. Fanl's 
calm courage and kind words, added to the 
proof they had of his prescient vrisdom, 
were well calculated to inspire the crew 
with a reverential trust in him, and to 
rekindle their extinguished hope. 

Ver. 25. — Even so for even, A.V. ; hath 
been tpoken unto me for wot told me, A.V. 
Be of good cheer ; eueu/iEirc, as ver. 22 ; 
elsewhere only Jas. v. 13, but we have 
ttSv/ios in ver. 36 and oh. zxiv. 10 ; common 
in classical Greek and in medical language 
(see ver. 22, note). Note how the servant of 
God has the light of hope and trust ia the 
darkest night of danger and suffering (Ps. 
cxii. 4, 7 ; xlvi. 1 — 3). It shall be even so, 
etc. Compare for the lesson of faith in 
God's promise, Luke i. 46, " There shall be 
a performance of those things which were 
told her from the Lord." " Lord, increase 
our faith," 

Ver. 26. — We must be oast, etc. (^KTeo-tw, 
ver. 17, note). Here St. Paul speaks dis- 
tinctly by revelation, probably what was 
told him by the angel. We can see the 
same purpose here as in all miracles and 
prophetic utterances, viz. to give God'i 
credentials to his ambassador as speaking in 
Us Name and by bis authority (John xx. 81). 



Ver. 27. — To and fro for np and doum, 
A.V. ; the sea of Adria for Adria, A.V. , 
sailors for shipmen, A. V. ; surmised for deemed, 
A.V. ; were drawing for drew, A.V. The 
fourteenth night, reckoned from their leaving 
Fair Havens (so vers. 18, 19). Driven to and 
fro (^Siatpepofievap") ; ii is rather carried across, 
or along, from one end to the other. Sea of 
Adria. Adria, as in the A.V., is scarcely cor- 
rect, as a translation of the Greek (though 
the Latins did call it Adria), because the 
nominative case in Greek is i 'ASpias, sc. 
koKttos, Adrias, the Adriatic Gulf. 'ASpia is 
the name of the town near the mouth of the 
Po, which gave its name to the Adriatic. 
As regards the nse of term d 'ASpias, the 
Adriatic, it is used in two ways : sometimes 
strictly of the Gulf of Venice, the Adriatic ; 
sometimes, chiefly in latter writers, in a 
much wider sense, of the whole sea between 
Greece and Italy, including Sicily. This 
last is its use here. So, too, Josephus says 
that he was wrecked /caret fietrov rhv 'ASp(av, 
in the midst of the Adriatic, on his voyage 
from Csesarea to Puteoli, and was picked up 
by a ship from Cyreue. This implies that 
he used the word "Adria" in the same sense 
as St. Luke does (see further the appendix 
V. and vi. in Smith's ' Voyage,' etc. ; Cony- 
beare and Howson, p. 343, note, and p. H5(j ; 
Lewin, vol. ii. p. 198, note; Farrar, vol. iL 
p. 377, note; Kenan, 'St. Paul,' p. 552). 
Surmised that they were drawing near. 
Probably from hearing the waves break- 
ing upon the Point of Koura, east of St. 
Paul's Bay. "tirovo'fa is only found in the 
Acts (ch. xiii. 25 ; ixv. 18 ; and here) ; but 
it is used three or four times in the LXX. 
(Daniel, Job, Judith, Sirach), aud is common 
in classical Greek in the sense of to " sus- 
pect," "conjecture," "guess at" anything 
(see uiroTOi'o, 1 Tim. vi. 4). Were drawing 
near, etc. ; literally, that some oountry (or, 
land) was drawing near to them. In like 
manner, the land is said ivaxapeiy, to recede, 
as the vessel gets out to sea. 

Ver. 28. — Tliey sounded for sounded, A.V. ; 
found for found it, A.V. (twice); after a 
little space for when they had gone a little 
further, A.V. After a little space (^pa^i 
SmiTT^o-oi'Tf s) ; literally, having interposed a 
short interval of time or space (comp. Luke 
xxii. 58, 59, liera fipax", k.t.A., and then 
follows Stao'Tiia'Tjs &iret &pas fitas "after an 
interval of about an hour "). 

Ver. 29. — And for then, A.V. ; lett haply 
for lest, A.V. ; be cast ashore on rocky ground 
for have fallen upon rocks, A.V. ; let go for 
cast, A.V. ; from for out of, A.V. Cast 
ashore (see ver. 17, note). Bocky ground 
{rpaxiis tJitous) ; Luke iii. 5. The region of 
Trachonitia was so called &om the rocky 
nature of the country — Skttj rpoxf m, a rooky 
shore. Tour anchors. "Naves quaieruja 



296 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xxvn. 1— 44 



anchoris destinabat ne fluctibus moTeretur " 
(Caesar, ' De Bell. Civ.,' i. 25). From the 
stem. Anchors are usually dropped from the 
bow, but under certain cirouiuBtances ships 
anchor from the stem. The British navy 
so anchored at the battles of the Nile, 
Algiers, and Copenhagen, and it is a com- 
mon practice of the Levantine caiques at 
the present day; and an ancient picture of a 
ship (at Herculaneum) distinctly represents 
" hawse-holes aft to fit them for anchoring 
by the stern." They did so in the present 
case, to obviate the danger of the ship swing- 
ing round and getting into breakers, and 
also that she might be in the best position 
for running on to the beach as soon as day- 
light came. 

Ver. 30. — Sailors for shipmen, A.V.; teeh- 
ing for about, A.V. ; and had lowered for 
ujhen they had let down, A.V. ; lay out for 
have cast, A.V. ; from for out of, A.V. Had 
lowered (xa\ti<rai/T€j, see ver. 17, note). The 
sailors thought the only chance of safety 
was to get into the boat and run ashore on 
the beach. They pretended, therefore, that 
they wished to let down more anchors from 
the bow; and let down the boat, as if with 
that intention, being prepared to jump in 
and make for the shore, leaving the ship to 
be wrecked, with all on board her. What a 
contrast to the conduct of our English crews, 
who are always the last to quit a sinking 
vessel I 

Ver. 31.— Paul said. It is remarkable 
what ascendency Paul had gained during 
this terrible fortnight. He now penetrated 
in a moment the design of the selfish sailors, 
and, with his wonted decision, told the cen- 
turion, who was in command of the whole 
party (ver. 11), and who, it is likely, had 
his soldiers on deck to preserve order and 
discipline. Except these abide in the ship, ye 
cannot be saved. The li/uis is emphatic, 
you yourselves. 

Ver. 32.— Cut away for cut off, A.V. Fall 
off (^KTretTfTi', vers. 17, note, 26, and 29). The 
action of the soldiers in cutting the rope 
«nd letting the boat loose was very prompt, 
but rather rash, as the boat might have been 
useful in landing those on board. But it 
showed their implicit confidence in Paul's 
word. 

Ver. 33. — Some food for meat, A.V. ; wait 
and continue for have tarried and continued, 
A.V. AU ; including the treacherous sailors 
whose plot he had just defeated. Having 
taken nothing ; not meaning that they had 
literally been fourteen days without tasting 
food, which is impossible ; but that they had 
no regular meals, only snatching a mouth- 
ful now and then in the midst »f their 
incessant toil. 

Ver. Si.— Beseech for pray, A.V. ; food 
for meot, A.V ; tafety for healOt, A.V. : 



a hair for on hair, A.V. ; perish for faO, 
A.V. and T.R. Take ; here in the B.T. /it- 
Ta\a0ut/ instead of irpoffA.o/Seix of the T.R 
Tour safe^ ; or, health; 1.6. for the preser- 
vation of your lives in the impending 
struggle. Not a hair perish ; or, according 
to the" T.R., fall. It is uncertain whether 
a7roA«Tai (R.T.) or TE(r6?Ta: (T.R.) is the 
right reading. The Hebrew proverb, as 
contained in 1 Sam. xiv. 45 ; 2 Sam. xiv. 11 ; 
1 Kings i. 52, is, " fall to the earth " or 
" ground : " Ei ireffetrai rpix^s (or, 4jri_ rns 
TDiytij, or tZv Tpix""^ '"■^^ Keipa\TJs diroC i-rl 
tV yv" (LXX.). In Luke xxi. 18, it is 
0pi{ Ik t5)J KfipaKris viiZf ov fi-h i.v6\riTat 
(oomp. Luke xii. 7). Absolute and com- 
plete safety is meant. He still speaks as a 
prophet. 

Ver. 35.— Said this for thus spoken, A.V. ; 
and had taken for he took, A.V. ; he gam for 
and gave, A.V. ; the presence of all for pm- 
sence of them all, A.V. ; he brake for when 
he had broken, A.V. ; and began for he began, 
A.V. Had taken bread, etc. The concur- 
rence of the words AojSi;' &pTov, tivxaplin-naf, 
KXiffas, which all occur in the institution of 
the Holy Eucharist (Luke xxii. 19), is 
certainly, as Bishop Wordsworth says, re- 
markable. But there is the same similarity 
of phrase (except that ei\6yn<'^ is used for 
TjiiYopio-TTjo-einthe first passage) in Matt xiv. 
19 and xv. 36, and therefore the conelu.sion 
to be drawn is that St. Paul's action und 
words were the same as those of our Lord, as 
far as the breaking bread and giving thanks 
and eating, went, which were common to 
both occasions ; but in the institution of tli€ 
sacrament the words "This is my body" 
were additional, and represented an ad- 
ditional and sacramental tmth. Observe, 
again, the devout confession of the living 
God in the presence of unbelieving men 
(vers. 23, 24). , , , , 

Ver. 36. — Themselves also took food for 
they also took some meat, A.V. Of good 
cheer (eCeu/ioi); eee above, vers. 22, 25, 
notes. _ 

Ver. 87. — We were in all, etc. From the 
number of persons, two hundred and seveuty- 
six, on board the ship it is calculated that she 
was of more than five hundred tons burden 
The ship in which Josephus was wrecked 
on his way to Rome, under the procurator- 
ship of Felix (/coTcfc ixiffov rhf 'ASplav), carried 
six hundred souls (' Life,' sect 3). The 
ship of Alexandria described by Lucian is 
calculated to have been of above a thousand 
tons. Thementionofthenumberbringsbefore 
us a striking picture of so many persons at 
St. Paul's bidding, in the midst of so great • 
danger, taking a cheerful and leisurely meaJ 
together, in dependence upon a speedy 
deliverance promised to them in God's Name. 
It also adds another nvid touch to th« 



DH. xxvn. 1— 44.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



299 



Picture of the eye-witness of what he relates. 
>ean Plumptre well suggests that St. Luke 
very likely counted the crew on this ooca- 
sioQ of their being all Bssembled together 
for the first time. 

Ver. 38. — Throwing out for and «o»t on*, 
A.V. They lightened the ship ; iKoiipurav, 
only here in the New Testament ; but it is 
the technical word for lightening a ship so 
as to keep her afloat. So in Polybius, i. 39, 
'Y.Rpiy^ttVTis iK rwy TrXoitav Trdvra t& )Scf/)7i 
^6\ts eKoit^taav rhs vavs : and Jonah i. 5, 
*' They cast forth the wares that were in the 
ship into the sea, to lighten it of them (tov 
KovtpLffdrjvai air' avrwv" (see ver. 18, note). 
Kovipiffai riiv vavv is one of the technical 
expressions for taking cargo out of a ship, 
given by Julius Pollux (Smith), The wheat 
(jav atrov). There is a difference of opinion 
as to what St. Luke here means by rlv 
ctTtov. Muyer and others thiak it was 
merely " the ship's provision," and that, 
considering the number of persons in the 
ship, and the little consumption during tlie 
last fortnight, the weigbt of what was left 
would be considerable. They add that the 
cargo had been already thrown overboard in 
ver. 18. Others, as Howson, following Smith 
and Penrose, Farrar, Lewin,and many older 
commentators, with more reason, understand 
" the wheat " to mean the ship's cargo from 
Alexandria to Eome; they think it had 
been impossible to get at it while the ship 
was drifting ; and that, even had it been 
possible, it was the last thing they would 
have recourse te. But now, when it was 
impossible to save the ship, and the only 
chance of saving their lives was to run her 
on the beach, it was an absolute necessity 
to lighten the ship as much as possible. 
They therefore cast her freight of Alex- 
andrian corn into the sea, and waited for 
daylight (see note to ver. 18). 

Ver. 39. — Perceived for discovered, A.V. ; 
bay vyifh a heach for creeh vtiih a shore, A.V. ; 
and they took counsel whether they could 
drive the ship upon it for into the which they 
were minded, if it were possible, to thrust in 
the ship, A.V. They knew not the land. It 
was Seven miles from the harbour of Vidsttii, 
and a part of the island not likely to have 
been visited by the sailors, and presenting 
no marked features by which tbey would 
recognize it. A certain bay with a heach ; 
aiViaAify, a level pebbly or sandy beach 
(Matt. xiii. 2 ; ch. xxi. 5 ; and ver. 40), as op- 
posed to Skti), a high rugged coast (rprixi'ia, 
i^-nKi], etc.. Homer). They took counsel 
whether they could drive, etc. The lender- 
ing of the A.V. is surely infinitely better 
tlian the B.V. The meaning of flou\evoij.ai, 
both in the New Testament and in classical 
Greek, is frequently and properly " to deter- 
mine," " to resolve " or " purpose '' (see ch. 



V. 33 ; XV. 37, note ; 2 Cor. i. 17 ; and Liddell 
and Scott's ' Lexicon ') ; and the order of the 
words here suits the rendering of the A.V. 
much better than that of the R.V., which 
would require xal ipovXeiovro, instead ot 
fh tv, K.T.A. The Eevisionists seem to have 
been misled by the resemblance of Luke 
xiv. 31. Drive ; i^affat, the technical word 
for driving a ship ashore (Thucyd., ii. 10, 
etc.). It only occurs in the New Testament 
here, and in a different sense in ch. vii. 45. 
It is not uncommon in the LXX. as the 
rendering of nriT and nn (see Dent. xiii. 3 ; 
2 Sam. xiv. IsVjer. xlix. [LXX.,xxvi.] 36, 
etc.). 

Ver. 40. — Casting off /or when they had 
taken up, A.V. ; they left them in the sea for 
they committed themselves unto the sea, A.V. ; 
at the same time loosing the hands of the 
rudders for and looted the rudder bands, 
A.V. ; hoisting for hoised, A.V. ; foresail for 
mainsail, A.V. ; for the beach for toward 
shore, A.V. This verse, so obscure before, 
has been made intelligible by the masterly 
labours of Smith, of Jordan Hill. We will 
first explain the separate words. Casting ofl 
(irepicA^yTes). The verb Triptaip4a occurs in 
ver. 20 ; in 2 Cor. iii. 16 ; and in Heb. x. 11 ; 
and in all those passages is rendered " taken 
away." So also in the LXX., where it is of 
frequent use, it means " take away," " put 
away," " remove," and the like. In classical 
Greek it means to " take away," " tiike off," 
"strip off." Here, then, applied to the 
anchors which were firmly enibilded in 
the very strong clay at the bottom of 
the sea off Koura Point, irepieAwrej ras 
iynipas means " putting away " nr " cast- 
ing off" the anchors by cutting the cables 
which fastened them to the ship, and, 
as it follows, leaving them in the sea, 
or, more literally, giving them up, dis- 
missing them into the sea {eXuv eis tjji/ 
6a.\aa-aap') ; comp. ch. v. 38. Loosing the 
bands of the rudders. -'The ships of the 
Greeks and Eomans, like those of the early 
Northmen were not steered by a single 
rudder, but by two paddle-ruddeis " (How- 
son, p. 310. See too an illustration from an 
ancient painting found at Herculaneum, in 
which the two paddle-rudduis are very dis- 
tinctly seen, at p. 346 ; and another illustra- 
tion in Lewin, vol. ii. p. 204, showing the 
two rudders and the foresail). These paddle 
rudders had been hoisted up and lashed, 
lest they should foul the anchors at tha 
stern. But now, when the free use of them 
was absolutely necobsary to steer the ship 
toward the beach, they unloosed the lash- 
ings, i.e. " the bands of the rudders," and at 
the same time they hoisted up the foresail. 
The foresail ; rht ipre/iom, a word found only 
here in this sense, but used in Vitruvius foi 
a "pulley," and so explained in Ducangp 



300 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xxtn. 1—44 



But artimon was till recently used In Venice 
and Genoa as the name of the large sail 
of a vflssil. In the Middle Ages arti- 
monium was the " foremast," mat de proue ; 
but it Ma,B also used of the foresail, " "Velum 
navis breve, quod quia melius levari potest, 
in summo perieulo eitenditur " (Ducange). 
They hoisted the loresail both to give them 
sufficient way to run on to the beach, and to 
give precision to their steering. (For a fur- 
ther account of tiie ipre/xdi', or foresail, see 
Smith, of Jordan Hill.) 

Ver. 41. —But lighting upon for and fall- 
ing into, A.V. ; vessel for ship, A.V. ; fore- 
ship for forepart, A.V. ; strtuik for stiieh fast, 
A.V. ; stem for hinder part, A.V. ; began to 
hreak up for was broken with, A.V. Where 
two seas met ; rdvov SiBaXaaaov, only here, 
and in Dion Chrysostomus. The explana- 
tion of this "place where two seas met" 
is as follows: — As the ship stood at anclior 
in the bay on the nortli-east side of the 
island, it would have the Koura Point (Bas- 
el-Kaura) on its left, and on entering deeper 
into the bay westward, the little island of 
Salmonetta, or Selmoon, otherwise calleil 
Gzeier, would lie on its right, and 
would appear to be part of the island of 
Malta, from which it is separated by a 
narrow channel about a hundred yards in 
width. When, however, ehe was just com- 
ing upon the beach for which she was mak- 
ing, she would come opposite to this open 
channel, and the sea from the north would 
break upon her and meet the sea on the 
south side of the island, where the ship 
was. Here, then, they ran the vessel 
aground. 'EvdxaTMv, or, according to the 
R.T., iirexfiXav, is only found here in the 
Bible ; but it is the regular word tor running 
a ship aground,or ashore, in classical writers. 
'EmKeWa has exactly the same meaning. 
The simple verbs kIaXu and oxeWa are 
also both in use for running a ship to land. 
The foreship stmck ; ip^ltraffa, here only in 
the Bible, but very common in classical 
Greek. Its meaning here is not very 
different from its frequent medical mean- 
ing of a disease " fixing itself" and 
" settling " in some particular part of the 
body. Eemained unmovable. " A ship im- 
pelled by the force ot a gale into a creek 
with a bottom such as that laid down in 
Admiral Smyth's chart of St. Paul's Bay, 
would strike a bottom of mud graduating 
into tenacious clay, into which the forepart 
would fix itself and be held fast, whilst the 
Btem was exposed to the force of the waves " 
(Smith, p. 144). Unmovable; iaiAeSrot, only 
here and Heb. xii. 28, in the Bible; but 
common in Greek writers in the sense of 
" firm," " unmovable." Began to break up 
(e\^£To, like lolvo and dissolvo in Latin). 
The planks were loosened and disjoined. 



By the violence. The B.T. omits the wofdi 
T&v Kvn&Tav, and so has pla alone, some- 
what like B;8pis in ver. 21. 

Ver. 42. — ^The soldiers' counsel, feto. The 
same stem sense of duty in the Boman 
soldier as moved the keeper of the jail at 
Philippi to destroy himself when lie thought 
his prisoners had escaped (oh. xvi. 27). Th« 
prisoners ; by which we learn, as also in ver 1, 
that there were other prisoners beside Paul 
going to be tried before Osesar at Bome 
(comp. Josephus's account (' Life,' sect. 3) of 
certain priests, friends of his, who were sent 
as prisoners to Bome, to be tried). Swim 
out; 4KKo\vfjiPda, only here, but not uncom- 
mon in the same sense in classical Greek 
(see next verse). Escape ; Siaipijoi, peculiar 
to St. Luke here, but it is the common 
medical word for n narrow escape from 
illness. 

Ver. 43. — Desiring for willing, A.V. ; 
stayed for kept, A.V. ; overboard, and get 
first to the land foi first into the sea, and get 
to land, A.V. To save Paul ; Siao-io-ai, and 
ver. 44 and ch. xxviii. 1, 4 ; a word ot very 
frequent medical use, employed six times by 
St. Luke, but only twice elsewhere in the 
New Testament (Matt. xiv. 26 ; 1 Pet. iii. 
20). Swim ; KoKvuPda, here only in the 
Bible ; though Ko\v(i.0ifipa, properly a swim- 
ming-bath, rendered " pool " in the A.V., 
occurs five times in St. John's Gospel. 
The verb means "to dive" rather than "to 
swim." Both the verb and the noun are 
used frequently in medical language for 
" swimming in a bath," and jtlTmiv aeavThi/ 
(like oTio^^iTTTeiy here) is the phrase tor 
jumping into the bath. 

Ver. 44. — Planks for boards, A.V. ; other 
things from for broken pieces of, A.V. ; a/2 
escaped (SiocrwA^yai) for escaped all, A.V. ; 
the land for Jonr/, A.V. Planks; (r^vimv, 
only here and in the LXX. of 2 Kings xii. 
9 (for the " lid " of the box) and Cant. viii. 
9 (for "boards"); very common in Homer 
and other Greek writers, for " boards " and 
" planks " of all kinds. They all escaped. 
In exact fulfilment of Paul's prediction in 
ver. 22. And thus ended the eventful 
voyage of about four hundred and eighty 
miles (as laid down in the charts) from 
Olauda to tlie Point of Koura on the north 
coast of Malta. It is one of the striking 
proofs of the identity of Melita with Malta, 
that the rate at which it is calculated that 
a large ship laying to in a gale would drift 
in twenty-four hours, viz. thirty-six miles, 
multiplied by thirteen and a half (the 
number of days occupied by the voyage), 
gives four hundred and eighty-six miles as 
the whole distance." Smith thinks that 
the ooinoidenoe between " the actual bear" 

' 36 X 13) = 486. 



OH. xxvu. 1^^4.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



301 



\ag of St. Paul's Bay from Olauda, and 
the direction in which the ship must have 
liiven," with the wind blowing in the 



qnarter we know it did, " is, if possible, itiU 
more striking" (pp. 127, 128>. 



HOMILBTICa 

Ven. 1 — 17. — The voyage. " The voyage of life " is sn expression drawn irom the 
common feeling of men that there is a close analogy between the course of a man's life 
through the world, from his birth to his grave, and the progress of a ship from port to 
port. The Christiaa metaphor of the ark of Christ's Church, tossed upon the waves of 
this troublesome world, yet finally reaching the land of everlasting life, is no less 
familiar to us. It may not be without instruction to note some of the points of resem- 
blance in a Christian's life to the apostle's voyage as described in the narrative before 
us. First, there is in both a definite purpose. The ship is making for a particular port; 
the Christian is definitely seeking to attain the kingdom of heaven. But many a life 
would be far more useful, and far more consistent, if this purpose were more condensed. 
We are often too much distracted by the episodes in our life. The passing circum- 
stances, the shifting situations, the immediate surroundings of the day, bound our 
horizon, and the intermediate seems to us as the final, or at least shuts the final out 
tiom view. The lesson is, keep steadily in view, in sunshine and in storm, under every 
variety of outward circumstance, the great end of the Christian life, to dwell with 
Christ in glory for ever, and bend your unrelaxing efforts to compass this end. Then, 
again, let us mark in the Christian life, as in the ship's voyage, the conditions of the 
enterprise. There is the fixed will and purpose, and the wisdom and skill and resolu- 
tion of the man, on the one hand; but there are also tbe inevitable hindrances and 
obstacles, on the other. Changes and chances, vicissitudes and disappointments, 
obstacles and disturbances, arise unbidden, and often when we least expect them. The 
pleasant start, the cheering incidents which seemed full of promise for a prosperous 
future, are succeeded by dull delays and by tedious, disheartening, and disconcerting 
experiences. We have to deal with events of which we had not taken count. The 
sanguine hope of a rapid progress is succeeded by the tediousness of delay, and our own 
counsels are continually thwarted by the folly or incompetence of others of whom we 
cannot set ourselves free. By-and-by, when we think we see signs of improvement close 
at hand, things suddenly take a turn for the worse. All the elements of difficulty are 
multiplied a hundredfold; and our bark, whether freighted with earthly schemes or 
heavenly hopes, is in imminent danger of shipwreck. Happy is he who at such times 
lays fast hold of the promises of God, cleaves to the Lord Jesus with a steadfast faith, 
and perseveres to the end. In spite of delays, and in spite of dangers, he shall not be 
ashamed of his hope. Only let each alternation work its proper work, teaching patience 
and long-suffering, encouraging a life of simple faith, stimulating all the energies of the 
soul, stirring up to active exertion, engendering a calm and dauntless courage, and 
bringing out every resource of the mind according to the immediate need, and the 
storms and agitation of the voyage will in due time be exchanged for the peace and 
safety of the everlasting haven of glory in the presence of the Lord Jesus. Dear reader, 
be prepared for all ; let nothing shake your faith or dim yovu: hope, and then the most 
troubled voyage shall have a blessed end ; and in the last review of the roughest pas- 
saga your testimony will be, " He hath done all things well." 

Vers. 18 — 44. — The escape from shipwreck. The particular feature in this part of the 
narrative of the shipwreck to which attention is now invited is the sacrifices by which 
the final escape was effected. The eighteenth verse finds tlie whole party on board the 
ship in an encounter with a furious tempest. We can easily picture to ourselves the 
sea running high, the vessel crouching as it were before the wind, the waves breaking 
over the side of the ship, and the water beginning to fill her. At this moment the 
relative value of things in the mind of the master and crew undergoes a great change. 
The freight of the ship — so precious in the owner's eyes, acquired at great cost, put on 
board with much labour, and on which was set the hope of great gains when the vessel 
should reach the Italian shore — now loses all its value in his pyes. Something mora 



802 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. xxtil 1— 44 

precious is at stake — the ship itself, and the lives of those on board; and so the sacrifice 
must be made. They throw the freight overboard in order to lighten the ship, that it 
and all that are in it may not go down to the bottom of the deep. Borne relief from th« 
pressing danger seems to have followed this step. For a time the vessel was relieved, 
and rode more buoyantly upon the troubled waves. But the relief was only temporary. 
The ship began again to fill with water, and the danger was greater than ever. Some 
fresh sacrifice must be made if she was to be kept afloat. And so with their own hands 
they cast all the tackling into the sea (note on ver. 19). Things which once seemed 
necessary to their comfort, things without which the ship could never have started on 
her way, are now ruthlessly destroyed. They stand in the way of saving something 
more precious than themselves — the ship and its freight of human life — and so they 
are cast into the sea. But the needful sacrifices are not yet complete. For eleven 
more days the ship keeps afloat, though every hour might seem to be her last. But on 
the fourteenth night a new element of danger appeared. They were close upon a lee 
shore, and so their only chance of safety was to run her upon the soft beach. But how 
could this be done ? There still remained in her the precious cargo of wheat which she 
was carrying from Alexandria to Italy. Lightened of this heavy load, there was a hope 
that she might run upon the beach, so that they might jump out and be saved. And 
so this sacrifice was made too. They threw out the wheat into the sea, for their lives 
were more precious than even the golden grain ; and they escaped all safe to the land. 
This account exactly illustrates the Christian's career. There is a time when the things 
of this world — wealth, or reputation, or the world's friendship, or certain habits and 
opinions — are of supreme importance in his eyes. By-and-by some conjuncture arises 
in which he has to choose between them and the salvation of his soul. There is a 
strug'^le at first, and an unwillingness to part with them. But as the things of God rise 
in their immensity before his eyes, and it becomes clear that the sacrifice must be made 
if he would enter into life, his mind is made up. What things were gain to him, those 
he counts but loss for Christ, for whom he suffers loss of all things, and counts them 
but dung that he may win Christ. He makes the calculation, " What shall it profit 
me, if I gain the whole world and lose my own soul?" and the decision is not uncertain. 
Thus the Hebrew Christians took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing that 
they had in heaven a better and enduring substance. Thus Levi at the receipt of 
custom, at the call of Jesus, left all, and rose up and followed him. But it often 
happens that the whole sacrifice is not made at once, nor does the necessity for it 
become apparent at once. Some lighter loss is sustained at first, and the lightened 
soul moves easier on her spiritual way for a while. But then some new danger arises. 
This time it is the sacrifice of the man's self, some part as it were of his very being, that 
has to be made. The right hand has to he cut off, or the right eye plucked out, if he 
would enter into hfe. But still the decision is the same. There is nothing that he 
can give or take in exchange for his soul. The sufferings and losses of this present 
time are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed ; and even in 
those extreme cases where the choice has to be made between life itself on the one 
hand, and faithfulness to Christ on the other, the true believer falters not. He well 
knows that the tilings that are seen are temporal, but the things that are not seen are 
eternal ; and so he cheerfully lays down his life on earth that he may not make ship- 
wreck of eternity. So the blessed Paul himself was led on from loss to loss, but through 
loss to eternal gain. His legal privileges, his blameless righteousness, his high standing 
as a Pharisee among Pharisees, his consideration among his equals, his rabbinical 
learning, his boasted superiority, all fell one by one before the excellency of Christ. 
Desiring to be the honoured benefactor of his race, he found himself the offscouring of 
all things, hunted down and persecuted as one not worthy to live. But still his views 
of Christ's gospel kept enlarging ; his conceptions of the blessedness of being in Christ 
kept biightening ; the righteousness of Christ, and the glory of Christ, kept growing in 
the intensity of their aU-absorbing interest, and so he was led on to suffer loss upon 
loss, and to heap labour upon labour, and to endure affliction upon afiliction ; till from 
being the prisoner, of the Lord he became the faithful martyr of Jesus Christ, and laid 
down his very life in sure anticipation of receiving the crown of righteousness at the 
hand of the righteous Judge, when lie should plant his foot in triumph upon the shore 
of eternal life. 



OH. iiTn. 1— 44.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 308 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOEa 

Vew. 1—44. — The voyage of life. The journey which is described in this twenty- 
seventh chapter may suggest to us some of tie main features of the long voyage of oui 
life. 

I. The vaeiett in cub companionships. As each passenger on board found himself 
inseparably associated with a strange admixture of fellow-travellers, so we find our- 
selves compelled to mingle, more or less closely, with various companions as we and 
they journey together over the waters of life. There are (1) those who have a right to 
command us (the captain) ; (2) those in whose power we stand (the soldiers, ver. 42) ; 
(3) those who are bound to care for our safety (the sailors), many of whom will selfishly 
neglect their duty (ver. 30) ; (4) those who can enlighten, heal, refresh us in spirit or 
in body (Paul, Luke, Aristarchus) ; (5) fellow-sufferers (the prisoners). 

II. Thb need fob laboub AMD FOR PATIENCE. Not Only did the sailors strive 
strenuously to discharge their nautical duties (vers. 7, 8, 17), but all the passengers 
worked with all their strength in co-operation with them (vers. 16, 19). And with 
what long patience had they to wait, not merely at Fair Haven, " where much time 
was spent, but also and chiefly when the vessel was drifting before the wind, " when 
neither sun nor stars in many days appeared " (ver. 20), and when riding at anchor, 
and fearing greatly that they would be forced on the neighbouring rocks, they " wished 
for the day." Labour and patience are the two oars which will bring the boat to shore 
in the everyday passage of our life. 

III. The CERTAINTY OP HARDSHIP AND PERIL, MORE OB LESS SEVERE. The winds are 
sure to be contrary, as in the earlier part of this celebrated voyage (vers. 4, 7, 8), and 
they may be tempestuous, as they were at the latter part (vers. 14, 18, 27). We must 
reckon upon some, adversity, some checks and disappointments, as certain to befall us ; 
we ought to be prepared for calamity and' disaster. No human voyager across the sea 
of life can tell that there is not a very cyclone of misfortune through which he is about 
to pass. 

IV. The excellency of a refuge in God. What an admirable figure does Paul 
present in this interesting picture ! What calmness he shows (vers. 21 — 2S) ! What 
comfort he conveys 1 What strength he affords (vers. 33 — 36) I What ascendency he 
acquires (ver. 43) 1 It is the prisoner, Paul, who is the central figure there, not the 
centurion, nor even the captain. If in the emergencies that will arise, in the crises 
that must occur, on those occasions when the higher virtues and heavenlier graces are 
demanded, we would show ourselves brave, noble, helpful, truly admirable, let us see to 
it that we have then— because we seek now — a Friend, a Eefuge, a Stay in Almighty God. 

V. The occasional demand fob sacbifice. To save life they " lightened the ship " 
(ver. 18) ; they " cast out the tackling " (ver. 19) ; they " cast out the wheat into the 
sea " (ver. 38). To save moral or spiritual integrity it is well worth while, and some- 
times positively necessary, to abandon that which is precious to us as citizens of this 
present life (Matt, xviii. 8, 9). 

VI. TiiK possibility of beaohino the shore. (Ver. 44.) In one way or another they 
all came " safe to land." We may arrive at the end^like the captain who steers into 
port, his vessel whole, every sail spread to the wind, rich and glad with a prosperous 
voyage ; or we may reach the strand like Paul and his fellow-passengers, on planks 
and broken pieces of the ship. We may die honoured, strong, influential^ triumphant ; 
or we may reach our end poor, unregarded, shattered. It is of small account, so that 
we do reach that blessed shore — so that we are " found in him," the Divine Saviour, 
and pass to his presence and his glory. — 0. 

Ver. 3. — Spiritual refreshment. We like to think of Paul at Sidon. We are not 
only glad to know that he had the opportunity of gaining such material provision as 
would help to mitigate the severities of the long weeks of suffering in store ; we like 
to dwell on that one day's " happy interlude," when, forgetting the imprisonment at 
Caisarea, and ignorant of the imprisonment at Borne, he ipmt some hours of spiritual 
refreshment among his friends. We may dwell upon — 



8M THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. xxvu. 1— 44 



L The need of bpiritual refreshment. Our minds may be comparatively gtrong ; 
our health may be sound ; our spiritual faculties may be capable of very vigorous 
activity; but the time comes before many months, or perhaps weeks, or even days, when 
we need recreation and refreshment. The Father " worketh hitherto " — the omnipo- 
tent One, he who slumbereth not nor sleepeth, is putting forth untiring activity with- 
out cessation. But he is the Infinite One, the everlasting God who fainteth not, 
neither is weary ; and even of him it is said that he " rested from his works." In some 
sense that was true even of the Supreme. We, with our feebleness and frailty, capable 
of such small and slight exertion, so soon weary with our work, need frequently recur- 
ring rest and refreshment of soul. Not only in mechanical industry or in mental 
exertion, but in philanthropic activities, and even in religious exercises, we need rest, 
change, and refreshment. 

IL The justification of it. Can we spare any time from duties so imperative as 
are ours who are engaged in holy usefulness, for mere recreation ? Is it right to be pas- 
sive, to leave the weapon untouched, the ground untilled, when so much is calling and 
even crying to be done, when such terrible weeds and thistles are disfiguring the " garden 
of the Lord"? It is right. We have : 1. The warrant of our Lord himself : "Come ye 
yourselves apart into a desert place, and rest awhile " (Mark vi. 31) ; and he himself 
often retired into the lonely mountain-fold for rest and refreshment of spirit. 2. Apos- 
tolic example (Gal. i. 18). 3. The experience of the wise and good of all ages. 4. The 
argument from necessity. Without it we break down; oxa spirit and our body are pros- 
trated ; the usefulness of our life Is cut short. With it we regain strength, heart, and 
n«rv« for continued activity and helpfulness. 

"Oh, rest awhile, but only for a while ; 

Life's business presses, and the time is short. 
Ease may the weary of reward beguile ; 

Let not the workman lose what he has wrought; 

•Best for a while, if only for a while; 

The strong birds tire, and gladly seek their nei^ 
With quiet heart enjoy Heaven's quiet smile : 
What strength has he who never takes his rest?" 

ni The sotmoBS of it. We naturally suggest (1) relaxation of ordinary effort, ft 
whatever kind it be ; (2) change of scene and of employment. These are the simple 
and efficacious expedients which we commonly adopt. But beside these, we may men- 
tion; (3) genial and inspiring companionships — the finding out such "friends " as those 
of our text, and having free, unfettered intercourse with them; and (4) the solitude 
which suggests communion with God, that measure of loneliness which, without oppress- 
ing us, will send our thoughts first inward and then upward, in quiet meditation and 
ia soothing, sustaining, refreshing prayer. 

"Oh, rest awhile, for rest is self-return; 

Leave the loud world, and visit thine own breast* 
The meaning of thy labomrs thou wilt learn, 
When thus at peace, with Jesus fur thy Guest." 

a 

Vers. 4, S.— Endeavour and aftainment. The voyage from Sidon to the port of Pair 
Havens supplies us with an apt illustration of human labour struggling with adverse 
forces, but ultimately realizing its purpose. For the attainment of our hope, there must 
ordinarily be — 

I. Pull arrangement beforehand. Julius had to convey his prisoners westward : 
for this purpose he wanted soldiers, a sea-route, vessels that would be making the 
passage at this time. All this he provided carefully or calculated upon correctly enough 
(see ver. 6). We cannot hope to execute our purpose without a thorough consideration 
and preparation beforehand. We must always count the cost and provide the means. 
We may be engaged in Cbd's work, but we must not presume that Providence will 
interpose to make good our carelessness, our negligence, our want of prevision and 
fKvistoa. 



OH. xxvn. 1— 44.J THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLEa 805 

n. Patebnt laboub. From point to point they made their way ; with the winds 
against them, they at length made Myra (ver. 5). " They sailed slowly many days," 
but they went on towards Cnidus (ver. 7). They had much work to pass Salmone (ver. 
8) ; but by dint of persevering labour they reached the port. Whether we seek knowledge, 
material resovirces, position, influence, or the accomplishment of any great enterprise in 
philanthropy or religion, we must be prepared for patient labour. We must make our 
way from point to point, struggling with "contrary winds," " hardly passing," but manag- 
ing to make our way beyond this mark and that, finally reaching our goal — exhausted, 
perhaps, but successful. 

III. The submission which pbevailb. Julius would not have arrived at Pair Havens 
when he did, had not the captains of the vessels in which he sailed conquered the forces 
with which they had to contend hy a viise submission. The captain of the " ship of 
Adramyttium" sailed on the other side of Cyprus from that on which he meant to steer, 
" because the winds were contrary " (ver. 4). " The wind not suffering " them, they 
did not enter Cnidus when they were "off" it (ver. 7). We must direct our course, 
guided by events. We are too feeble to carry our projects through without frequent 
tacking and changing. We may be resolutely firm in our principle, though we may 
vary our policy as circumstances may demand. We often find it wise to yield ont 
thing in order to gain another which is not inconsistent with the end in view. We do 
well to concede small things that we may secure greater ones. If our aim is a pure 
and noble one, we shall gladly bend to the " contrary winds," if only we may, by taking 
another course, reach the Fair Havens which we seek. Between one man surrendering 
'principles to gain position or resources for himself, and another man yielding to oppos- 
ing winds in order to effect a high and beneficent purpose, there lies all the distance 
between meanness and magnanimity. 

IV. Ready use op pavoubable oiecumstanobs. (Ver. 6.) If we would do good and 
great things in our day, we must not only use the weapons which are thrust into our 
hands, bat must eagerly and actively seize upon them when they are in reach. The 
centurion /oMnrf, on seeking for it, a ship sailing in his direction. Many men are very 
near to failures in business, in society, in sacred service, because they expect opportunity 
to seek them out, instead of their looking keenly out for opportunity. Then comes — 

V. JoYODS ATTAINMENT. (Vcr. 8.) We arrive at the Ftur Havens, the port of our 
hope, and the peaceful harbour is the pleasanter to our eye for the toil and the submission 
we have exercised to gain it. — 0. 

Vers. 12—16. — Disappointment. Disappointment is the strong reaction of the soul 
where it nurses an eager expectation and fails to secure the object of its hope. The 
familiar pleasantry which affirms the blessedness of him that expects nothing, is only a 
pleasantry ; it does not contain any other grain of truth than that it is wise not to 
cherish hopes which are unlikely to be fulfilled, and this is a very simple truism. 
For— 

I. Hope is a constant eesident op the human soul. " Thou didst make me hope 
upon my mother's breasts" (Ps. xxii. 9). Man must hope for that which is beyond 
him ; otherwise he would sink fast and far in the scale of being. 1. We may set our 
heart on exchanging the insufficient for the satisfactory. That was the case here. The 
port of Fair Havens was " not commodious to winter in " (ver. 12) ; the sailors could 
not be satisfied that they were safe until they reached another which lay "toward the 
south-west and north-west " (Phenice), 2. Or we may desire to pass from th« unsuit- 
able to the appropriate ; as when he who has left boyhood behind him desires to have the 
heritage of manhood. 3. Or we may long to move on from the good to the better ; as 
when a nan strives to rise to the higher post, to the superior position, to the wider 
sphere. Such hope is, in the first case, obligatory ; in the second, desirable ; in the third, 
allowable. But such is the feebleness of our nature and such tiie frailty of our efforts 
that— 

n. Disappointment is often WAiTiNa upon hope. How often does the " south wind 
blow softly " (ver. 13), and we think we " have obtained our purpose," and make ready 
to enter our " desired haven," when suddenly there arises " a tempestuous wind," and 
the " ship cannot bear up " (ver. 15), and we have to " let her drive " whither she will, 
but not wliither we will 1 How often does some relentless Euroelydou interpose 
ACTS — n. % 



306 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. xxvn. 1— 44 

between U8 and the fruition of our hope ! Prom childhood to old age, disappointment 
embitters the cup of lile, saddens the spirit of man. It is the little child that fails to 
receive its coveted toy ; it is the boy that does not quite win the prize ; it is the young 
man who nearly secures the post, but is overmatched in the lists ; it is the lover who 
returns with a heavy heart ; it is the mother who cannot save the young life from an 
infant's grave ; it is the statesman who is passed by that a favourite may have the port- 
folio ; it is the student, the traveller that does not make the discovery to which he 
seemed so near ; — it is the seeking, striving, yearning human heart that opens to receive 
and is bitterly disappointed. Of all the evils which fall upon and darken the path ot 
life there is none more common, none more powerful, none more iU to bear. Beneath 
its blow, how many a heart has bled to death I under its cruel weight, how many who 
Live about us and whose path we cross are compelled to " go softly all their days " I Let 
us thank God that — 

III. There is a refuge even from disappointment. The sailors in our text had 
very little consolation when they could not " obtain their purpose." There was no other 
harbour for which to make. But when disappointment comes to the human soul in the 
•trife and conflict of life, there is always a resort to which the heart may flee, a haven 
m which to hide. It can always fall back on either (1) the sympathy and succour of 
the unfailing Friend, or (2) the hope " which maketh not ashamed," " that sure and 
steadfast hope which entereth within the veil." — C. 

Vers, 23 — 26. — Divine ownership and human service. I. The extent of thb 
Divine claim. " Whose I am." God's claim upon our service is simply complete ; it is 
impossible to conceive of a tie stronger or more perfect. It rests on : 1. His absolute 
sovereignty over the universe. 2. His creation of our spirit ; the fact that he called us 
out of nothingness into being, tbat he conferred on us our spiritual nature and our 
bodily life. 3. His preservation of us in being. 4. His provision for all our wants, 
constant and generous. 5. His fatherly love prompting him to the bestowment of all 
his gifts, and greatly enhancing their value. 6. His redemption of us by Jesus Christ 
his Son; in this the last manifestation of Divine goodness, ratifying, multiplying his claim 
on us beyond all measure. " We are not our own : we are bought with a price ; " 
" Redeemed with the precious blood of Christ " (1 Cor. vi. 19, 20 ; 1 Pet. i. 18, 19), Best- 
ing on such solid grouod, God's claim on us is very great. He asks of us that we 
" yield ourselves unto him ; " that we offer ourselves, all that we are and have, to himself 
and his service, that he may enlarge and employ and bless us. This giving of ourselves 
unto God, this act of self-surrender by which " living or dying we are the Lord's " (Eom. 
liv. 8), involves (1) the subjection of our will to the will of God ; (2) the opening of our 
heart to the love of Christ ; (3) the purpose of our soul to spend our lives and powers in 
nis service. 

IL The Divine communication. God has been pleased to make some special com- 
munications to certain favoured individuals of our race. The Apostle Paul was one of 
these, and this shipwreck through which he passed was one of the occasions on which 
he sent his angel with a message from his own mind (text). But though the great 
majority of our race pass through life without such direct and special manifestation, we 
are all addressed by the Father and Saviour of our spirits. God speaks to us : 1. In his 
Word. 2. By his Son, who is ever saying to each human heart that hears his gospel, 
" Believe in me j " " Abide in ine ; " " Follow me ; " " Work in my vineyard." 3. By 
his Holy Spirit, who comes with enlightening, quickening, renewing energy to the 
iudividual soul. 

IIL The ebsponsb we should render. 1. Faith. " I believe God." God (1) gives 
us strong and sufBoient evidence that it is he who is speaking ; and then (2) asks 
as to believe unquestioningly what he tells us. He teUs us many things of himself 
and of ourselves, and particularly of our direct relation to himself, which we could not 
nave divined by our own imagination, which we cannot prove by our own reason, which 
we are not able to comprehend by our own perceptive powers ; but it is reasonable and 
right that, having the strongest evidence that God is speaking to ns, we should 
accept with creature humility and filial trust what we cannot fathom now, assured that, 
by believing his Word and acting on our belief, we shall rise to a height where we shall 
see what is now invisible and understand what is now beyond us. This is only whai 



AH. xxviL 1— 44. J THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 807 

we have already done In the days of our childhood, on a Bmaller and earthly plane. 2, 
Service. " Whom I serve." This service (1) begins with the grateful and cordial 
acceptance of Jesus Christ as the Lord and Saviour of the soul : " This is [to do] the 
work of God, that ye believe on him whom he hath sent " (John vi. 29 ; sec i John iii. 
23) ; (2) continues through life in the endeavour to please Christ in everything, toadcrn 
his doctrine, to exalt his Name and extend his kingdom ; (3) is consummated in the 
heavenly service of the future life. Then, there, in very deed and truth, with undimmed 
and untiring devotion, " his servants shall serve him" (Rev. xxii. 3). — 0. 

Vers. 24, 31. — The Divine and the human will. These two verses have an appearance 
of inconsistency. How, it may he asked, can both be true ? If God had given Paul " all 
them that sailed with him," and this so certainly that the apostle could say without 
qualification, " There shall be no loss of any man's life " (ver. 22), how could the desertion 
of the shipmen (ver. 31) have imperilled the safety of the passengers so that Paul 
exclaimed, " Except these abide," etc. ? The answer to this question is found in the truth 
that God^s promises to his children are always conditional on their obedience to his will. 
So truly is this the case, and so practically, that it is not only possible we may bring 
about the non-fulfilment of the Divine promise, but certain that we shall do so, if we 
do not comply with the conditions which are expressed or understood. We may find — ■ 

L Historical illustrations of this principle. 1. Gen. i. 26 — 31 and vi. 5 — 7. 2. 
Exod. iii. 7—8 and Numb. xiv. 28—34. 3. 2 Sam. vii. 12—16 and 1 Kings xi. 11— 
13, with 1 Kings xii. 16. 

n. Individual iLLDSTBATiONB.of it. 1. Our entrance into the kingdom of Christ. 
We know that it is the will of God that all who hear the gospel should be saved by it 
(1 Tim. ii. 4 ; 2 Pet. iii. 9 ; Ezek. xxxiii. 11). But we also know that those will never 
enter the kingdom who will not repent and believe (John iii. 36; v. 40; ch. xjii. 46). 
2. Our progress in the Christian race. God wills our sanctification ; he has arranged 
that they who enter into life by faith in Jesus Christ shall grow in grace, in strength, 
in virtue (1 Thess. iv. 3 ; Eph. v. 26, 27 ; 2 Pet. i. 5—8, etc.). But it is certain that 
if we neglect the means of grace and growth we shall not advance, but recede (John xv. 
4, 6; Heb. x. 23 — 25). 3. Our admission to the heavenly kingdom, God promises his 
children a place in his eternal home (John xiv. 2, 3; 2 'J'im. iv. 8). But the crown 
of life will only be given to those who are faithful unto death (Rev. ii. 10). It is only 
he that overcometh that will " eat of the tree of life which is in the midst of the paradi.se 
of God " (Rev. ii. 7), and who will be made " ^^ pillar in the temple, ... to go no more 
out " (Rev. iii. 12). It is only they who have put out their talents to whom the " Well 
done " of the Divine Lord will be addressed (Matt. xxv. 14 — 30). " Let us therefore 
fear, lest, a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of u* should seem to 
come short of it" (Heb. iv. 1).— 0. 

Ver. 41. — The shipwreck of the sold. We are familiar with scenes of shipwreck ; 
the stories read in childhood and the stem facts of later years bring them vividly 
before our minds. We see the gallant vessel, well rigged and fitted from stem to stern, 
sailing forth on her mission of transport or merchandise, moving along under favour- 
able breezes, seeming likely to make the port where she is due ; we see her overtaken 
by the storm, admitting the water which gains hour by hour upon her, sinking 
lower and lower, finally going down beneath the waves. But sad as this story is, there 
is a far more profound and pathetic sadness in the history, only too often to be told, 
of the shipwreck of a human souL Bravely setting forth on the voyage of life, hope- 
fully speeding on its course with helpful influences, promising to make its port on the 
other strand, we see it overtaken by the storm of some mastering temptation or falling 
into the irresistible current of some adverse spiritual force, and it makes melancholy 
shipwreck; instead of reaching its Fair Haven, it goes down into the waters of 
deatruction. Some are wrecked in — 

I. Their RELiaious faith. They start on the voyage of life with that one chart 
in hand which alone can take them safely to their journey's end — the Word of the 
living God. Then they come intu con tact with fascinating but unbelieving companiont' ; 
or they meet with a number of specious but shallow objections ; or they look, with 
foolish and cruel persistency, on the one side of tne difficulties, neglecting to pny pro- 



308 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xxvn. 1— «. 

portionate attention to the arguments on the other side ; and the end is that the Teasel 
of their faith breaks up and at length goes down. 

II. Thbib mobal habits. Trained in godly homes, onr youths and maidens acquire 
habits of moral excellency ; they enter active life, honest, pure, sober, reverent, prudent 
But they encounter those hurtful and deadly influences which, after a while, if not at 
the first attack, lead them down to dishonesty, to impurity, to intemperance, to pro- 
fanity, to the pestilent habit of gambling. Usually they " make shipwreck of a good 
conscience," as the vessel is drawn upon the relentless rocks when it is caught in the 
strong current from which it cannot escape. Slowly, going further and further in the 
wrong direction, by every movement getting more at the mercy of the foe, the vessel 
drifts to destruction. 

III. Spiritual life. One of the sad spectacles which we have often to witness is 
the decline and disappearance of the spiritual life which was in the soul. By degrees— 
for this loss is commonly gradual — reverence becomes weaker, zeal decays, sacred joy 
grows dim and dull, habits of devotion are relaxed, the regard for the will of Christ 
becomes feebler and less effective, until life is really gone, and the soul has become a 
spiritual wreck. The shipwreck of the soul is : 1. Inexpressibly sad. By how much the 
spiritual is greater than the material and the destinies of a human soul larger and 
longer than the fortune of a piece of human handiwork, by so much is the wreck of a 
soul a more pitiful thing than the loss of the noblest bark that ever foundered on the 
ocean. 2. Not absolutely final. Sometimes, but very seldom, a sunken vessel is raised, 
and " ploughs the main " once more ; sometimes, but seldom, a soul that has lost faith, 
virtue, piety, is raised up from the deep, and sails again on its voyage, and attains its 
port. Let none presume ; let none despair, 3. An evil that may always be averted. 
The mind tliat is open to the truth which is before it, that keeps clear of the dangers 
of which it is warned, that uses the spiritual resources which the generous Lord has 
supplied, will not make shipwreck, but reach, unharmed and safe, the heavenly 
harbour. — 0. 

Vera. 1 — H. — Tlie voyage to Italy: an allegory of fh» Ghristiam's course. Bnnyan 
wrote an immortal allegory of the Christian course as a jotimey by land. It may b« 
rewritten as a sea-voyage. 

I. The Christian sets out in strange company, and with often unc»noeniai. 
SUBBOUNDINGS. Bomans, Macedonians, prisoners, Alexandrians, are Paul's fellow 
voyagers (vers. 1, 2, 4 — 8). No seclusion, no picked society nor refined retirement, 
can be or ought to be the usual lot of the Christian. We cannot go out of the world. 
In society, among all the diversities of human character, our education and trial must 
go on, our experience he gained. The greater the variety of men, the more eliciting of 
our capabilities, the larger scope for doing good. 

II. The Cheistian ib bube to meet with friends. A friend and hospitality is to 
be found at most ports (ver. 3). And love begets love. Captain Julius, another of 
those fine Roman soldiers who cross the stage of the Christian story, is glad of an 
excuse to show the kindness of his heart to his prisoner. Oh, let us believe in the 
human heart ; if we speak to it in the tones of love, it will give back its sweet echo 
everywhere. Unexpected acts of friendship are revelations of God to ub in lonely 
places and oad hours. 

"I fancied he was fled, 

And after many a year, 
Glowed unexhausted kindlinew 

Like daily snniise there." 

IIL Cloubt skies. (Vers. 9—15.) Forebodings of danger are felt as the Christian 
goes on. Sunny life-seasons, the joys of calm friendship, must give place to dark skies 
and danger. The changing drama of nature mirrors the story of the human soul. The 
Christian, taught by experience, becomes prophetic, like Pali. The centurion and the 
master of the ship may typify that blind obstinacy which will persevere with its 
designa in the teeth of nature's laws. Nothing fatal occurs without previous warnings. 
In the natural and in the moral world we constantly come upon effects without visible 
But the causes exist and are in action. llence the constant duty of sobriety 



BH. xxvn. 1—44] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 808 

and watchfulness. The deep lesson of the gospel here illustrated is that we onght not 
to be taken at unawares. 

IV. Unbblievinq fbae and bblibvino confidence. The former in vers. 16—20. 
To save dear life men will cast their treasures as worthless dross into the sea. And 
when, in spite of all, death seems near and inevitable, nothing is left but despair. 
But if earthly life itself is well lost for the sake of the immortal soul, hope need 
not set, but rather rise, like the morning star, above these troubled waves. This 
contrast is brought out by the behaviour of the apostle (vers. 21—26). Through the 
many sunless and starless days and nights, hope shines unquenched within bis breast. 
There are reflections of such times within the horizon of the soul (Isa. xi. 10 ; Ixiii. 17). 
Reason contends with faith ; and in struggle with itself the spirit becomes conscioug 
of its power and victory through God. Paul supports himself on a Divine intimation, 
confirming the promise of the past (ch. xxiii. 11). The great thing is to be intent upon 
our work and witness ; then comes the sense of security, the faith that ao harm can 
come nigh us until our work be done. 

• Too busied with the crowded hon» 
To fear to lire or die." 

ft will be felt deeply true that — 

" On two days It steads not to run from thy grave— 
The appointed and the unappointed day ; 
On the first neither balm nor physician can sav(^ 
Nor thee on the second the imiverse slay." 

V. Shipwbeok and iiANDTNa. (Vers. 39 — 44.) The day breaks. The face of God 
appears after the night of weeping and watching. When need is sorest, he is nearest. 
Yet his light leads to strange and unfamiliar scenes : " They knew not the land." The 
scenery that unfolds before the soul in the great crises of life or in the hour of death 
is that of a foreign shore. Death is a great break-up of all our familiar and trusted 
associations, and great experiences of change in the soul may resemble it in this. 
'I'heir uae is to teach self-reliance — that true self-reliance which identifies God with the 
truest impulses of the soul. At the moment when all seems lost, all is gained. The 
foreign and seeming unfriendly shore proves a haven and a home ; the restless sea 
tosses them from its Iwsom to terra Jirma, and to a rest. So to the faithful soul do 
the fears and fancies of the terrified imagination give way to fixed prospects, and we are 
wrecked in transitory conditions that we may find a footing in the eternal. — J. 

Vers. 21—36. — The example of Paul in the ttorm. L His firm faith nr ms God, 
AND THE PEACE OF SOUL THENCE PLOWING. We may Compare the picture of the 
Saviour on the lake of Galilee. " Why are ye so fearful? How is it that ye have no 
faith?" 

II. His CONSEQUENT CALMNESS AND PBUDENOE VS COUNSEL. He Sets aside, with 

dear presence of mind, mistaken plans (vers. 27 — 32) ; he encourages dispirited minds 
(vers. 33 — 38) ; he acts with the fidelity of a pastor to the souls he feels committed to 
his care. 

III. His prophetic poweb. It is seen in warning of danger (ver. 10), and exhorta- 
tion amidst trial. The spirit of the prophet is at home amidst the storms of the 
world; flits like the petrel above the troubled waves. He has heard of the still 
small voice; the noise and crash of elemental war cannot shut out the melody of 
God. He rides upon the waters, directs the storm, furnishes an ark for the faithful 
in secret. God is our Befuge and Strength ; this song was singing throughout in the 
heart of Paul, 

IV. His lovino, thankful, and hopeful spirit. (Vers. 34 — 36.) He breaks 
bread with the company, gives thanks, and utters the divinest and most successful con- 
eoLMAon. A picture again that recalls the scene of the last Supper. — J. 

Ver. 26. — The victory of faifh. "Wherefore, sirs, be of good cheer," etc. Th« 
position of Paul in the voyage. Though a prisoner, yet really the ruler of the shipw 
An example of moral influence. The root of hit) character was neither his intellectual 



310 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. xxto. 1—4 1. 

superiority nor the mere moral goodness of his motives, but his consciousness of direct 
intercourse with God. God had " spoken unto him." 

I. Tbub faith ovebcometh the world. 1. By bringing in the light of the hettei 
world — so foreseeing the end, measuring; present circumstances, maintaining physical 
and moral strength. 2. By lifting up the individual life into the sphere of the Divins 
purposes. Paul felt that he was living for Christ, and, as an ambassador, must be pro- 
tected. 3. By cheering the heart with benevolence. " God hath granted thee all 
them that sail with thee." The sense of a philanthropic value in our own life is won- 
derfully cheering. We are doing good : what does it signiiy where we are, and how we 
are placed ? Those around us must bless God for us. 

IL The TtOTOBiouB life of faith ib the only life wobth living. 1. The 
shipwreck of worldly confidence. Human wisdom, physical force, political supremacy 
— all fail. Our temptation in these days to trust in schemes of social remedy. Chris- 
tianity alone can say, " Be of good cheer." 2. The Christian in the presence of suffer- 
ing and death. Instances resembling Paul's. Mackenzie in the Pegasus. Then comes 
the trial of confidence, and what we want is to say, " I believe in God." 3. The ministry 
of the believer in a perishing, despairing world. Bach one able to say to some and 
somewhere, " Be of good cheer." 4. The prophetic power of Christianity. Not idle 
dreaming, not fanatical predicting of events, but the certainty of the future brought 
to bear upon the present. One who can say, " I believe that so it shall be," and who 
can show by his fortitude and cheerfulness that he does believe it, will be as a light in 
the world's darkness. Such a narrative rebukes the folly of our modem necromancy 
•nd soothsaying, and incites us to be true children of the day and of the light. — ^B. 

Vers. 20 — 25. — The had man's extremity, Ood and the good man's opportunity. 
The contents of this chapter are, in some respects, amongst the most striking and 
instructive for the deeper facts of human life and nature, in all the book. 1. The 
interplay of human action and of Divine providence, the harmony of human responsi- 
bility and Divine purpose, are forcibly illustrated more than once. 2. The moral 
superiority, the real strength, the solid ground to stand upon, which are the portion of 
the man with whom the truth of God dwells, in comparison of two hundred and fifty 
others, though he be the prisoner and they his masters, or at least their own, are most 
impressively exhibited and vindicated. Supposing that we read rightly, that there 
were as many as two hundred and seventy-six souls in that tossed boat, we may say 
that the length of this long chapter shows one man — him the chief prisoner — as the 
man whose heart fails him not, who revives the hearts of the others, when at all they 
are revived, and in whom, under God, the hope of all centres. The force of this 
contrast makes the chapter one of sustained and unique interest, on the one hand, 
and, on the other, strews its path with suggestions of instruction. Though we read 
nothing positive respecting the state of mind of the personal companions and Mends 
of Paul (the one of whom was the historian of the book, who for that very reason 
probably modestly abstains from speaking of himself), there is no reason to doubt that 
they shared the strength and peace and confident faith of Paul himself. In this present 
passage we may notice these four things in chief. 

L The forcible description of " man's extbemitt." 1. It involves outwardly, 
in one common condition, the bad and the good. 2. It is day without one sight of the 
sun, night without the radiance of one star ; it is tempest of wind and wave without 
respite ; it is the heart " without hope." 3. It is the strain of long continuance of the 
same. This scriptural description may be taken to cover pretty well the subject, and 
brings any one sufiiciently face to face with the question whether there be any higher, 
ftiendly power able, willing to interpose. 

II. The " proper man " fob the houb. 1. He is the man " in chains." 2. He is the 
max to whom the Roman centurion cannot help showing some consideration (vers. 3, 
il, 31, 32, 43), though he has the care of him for Csesar's judgment-seat. 3. He is a 
man who knows what is due to himself, and, denying all traffic with the spirit ol 
obsequiousness, holds his own, and dares to say, " You see I was in the right " (vera, 
10, 21). 4. Though he might well have stood off from the rest in the boat, and been 
excused for doing so easily by them, yet he does not take this course, not play this 
part He throws himself and lot in with them and theirs. 6. He is the preacher ot 



oa. xtvn. 1—44.] THE ACtS OF THE APOSTLES. Sll 

comfort and of courage, and the confident prophet of hope and safety, but tells the bad 
also with the good (ver. 26). 6. He is the genuine religious man, not " ashamed of 
Christ," and plainly tells the source of his own confidence and of the firm language h« 
holds to his congregation of the boat, for all that he may be called or thought 
fanatical. 

III. The God who made that man of the houk. Let alone all which that God 
had done in the remoter past, and the earlier heretofore of his life, what had he done 
lately ? 1. That God did not forget his child, his servant, his anxious suficrer. He 
had long so served Paul that nothing was more precious to him than to think ho was 
the acknowledged and sure possession of God — " whose I am ; " and no livery con- 
ceivable so honourable as his — " whom I serve." And now with gentle wittjess he 
makes him know that he does not forget him, has not taken his eye off from him, but 
is following him with that watchful, careful, loving eye. And " he sends his holy 
angel" to him. 2. That God strengthened and refreshed the confidence of his child 
and servant in a very noteworthy manner. For he condescends to repeat himself. 
Again he sends his angel, again the visit is the visit of the night, when " deep sleep 
falleth upon men " generally, but when little now visited the eyes of Paul or of others 
in that boat. Again the angel " stands by " Paul, ready for march, for work, for conflict, 
for victory. He does not over-hover nor seem in the attitude that would sug5;est the 
upward flight for Paul. Firmly on earth that angel of God condescends to plant his 
feet. Again the former words are repeated (ch. xxiii. 11). Was it not enough that " God 
had spoken once," saying that the eyes of Paul should see Rome, and that he should 
preach in liome ? Again, however, the assurance is given him, and again the word of 
direct encouragement is addressed to the heart of Paul, " Be of good cheer " (ch. xxiii. 
11) ; " Fear not, Paul." 3. That God sots double and very high honour on his despised 
child and suffering servant. He " gives " to Paul " all them that sail with him." 
And it is not a secret covered gift, it is such a one as Paul can quote, and quoted, no 
doubt, not without Divine warrant, though this is not asserted. Thus the God who 
made Paul the man of the hour made him such in the strength of his kindly memory 
of him, in the comforting and assuring language he addressed to him, and in the practical 
honour, a very boon of honour, he bestowed upon him. It may have required some 
courage for Paul to have made this last announcement, except for one fact, significant 
enough, that by far the more part of " them that sailed with Paul " had none at all, 
had lost heart, and hope, and the tongue to jeer, and lip to mock, and countenance to 
laugh unbelievingly, with all which it is highly likely his announcement would at any 
other time have been received. 

IV. The means by which that mak got his hold on Gtoo. The declaration of 
these means stands on the page of the book and shines on the life of the man in sim- 
plicity, brevity, grandeur, unigue. " For I believe God," says Paul. What a word is 
this 1 What a thing it is I How few say it firmly ! How few who say it and even 
firmly, do It ! How fewer still by far who consistently and persistently do it ! Yet is 
it the secret of peace, of strength, of influence, of the only kind worth having and 
enduring, and of heavenly wealth. What does the man possess who can say this with 
simple, full truth, " For I believe God " ? And what can he want ? Of him this may 
be said, and it is enough, " He has all things and abounds." How mournful, pitiful, 
sinfiil, the Instability of the man who cannot say this from the heart 1 How strong and 
safe from " shipwreck " the man who can 1 — B. 

Vers. 30 — 32. — A glimpse at human nature and its behaviour in three varieties at one 
and the same conjuncture. The episode comprised in these few verses is full of startling 
effect. It displays human nature — that which is alike so one and so manifold — in this 
its latter aspect, rather than in the former. It invites us to look, to wonder, and, if wise, 
to be warned and learn in time. Let us notice the manifestation of human nature as 
made now by three varieties of people— 

I. Bt the shipmen. That is, by the " master and owner" of the ship (ver. 11), and 
evidently the officers and crew (ver. 27) of the ship. Every sentiment of honour, 
every plain demand of duty, called upon them to stand by their ship to the last, and to 
be the last to leave it. They now try to do all the reverse of this, competent to 
purpose it, and taken in the attempt to do it by craft, " under colour " of doing som*- 



312 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xxvn. 1—44, 

thing else. They reveal : 1. Cowardice. That they should fear was natural and a sign 
that nature had not gone callous in them. But cowardice began when they did not 
face to the end what had now some days been a common danger, one for which they 
were in part themselves answerable, which they could best meet, and which others 
mutt meert. 2. Selfishness. They try to save themselves, (1) regardless of others 
who belonged to them, as if only so much freight ; (2) and yet worse, doubling the 
risk of them, by (a) withdrawing their own professional help, and (6) withdrawing the 
boat. 3. The unfaithfulness of the hireling. Seldom covdd there be found a more 
typical instance of this (John x. 11 — 13). They were hired, they " cared nothing " for 
the lives of those entrusted to their charge, and they did attempt to "flee." 4. 
The " wisdom in its generation " of human nature. For, baulked of their purpose, and 
baulked in a most transparent and peremptory manner, they are too " wise " to court 
lynch law ; and they appear to follow the policy at once of saying nothing, and making 
the best of it. They fall into their places, and do whatever is to be done. So versatile 
can human nature be when it suits her. 

II, By Paul. Paul under any showing was th« character and the hero of the boat. 
We should) not be content without knowing anything of him that opens to our view. 
A great deal does open to our view. He steps out not now for the first time since the 
storm began. It would be very far from the truth to say now that it was only human 
nature that we have the opportunity of seeing. No ; the subordination of human nature 
was, perhaps, not yet perfect. Yet there was no willing strife (Rom. vii, 15 — 25), no 
great strife, no very distorting strife, between the human and the Divine in him. 1. 
Paul was the one calm watcher of everything that transpired. 2. His was the eye 
that read and that was then engaged in reading nature in others. It was in very deed, 
at any time, part of his ofBoe to do this very thing. 3. His was the eye that, so clear 
itself, detected the fraud, the would-be fraud of others. 4. His was the unfaltering 
tongue that declared it, though probably with no addition of safety to himself. 5. His 
was the mind conscious in its own rectitude and confident in God's truth and provi- 
dence, that does not for a moment hesitate to expose itself to being taxed with certain 
theological inconwstency. Most positively and publicly had he committed himself to 
the statement that God had promised him himself and " all them that sailed with 
him." And yet he brings to the fore a condition, a new sort of proviso, and that one 
that postulated the help and co-operation of a number of godless and inhuman hire- 
lings. These things all show, not only that the truest Christian need be no less a true 
man, but rather that it is only the true Christian who touches at all sufficiently the 
possibilities of the true man. For Paul the prisoner, on the way to trial, of many the 
despised, is nevertheless the man in every essential respect, in that boat, and succeeds 
in commanding not only a professed respect, but a practical obedience from all the rest. 

in. By the Roman obntdeion and boldieks. 1. So soon as Paul has had his say, 
they see quickly, because their eyesight is keen by reason of the instinct of self- 
preservation. 2. They are not nice as to the source firom which they derive their clue. 
Extreme peril has done a great deal to strip off from them all unnecessary artificiality, 
all dignified ceremony, all ofScialism and mere sense of authority. Nature itself stares 
them in the face, and puts not lispingly the alternative — Where may all these be very 
soon ? 3. They act, act at once, and act trenchantly too. They cut off escape from 
the coward and the knave and the supremely guilty. Let what may be said to them, 
let what may be threateningly looked at them, they act, for so it is given to human 
nature to do in the last resort. And those who do not act in the presence of the solemn, 
supreme dangers of life, cutting off escape from the evil-doers, though these be them- 
selves, are the men who will be left yet more " without excuse " for wlmt is written in 
tbe book, in this threefold illustration of human nature in the presence of periL — B. 

Vers. 33 — 36. — An unexpected testimony to the force of goodness. Not the least 
honourable testimony to Paul is contained in the incident related in this passage. 11 
is one undeniable testimony among many as to where in the ultimate resort strength 
lies. It lies with goodness. It lies with the man who lives with God, works for Christ 
is ruled in conscience and life by the dictates of the Spirit. Long periods may wear 
away first, and the most unpromising entanglements seem to forbid hope, but the vindi- 
cation oomes at last, and often in the most extraordinary and unanticipated way. Fat 



OH. XXTO. 1— 44J ITHE ACTS OF THE APOSTLEa S13 

what » transformation it is now which shows the prisoner of the whole company, an^ 
the man who before has seemed to run the gauntlet of one continuous contradiction of 
men, standing forth, not merely the observed of all observers, which he had often been 
before, but the one respectfully listened to, followed obediently, and really appreeiated 
by the witness and unanimous consent of cheered hearts (ver. 36). 

(A) Notice, then, the persecuted and misunderstood good man comes to be regarded — • 

I. As A FRIEND TO BE LISTENED TO. 

II. As A FBIEND WHOSE GOOD CONFIDENCE IB WELCOMED AND 8FBEAD8 A OBATEFUL 
IKFLTJBNCE. 

III. As A FRIEND WHO IS PERMITTED TO UKGE SIMPLE PRACTICAL DUTY. 

IV. As A FRIEND NOT MOCKED WHEN HE TEACHES RELIGION. Paul did thuS tea«h, 

both (1) by word and (2) by his own act. 

V. AB one WHO, BY THE SIMPLE PTJKITT OF HIS FRIENDSHIP, 18 RAISED TO THE 
POSITION OF THE MASTER OP ALL, IN A MORAL SENSE. 

(B) But a second series of suggestive lessons lies before us in the same passage. 
Notice — 

L What rbsouroeless fear the feab of the wicked is! 

II. What disabling fear that fear is! 

IIL How it takes its very first revenge on that outer life fob which the 

BINNEB lives! 

IV. What discord, distrust, and even disservice are wrought by it among 
" THE COMPANY OP THE UNGODLY " THEMSELVES ! They who Were One long time to 
oppose the true, soon fall to opposing one another. 

V. To VTHAT DEEP SELF-CONVICTION OP SHAME AND HUMILIATION THE FEAR OP 
THE WICKED, EVEN IN THIS WOBLD, REDUCES THEM, WHEN THEN FOR THE FIRST TIME 
THEY LEABN RESPECT FOR THE GOOD, AND BORROW CHEERFULNESS FROM THEM ! — ^B. 

Vera. 42 — 14. — The means human, the power Divine. A series of lessons are 
suggested here which the facts of life are proving by a constant analogy. Notice — 

I. A LESSON OF HUMAN MEANS AND ACTIVITY. No One of all the two hundred and 
seventy-six were saved by anything that looked like supernatural help. All were 
saved either by their own exertions in swimming, or by these together, strange to gay, 
with the aid of the mere fragments of their broken vessel. 

II. True goodness has rrs impression for the most ignobant and the worldly, 
ESPECIALLY IF THESE ABE HONEST. Whatever might be the religious ignorance or 
inexperience of the centurion, he evidently was impressed and attracted by the manner 
of Paul, or by his evident quality, or by both. He saves Paul. And probably his 
honesty was the real account of the impression he took. 

ni. The good ohaeacteb of one man wiLit avail to save others with "whom 

HE MAY BE CLASSED BY THE WORLD OB BY PROVIDENOE, THOUGH THEY BE NOT GOOD. 

Doubtless the righteous do sometimes perish with the wicked. How often are the 
wicked saved and the city spared for the sake of the few righteous 1 All the rest of 
the prisoner! owed their safety (under God) to Paul and the silent influenoa of his 
integrity. 

IV. God himself vouchsafes to bet on one faithful bebvant of his this same 
MOST DISTINGUISHED KIND OF HONOuB. It is written, ay, it was divinely said by the 
angel that God " gave all them that sailed " in that boat to Paul. 

V. All THINGS comb of God, He it was, he only, who saves aU. — B, 

Ver. 3. — The good mam's power to win confidence. "Julius courteously entreated 
Paul, and gave him liberty ; " and, in so doing, he did but act as almost everybody 
acted towards the great apostle who had anything to do with him. St. Paul had a 
remarkable power of personal fascination. For instances of the impression which he 
produced on individuals, compare ch. xviii. 14 ; xix. 31, 37. For Scripture illustrations 
of the power to win confidence, recall the incidents of Joseph's early life in Egypt, and 
the narrative of the three Hebrew youths as given by Daniel. For illustration in modem 
life, recall the liberty which the jailor gave to John Bunyan. Very possibly this JuUua 
had heard Paul's address before Agrippa, and the kind consideration of the centurion 
mnst hav« been very helpful to the apostle, whose two years' imprisonment most hav« 



n4 THE ACTS OF THE AFOSTLEa (.<>»■ zxtil 1—44 

told unfavourably upon his health, and who can have been but scantily provided with 
the requisites for a long voyage. We direct attention to that power which St. Paul 
evidently possessed, of winning the confidence and the favour of those who came into 
intimate contact with him ; observing that— 

I. Power to win confidbnoe re a natural gift. It belongs to some persons in 
an unusual degree. Children at once recognize and respond to it. We are wont to 
say that the true teacher is the person who can gain the confidence of the children. 
From some persons we instinctively shrink, to others we are as instinctively drawn. 
It ia a power that belongs to natural disposition and character ; it is a Divine endow- 
ment or gift, the talent entrusted to some. So far as it belongs to character we may 
notice its dependence on three elements. 1. Transparency. Some men make you 
feel their sincerity, honesty, integrity, guilelessness. They make you feel that you 
know them as they are, and that there is nothing hidden behind. 2. Firmness. Some 
men are changeable, undecided, and you cannot rely on them. Others may be slower 
in forming their judgments or expressing their decisions, but you know that you can 
trust them ; they stand fast by their promise ; they are as steady as a rook. 3. Sympathy. 
A mysterious attraction is in some persons as they seem to understand us and feel with 
us, and their brotherliness commands our confidence. 

XL Power to win confidence re a Divine trust. It takes its place among the 
talents. It is onr characteristic, a force for good which is entrusted to our use. It is 
ours as distinctly as may be the gifts of song, of eloquence, of art, of position, or of 
wealth. And this particular gift has even an unusual importance attaching to it, for, 
in inviting the trust of men in us, and meeting that trust faithfully, we may be reveal- 
ing God to them and helping them to confidence in him. It is hard indeed for that 
man to have confidence in God who has never been able to rely on any of his fellow- 
men. This Divine " trust " brings its burden of responsibility. In relation to it we 
may be found faithful or unfaithful. 

III. Power to wot confidence n capable of culture. Not so much of direct 
as of indirect cidture. As in other cases so in this, culture comes by use. To employ 
any talent, to exercise any gift, is to nourish it into strength ; but those powers which 
belong to character are cultured in the general moral culture, in the daily training of 
the spirit and ordering of the life. Occasion may be taken here to plead for the 
duty of "keeping the heart with all diligence, seeing that out of it are the issues of 
life." 

IV. POWBB TO Win CONFIDENCE 18 SANCTIFIED BY KELIGION. This St. Paul Well 

Illustrates ; his faith in God, his devotion to men, his renewed disposition, his sense 
of the living presence of Christ, the measure of his change into the very mind and 
image of Christ, all told directly on the purifying and perfecting of this his natural 
gift. Christian faith sanctifies character, especially bearing its force on those three 
features of transparency, firmness, and sympathy, on which we have seen the power to 
win confidence mainly depends. Impress that, from the Christian standpoint, a man 
will only use this power of drawing others to himself in order that he may draw them 
all to Jesus, and, in and through him, to God. — R. T. 

Ver. 10. — The mission of Divine vjwrnings. St. Paul was moved by God's Spirit to 
warn the sailors of theoonsequences of proceeding on the voyage. No doubt the apostle 
had a large experience of the sea, and in part gave his personal opinion, but we must 
recognize that he had the gift of foresight, and this may very readily, on occasion, pass 
into the gift of prophecy. We note that it is an almost imiversal method of Divine 
dealing to warn before judgment fells. Illustration may be found in Noah's warning 
before the flood, Jonah's warning to Nineveh, Daniel's to Nebuchadnezzar, the warnings 
of Jehovah's prophets, and our Lord's warning addressed to the guilty people of Jeru- 
salem. We ask why these are given both to individuals and to nations, and what 
precise purposes do such warnings accomplish. 

L They mat be preventive op calamity. St. Paul's would have been if it had 
been heeded. The warning of Jonah was, for the king and people of Nineveh did 
give heed to it. Explain that in the Divine rule of the world and men, no events need 
be regarded as absolutely and irrevocably settled. God's foreknowings and fore- 
Mfdainings aie quite consistent with the conditional character of all events as regarded 



OH. XXVII. 1—44.] THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 



818 



by men. We can prevent overhanging calamities up to certain limits of time. We 
can if we will duly keep Divine principles, and heed Divine warnings. 

II. They show the oonmeotion between man's conduct and man's oiboum- 
8TAN0ES. This is always the point of a Divine warning. This connection we aro 
always in peril of denying or of forgetting. If we possibly can we tliink of events as 
accidents, and then all moral relations and uses are taken away from them. We never 
can call them " accidents " in the face of Divine warnings, for these distinctly afSrm 
that the character of the coming events depends upon ourselves. It should be carefully 
shown that public events may not depend on iudividuals, but they do upon social 
conditions ; and it may also be shown that the wrong-doing of some one may involve 
the calamity of many. In further and more minutely imfolding the mission of Divine 
warnings, it may be shown that — 

III. Thbt make men pbbsonallt responsible, and oivb thbib afteb-aotions 
A BiSTiNOT MORAL QUALITY. The Warned man does not act at unawares. All excuses 
are taken away. The character of his proposed conduct is revealed to him in its issues. 
He acts upon knowledge, and the action is obedient or self-willed, good or bad. 

IV. They solemnly affirm the supreme knowledge op God, and the Divinb 
OVERRULING OP ALL AFFAIRS. In man's wilfulness he says of some things, " They 
are mere calamities ; man's conduct had nothing to do with them ; " and then again of 
other events he will say, " They are simply the natural consequences of men's foolish 
and wicked doings, and we need not think that God has anything to do with them." 

V Correcting both errors, God's warnings make us understand that he rules and overrules 
all events, all actions, all sins, " making the very wrath of man to praise him." Show, 
in conclusion, that warnings still come to us (1) through men ; (2) through the Word ; 
(3) through providences; (4) through the inward witnessings of God's Holy Spirit. 
Individuals and nations now cannot press on in paths of evil without finding, again 
and again, God's angel of warning blocking the way, m he did for foolish, covetous, 
wilful Balaam.— K. T. 

Vers. 21 — 26. — Oood cheer from a good man. This interesting incident of the 
voyage may be introduced by a description of the perilous condition of the vessel, and 
the distress and hopelessness of the sailors and passengers. Canon Farrar's careful nar- 
rative will be found helpful (' Life of St. Paul,' vol. ii. pp. 375, 376). A few sentences 
we may give : " The typhoon, indeed, had become an ordinary gale, but the ship had 
now been reduced to the condition of a leaky and dismantled hulk, swept from stem to 
stem by the dashing spray, and drifting, no one knew whither, under leaden and 
moonless heavens. A gloomy apathy began to settle more and more upon those helpless 
three hundred souls. There were no means of cooking, no fire could be lighted ; the 
caboose and utensils must long ago have been washed overboard ; the provisions had 
probably been spoiled and sodden by the waves that broke over the ship ; indeed, with 
death staring them in the face, no one cared to eat. They were famishing wretches in 
a fast-sinking ship, drifting, with hopes that diminished day by day, to what they 
regarded as an awful and certain death. But in that desperate crisis, one man retained 
his calm and courage. It was Paul the prisoner, probably in physical health the weakest, 
and the greatest sufferer of them aU. But it is at such moments that the courage of 
the noblest souls shines with the purest lustre, and the soul of Paul was inwardly 
enlightened." Kotice the apostle's sensitiveness to visions at all the great crises of his 
life. He was a man of prayer, and when a man has gained the habit of communion 
with God, special times of nearness and revelation are sure to come. A man may, by 
prayer and communion, make the veil between himself and God very thin and very 
shadowy, only a mist through which the shinings of God may, at times, easily pass. 
If we inquire why, on this most depressing occasion, this one man Paul kept so 
cheerful and so hopeful, the answer is that in him we see the triumph of the man who 
is conscious of God's presence with him. St. Paul here gives an illustration of his own 
words, " I can do all things through him that streugtheneth me." In these verses 
note — 

I. The good man's reproof. (Ver. 21.) It might seem unfitting and unkind to 
remind the ofScers of their past mistake ; but St. Paul was a moral teacher, and every- 
where he sought to do his moral and religious work. He would not miss the oppor* 



816 THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. xxvn. 1— 44 

tunity of producing a sense of sin which might be the beginning of better things. If 
his reproof had been a mere taunt, in the spirit of our irritating way of saying, " ] 
told you so," it could not be commended. It belongs rather to the reproofs of which it 
may be said, " Faithful are the wounds of a friend." 

II. The good man's AsstmANOB. (Ver. 22.) It was found in the strong brava 
words St. Paul used, but even more in the tone with which they were uttered. There 
could be no question about his own assurance. On his own faith he could uplift and 
cheer others. Compare the calmness of St. Paul with the unnatural calmness of Jonah 
when the storm raged about him ; and give illustration, from modern tales of shipwreck, 
of the power of the godly man to quiet alarm and prepare men for death. 

III. The ground op the good man's confidence. (Vers. 23 — 26.) In this case a 
Divine communication. In other cases more general grounds, such as (1) our good 
Father's care and power ; (2) the " exceeding great and precious promises ; " or, some- 
times, a strong impression made upon our minds. Impress that the power to cheer 
others may be won by any and every godly man. It follows upon a real living faith in 
God ; it is the proper power of the man who is calm by reason of his trust in God, and 
cherished sense of the Divine presence. — R. T. 

Ver. 38. — The sanctity of human life. This subject is suggested by the fact that 
they cast out the very wheat into the sea, being willing to lose everything if they 
could only save dear life. " Skin after skin, yea, all that a man hath will he give for 
his life." There is no intenser passion in the creature than the desire to preserve life. 
Not the tiniest insect, not the gentlest animal, but holds life most dear, and will do 
battle for it to the very last. The foe that man most dreads, all earthly creatures dread. 
God does not permit us to see anywhere around us life that is not valued, and for the 
sake of which all else will not be sacrificed. Man can do everything but die. Man 
can calmly lose everything but his life. Circumstances the most wretched, pains the 
most violent, desolation the most complete, can all be borne rather than life should be 
lost. Poor men cling to life as much as do rich men. Ignorant men hold life as tightly 
as do wise men. Young men value life no more highly than do old men. Well does 
the poet say, " All men think all men mortal but themselves, themselves immortal." 
Now, why has God made life thus sacred, and implanted such an instinct for the 
preservation of lite in our nature ? 

L To ACCOMPLISH God's pubposb the time op bach man's life mijbt be in ms 
OWN HANDS. Life is a probation for us all, and one man requires a longer probation 
than another. One lad may be fitted for the business of life with four years' appren- 
ticeship, while another may require six years. So it is in our schooling for eternity. 
God must hold in his hand both the incomings and the outgoings of our life. Some 
end life almost as soon as it is begun, while others drag wearily through their seventy 
or eighty years. And yet fflan has the power of takijig away his life at any moment. 
God has, indeed, hidden away all the vital parts of our frame in secret places : covered 
the brain with bone and hair; set the arteries deep down beneath the flesh, and 
preserved the lungs and heart within a bony cage. Nevertheless, man can easily reach 
and spill his life. The poor suicide finds easy entrance into the secret chambers where 
his life dwells. It would almost seem that, if the entrance of life is in God's hands, 
the exit of it is in man's. And yet it must not be so. For man's own sake it must 
not. But how shall man's hand be guarded from touching his own life? God has 
done it by simply making the love of life the one master instinct in every man. He 
has also done it by revelation and by law, declaring, " Whoso sheddeth man's blood, 
by man shall his blood be shed." But, more important than any merely outward reve- 
lation is the inward revelation found in the clinging of the creature to its existence, so 
that, until the brain reels and self-control is lost, man will bear anything and lose any- 
thing rather than die. So God alone knows the appointed time for man on the earth, 
and he can accomplish in each his purposes of grace. 

IL ThB OBDBE and AEEANQBMBNT of society COtn^D NOT BE maintained IP MEN 

HAD unlimited contbol OVER THEIB OWN LIVES. Consider how the reasons which 
now induce men to take their lives would then be multiplied. For the smallest things 
• little over-anxiety, a little unusual trouble, a commonplace vexation, slighted love, 
or unsuccessful effort, men would be destroying themaelves. We think Ufa ii wuU/ 



cm xxvn. 1— 44.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 317 

full of change now that, at God's bidding, homes are here and there broken up, and 
hearts are rifled. But what would be the uncertainties and the crowded miseries of 
this world's story, if men were unchecked by this universal feeling of the sanctity of 
life ? Widows moan, and orphans weep, and homes are desolated now ; but then — if life 
were felt to be without value, and might be flung away for trifles — then, everywhere 
men would walk amidst ruins, fallen pillars, broken carvings, shattered roofs, scarce 
one stone upon another, and the wretched remnant would soon cry out of its desolation 
that God would seal again the sanctity of life. 

III. But fob this instinct of life, man would have no impulse to toil. 
We know that toil is necessary for the well-being of every creature ; that Adam had 
to till the garden of Eden in the days of his purity and innocence. We know that 
the judgment on sinning man, that " he should eat bread at the sweat of his face," 
was no mere punishment, but the indication of the process by which he should be 
recovered to goodness. We know that through work moral character is cultivated, 
that alike the common necessities and the higher training ot human nature demand 
toil. We must work if we would eat. We must work if we would know. We must 
work if we would be " meetened for the inheritance of the saints in the light." 
"Yet who would work if there were not this instinct of life ? What motive wovdd be 
left sujflcient to urge us to earnest endeavours, and to the mastering of difficulties ? 
Though men do not say it to themselves in so many words, their real reason for 
working is that they must live, they want to live, they cling to life, they will do and 
bear anything if only they may, as we say, " keep body and soul together." 

IV. This instinot of life is the means of pbesebvino ub from the lawless 
AND the violent. That clinging to my own makes me jealous of my brother's life. 
As I would not imperil my own, so I would not endanger his. Let him be in the 
waters or in the fires, we would do our utmost to save his life. But suppose there 
was no such instinct ; suppose life were of no higher value than property, — then we 
should be at the mercy of every lawless, vicious man, who would not hesitate to kill 
us for our purse. Every robbery would be liable to become a murder, a robbery with 
violence. But now, even in the soul of the thief and the vicious man is this impress 
of the sacredness of life, and only at the utmost extremity will they dare to take it. 
We\may therefore bless God for this universal instinct, recognizing its importance in 
the economy of this world. We may be comforted, as Christians, when we find it so 
strong within us as to make us even dread death. It is better for the race, it is better 
for aU, that this should be a mastering instinct ; and we may be willing to bear a 
seeming disability which is so evidently for the good of the many. — B. T. 

Ver. 44. — Safety at last, somehow. Luke succeeds in presenting a very vivid picture 
of the exciting scene, when he says, " And the rest, some on boards, and some on 
broken pieces of the ship. And so it came to pass, that they escaped all safe to land." 
St. Paul gave orders that " every one who could swim should first fling himself over- 
board, and get to land. The rest seized hold of planks and other fragments of the 
fast-dissolving wreck. The wind threw them landwards, and at last, by the aid of the 
swimmers, all were saved." St. Paul was probably one of the swimmers, and we may 
be quite sure one of the most active in helping the others. We may find in this 
thrilling scene, and in the various experiences of such a time, a picture of the getting 
home to God at last of human souls. 

I. Some qet home as ships that sail into habboub afteb a sucobssful votagk. 
Somewhat bruised and battered, indeed, by the wild winds and the stormy seas, but 
whole and sound, and with sails all set, and ropes trimmed with flags, and shouts of 
joyous welcome from the shores. And thus all God's redeemed children ought to go 
home to him, and would go home, if in the voyage and the storms of life they 
fully trusted and fully used his offered grace. There ought to be for ua all " th« 
abundant entrance into the everlasting kingdom." 

n. Soke qet home ab shipwbecked kabinebs oome ashobe. With life hardly 
taved. With all the works of the life abandoned »nd lost, like a shipwrecked vessel. 
Illustrate cases of Christian lives in which the conflict against sin has not been main- 
tained, and the poor soul is almost lost ; or cases in which the frailties and easy 
besetment* are unmastersd to the end ; or cases in which intellectual doubts spoil 



318 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLSa [ch. xxTm. 1— 31, 



Christian faith up to the veiy hour of passing ; or cases in which the passion for 
luxury and worldliness and pleasures giye a wrong tone to Christian conduct all 
through life ; — all such cases may coincide with a genuine and saving faith in God, 
but in all sucli cases the home-coming is sadly like the picture of the strugglers for 
dear life given in our text. St. Paul presents the same thought under another figure. 
He speaks of some as " saved, yet so as by fire." In the great testing-day, every 
man's life-work is to be " tried by fire, of what sort it is." Some will find their 
life-work, in which they had so prided themselves, prove nothing but wood and hay 
and stubble. 1 1 will all burn up, and burn away, if Ck)d can find nothing but self- 
seeking and self-serving in it, and the poor soul will enter into life like one plucked 
naked from a burning house. Surely if we magnify the exceeding grace which 
permits us all to reach safe home at last, we may well long and pray and strive to 
win our way to heaven and God with all sails set, bringing safely in the full cargo 
of a life of goud works, done in a good spirit, under Divine leadings. Such a cargo 
as GuJ may make to " enrich the markets of the golden year." — E. T. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XXVni. 



Ver. 1.— TTe for they, A.V. and T.R. 
(twice). Was called. It reads as if it was 
the answer to their question to the natives, 
" What is this island called ?" Melita. That 
Melita is the islandof ilfaZta, and not MeUda 
off the coast of JJalmatia, is demonstrated in 
Smith's ' Voyage and Shipwreck of St. Paul,' 
and it is not worth while here to consider 
the arguments in favour of Meleda. Melita 
appears to be a Phoenician name, from the 
root in Hebrew D^D, to escape (Bochart, ' Ca- 
naan,' i.26), meaning, therefure,a "refuge," 
a harbour of refuge," so called from sailors 
often running into Valetta during a gale ; 
or possibly from ha, clay, in Italian malta, 
from the clay which forms the bottom of the 
sea as you approach Malta, and wliich makes 
the anchorage so safe. It was originally 
colonized by Phoenicians, whether from 
Tyre or Carthage cannot be pronounced 
with certainty, though we know it was a 
Carthaginian possession at the time of the 
first Funic War. It fell into the hands of 
the Romans B.C. 218, and at the time of St. 
Paul's shipwreck was annexed to the pro- 
vince of Sicily. The population, however, 
was Phoenician or Punic, and probably 
knew little Greek or Latin. The name 
of a fountain in St. Paul's Bay, Ayn tal 
Bazzul, " The Apostle's Fountain," is said 

' In the article "Melita," in the 'Diet, 
of Greek and Roman Geog.,' the writer 
desoriljes it casually as "a harbour of re- 
fuge " for Phoenician mariners. Diodorus 
Sioulus, quoted by Gesenius (' Monument, 
rhosnio.,' pars prima, p. 92) says that the 
I'hoenicians had Malta for a Karaipvyfi, a re- 
fuge, in their voyages to the Atlantic, on 
account of its having good harbours 



(Smith, p. 24) to be Phcenioian. But this is 
extremely doubtful. It is far more pro- 
liably, not to say certainly, the corrupt 
Africano- Arabic dialect of the island, as I 
venture to affirm on the high authority of 
Professor W^right. Gesenius is also dis- 
tinctly of opinion that there are no remains 
of Piioenician in the Maltese, and that all 
the words in the Maltese language which 
have been thouirht to be Phoeaician are 
really Arabic. Four genuine Phoenician 
inscriptions have, however, been found in 
the island (' Monument. Phoenio.,' pars 
prima, pp. 90—111, 252, and 341). 

Ver. 2. — Barbarians for barbarous people, 
A.V. ; common for little, A.V. ; all for every 
one, A.V. Barbarians ; i.e. not Greeks or 
Romans, or (in the mouth of a Jew) not 
Jews. The phrase had especial reference 
to the strange language of the " barbarian." 
See St. Paul's use of it (Rom. i. 14 ; 1 
Cor. xiv. 11; Col. lii. 11); and compare 
Ovid's saying ('Trist.,' iii. 10, 37), "Bar- 
barus hie ego sum, quia ncm intelligor uUi; " 
and that of Herodotus (ii. 158), that the 
Egyptians call all barbariam who do not 
speak the Egyptian language(Kuinoel). The 
word is thought to be formed onomato- 
poetically, to express the confused sound 
which a strange language has in a man's 
ears. Kindness ; ^tXgivepimla, here and 
Titus iii. 4 (comp. ch. xivii. 3). Beceived 
us all. The whole party, numbering two 
hundred and seventy-six. The present rain, 
and . . . cold ; showing that the gale still 
continued, and the wind was still north-east. 
The plight of the shipwrecked party must 
have been lamentable, drenched to the skin, 
with no change of clothes, a cold wind blow- 
ing. Probably the hearty meal they had 
taken on board ship was the means of saving 
their lives. 
Ver. 3 — But for and, A. V. : a wiptr eame 



OH. xxvm. 1— 31.) THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 



819 



lor fhere coma a viper, A.V. ; by reason of 
tor out of, A.V. Had gathered ; (rvarpexjiavTos, 
only here and in the LXX. of Judg. xi. 3 
and lii. 4, for "to collect," "gather to- 
gether." But avaTpo<\>i\ (ch. xix. 40 ; xxiii. 
12) means " a concourse," " a conspiracy." 
In classical Greek avarpeipeui is " to twist 
up together," to "form Into a compact 
body," and the like. A bundle of sticks; 
(ppvydviav irKrjSos. The word only occurs in 
the New Testament here; it means "dry 
sticks," " kindlers," any combustible mate- 
rial. In the LXX. it is used as the equi- 
valent of typ, straw or stubble (Isa. xl. 24 ; 
xli. 2, etc.),"and for "nettles " (Job xxx. 7). 
Theophrastus seems to use it for plants 
smaller than a shrub (' Hist.,' Plant., i. 3, 1, 
quoted by Hobart). Lewin (vol. ii. p. 208) 
writes as follows : — " When in Malta in 1853, 
I went to St. Paul's Bay at the same season 
of the year as when the wreck occurred. . . . 
We noticed eight or nine stacks of small 
faggots. . . . They consisted of a kind of 
thorny heather, and had evidently been cut for 
firewood." This is a conclusive answer, if 
any were needed, to the objection to Melita 
being Malta, drawn from the absence of 
wood in the island. But besides this, it 
is not a fact that even now there is no 
wood at all (see Lewin). A viper came out. 
It is objected that there are no vipers in 
Malta. But it is obvious that the condition 
of Malta now, a very thickly inhabited 
island (one thousand two hundred people 
to the square mile, Lewin, p. 208), is very 
different from what it was with a sparse 
population in the days of St. Paul. Vipers 
may well have been destroyed during one 
thousand eight hundred and sixty years. 
Lewin mentions that his travelling com- 
panions in 1853 started what they thought 
was a viper, which escaped into one of the 
bundles of heather. Came out. AiefeASoSira 
-athe reading of Tisohendorf, Alford, Meyer, 
etc., " came out through the sticks." It is 
a frequent medical term. The heat ; t^j 
(i^/iris. This form of the word is only used 
here in the New Testament, iustead of the 
more common Bsp/idrns. It occurs, however, 
repeatedly in the LXX. (Job vi. 17 ; Ps xix. 
7 ; Ecolus. xxxviii. 34, etc.), and was the 
usual medical word for feverish heat. 
Fastened; Kd6ri\j/e, here only in the Bible; 
but not uncommon in classical Greek, and 
of general use among medical writers. 

Ver. 4. — Beast for venomoiis beast, A.V. ; 
hanging from for hang on, A.V. ; one to 
another for among themselves, A.V. ; escaped 
from for escaped, A.V. ; justice for vengeance, 
A.V. ; hath not suffered for suffereth not, 
A.V. The beast (rh dripiov). It is peculiar 
ti) medical writers to use Sniplov as synony- 
mous with ^x'^""! * viper. So also OnpiiSriK- 
ros, bit by a viper, eripiaidi, an antidote to the 



bite of a viper (Diosoorides, Oalen, ete.). 
Justice ( ? a/kjj). In Greek mythology Diet 
(Justitia) was the daughter and assessor of 
Zeus, and the avenger of crime. In her 
train was Poena, of whom Horace says, " Baro 
antecedentem scelestum Deseruit pede Poena 
claudo" ('Od.,' iii. 2, 32). " The idea of 
Dice as justice personified is most perfectly 
developed in the dramas of Sophocles and 
Euripides " (article " Dice," in ' Diet, of 
Greek and Eoman Biog. and Mythol.'). It 
does not appear whether the islanders had 
learned the name and office of Dice from the 
Greeks in Sicily, or whether they had any 
native divinity whose name St. Luke trans- 
lates into that of Dice. The gods whose 
names are found in ancient Maltese inscrip- 
tions are Melkarth, another name of Hercules, 
the tutelar god of Tyre ; Osiris, and Baal. 
Other Phoenician divinities are named in 
the Carthaginian inscriptions (see Gesenius, 
' Mcnimaent. Phosnic.'). Hath not suffered. 
They assume that death will certainly follow 
from the bite. 

Ver. 5. — Sowleit for and, A.V. ; took for 
felt, A.V. 

Ver. 6. — But Ihey expected that he would 
for howheit, they looked when he should, A.V. ; 
when they were long in expectation for after 
they had looked a great while, A.V. ; beheld 
nothing amiss for saw no harm, A.V. They 
expected ; Tr/xxrcSi^Kwi/. This word is used 
eleven times by St. Luke, twice by St. 
Matthew, and three times in the Second 
Epistle of Peter (see ch. iii. 5 ; Luke i. 21, 
etc.). It is also common in tlie LXX. But 
it is a word much employed by medical 
writers in speaking of the course they ex- 
pect a disease to take, and the results they 
look for. And this is the more remarkable 
here because there are no fewer than three 
other medical phrases in this verse, irlfi- 
irpatjSai, Karawi-TrreLv, and ^7;5ef &to7tov, be- 
sides those immediately preceding Siefe'pxe- 
o-flai (ucoording to several good manuscripts 
and editions) Oepfxri, Kadd-jmiv, and Gripiov. 
So that it Idolss as if, having once got into a 
medical train of thought from the subject he 
was writingabout, medical language naturally 
came uppermost in his mind. Have swollen ; 
iri/jiwpaaBai, only here in the Bible, and nut 
found in tills sense in older classical writers. 
But it is the usual medical word for " inflam- 
mation "in any part of the body. Fallei 
down ; KaTaTriirTeiy, only here and in cli. 
xxvi. 14, and twice in the LXX. ; but com- 
mon in Homer and elsewhere, and especially 
frequent in medical writers of persons fall- 
ing down in fits, or weakness, or wounded, 
or the like. Nothing amiss (uijSei/ Utottop). 
Mr. Hobait quotes a remarkable parallel tc 
this phrase from Damocrites, quoted by 
Giilen. He says that wliosoever, having been 
bitten by a mad dog, drinks a certain anti- 



920 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLSa [ch. xxmi. 1—51. 



dote (tit ttXhr tcTVto* tiatfrtvrtu p^Sias), 
" shall Buffer no harm." It is used iu medi- 
cal writers in two senses — of " unusual symp- 
toms," and of fatal consequences. In the 
New Testament it only occurs elsewhere in 
Luke xxiii. 41, "Nothing amlBs;" and 2 
Thess. iii. 2, 'ti.T6Truiv koX irori\pav ImBpdtrav. 
It is also used in the LXX. for wickedness, 
doing wickedly, etc. They changed their 
minds ; as in an opposite direction the Lyca- 
onians did (ch. xir. 11, 19). It is a graphic 
pietnre of the fickleness of an untutored 
mind yielding to every impulse. The im- 
punity with which St. Paul endured the bite 
of the viper was a direct fulfilment of our 
Lord's promise in Mark xvi. 18 (see further 
note on ver. 8). 

Ver. 7. — NoiB in the neighbourhood of that 
ploice for »■» the same quarters, A.V. ; lands 
belonging to for possessions of, A.V. ; named 
for xBhose name was, A.V. ; entertained for 
lodged, A.V. Lands (xeo/iia); so John iv. 
5 ; ch. i. 18, 19; iv. 34; v. 3, 8. The chief 
man of the island (t^ ^/^(^T^f ttjs yhffov). It 
appears that, with his usual accurate know- 
ledge gained on the spot (see ch. xvi. 22, 
note), St. Luke here gives to Fublius his pe- 
culiar official title of primus. For Oiantar 
(i. 215), quoted by Smith, gives a Greek in- 
scription on a marble, which in his day was 
standing near the gates of Citta Veochia, in 
Malta, in which are the words, Ilpovdsvs 
?7r7r€us Pw/a' -npunos MeKiTaiav, k.t.K, *' Pru- 
dens, a Boman knight, chief of the Maltese." 
The Latin inscription, which was discovered 
in 1747, has the same title, uel primus. 
" chief of the Maltese." It may not im- 
probably be the Greek and Latin translation 
of the old Phoenician title of the " head- 
man," in Hebrew ts-'siin, in Chaldee »lsn, as 
in the title nni^jn ^tn, the chief of the Cap- 
tivity. When the Eomans succeeded the 
Garihaginians in the possession of the island, 
they would be likely to perpetuate the title 
of the chief magistrate, in this case the 
chief was also a Boman, as his name of 
PabliiBg indicates. Alford saya that he was 
legatus to the Frsetor of Sicily, and so 
'Speaker's Commentary,' Kuinoel, Meyer, 
etc. Received us ; araSf^d/ievos, only here 
(and Heb. xi. 17 in a different sense) for the 
more common v7raSExo//ai. Kuinoel quotes 
from .Lilian, ' Var. Hist.,' 4, 19, the similar 
phrase, 'TireSe^aro aiirobs - ■. • <pi\o<l)p6vas X 
and from 2 Maco. iii. 9, ii\o<pp6vais vrb 
rov &pxi^p^(os inroSex^^^s. Entertained U8 
(^{eVKrev) ; see ch. x. 6, 18, 23, 82; xxi. 16; 
and in the active voice in Heb. xiii. 2. Cour- 
teoiisly ; <j>i\o(pp6vus, only here in the New 
Testament, out we find (l>i\6ippav, courteous, 
in 1 Pet. iii. 8. We must understand the 
" us " probably to include the centurion, St. 
Paul, St. Luke, Aristarchus, and possibly 
one or two others, but not the whole two 



hundred and seventy-six. Heb. xilL S had 
a striking fulfilment here. During the thre« 
days they would have opportunity to prooura 
suitable winter quarters. 

Ver. 8. — It was so for it eame to pats, 
A.V. ; fever for a fever, A.V. ; dysentery for 
of a bloody flux, A.V. ; unto for to, A.V. ; and 
laying, etc., healed for and laid, etc., and 
healed, A.V. The father of Publius. The 
fact of the father of Publius being aUve and 
living in Malta is a further indication that 
the term S iipSnoi rijs v^ffov is an o£Soial 
title. Lay siok. 3uv4xe<r6ai is also the 
usual medical expression for being taken sick 
of any disease (see the numerous passages 
quoted by Hobart, pp. 3, 4, from Galen and 
Hippocrates). It is used by St. Luke, with 
irvperc^ (Luke iv. 38), and in the same sense 
in Matt. iv. 24. Lay. KaraKetirBai is used 
especially of lying in bed from sickness (see 
Mark i. 30 ; ii. 4 ; Luke v. 25 ; oh. ix. 33). It 
answers to deeumbo in Latin. Siok of fever 
and dysentery (Trvperois koI Svtrevrepltf 
avvexip-evoy). The terms here used are all 
professional ones. IlvpeT6s, in the plural, is 
of frequent occurrence in Hippocrates, Aie- 
teeus, aud Galen, but elsewhere in the New 
Testament always in the singular ; SuffEynpia, 
only found here in the New Testament, ii 
the regular technical word for a " dysen- 
tery," and is frequently in medical writers 
coupled with irvperol or irvperSs, as indi- 
cating different sta^ of the same illness. 
Laying his hands on him. So Mark xvi. 
18, " They shall lay hands on tlie sick, and 
they shall recover" (see also Matt. ix. 18; 
xix. 13, 15 ; Mark v. 23 ; vi. 5 ; vii. 32 ; viii. 
23, 25 ; Luke iv. 40 ; xui. 13 ; ch. ix. 12). It 
is also spoken of as an accompaniment of 
pray» in confirmation, ordination, etc. It 
has been remarked as curious that the two 
actions of taking up serpents and healing 
the siok by the laying on of hands should 
be in such close juxtaposition both here and 
in Mark xvi. 18. It suggests the thought 
whether Luke had seen the passage in St. 
Mark ; or whether the writer of Mark xvi. 
18 had seen ch. xxviii. 8. Or is the coin- 
cidence accidental, arising out of the facts ? 
Ver. 9.— And for so, A.V. and T.B. ; the 
rest for oOiers, A.V. ; cured for healed, A.V. 
Ver. 10.— Sailed for departed, A.V.; 
put on board for laded us with, A.V. ; tea 
needed for were necessary, A.V. Honoured 
us with many honours. Kuinoel under- 
stands this iu the sense of " gifts," " pre- 
sents," which of course their destitute con- 
dition, after losing all they had in the ship- 
wreck, would m&e very acceptable. But 
there is nothing in the words to suggest 
this meaning, and, had it been so, Luke 
would have simply stated it, as he does im- 
mediately afterwards, when he says that 
they put on board suah things aa w« 



OH. xxvm. 1— 31.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



SZl 



needed. When we saUed (ivayan^voti) ; see 
oh. xiii. 13; xvi. 11 ; xviii. 21; xi. 3, 13; 

xxL 1, 2, 4, 12, 21, and notes. It Is touch- 
ing to see the kindness of the Maltese, and 
we may hope that they had to thank God 
for light and grace and life through the 
ministry of St. Paul and his companions. 

Ver. 11.— Set eaU for departed, A.V.; 
island for isle, A.V. ; The Twin Brotheri 
for Castor and Pollux, A.V. After three 
months. At the very earliest period when 
the sailing season began after the winter. 
It would be, perhaps, about the middle of 
February, or, as Alford thinks, about March 
10. If tlie weather was fine, having so short 
a voyage befure them, they would venture 
to sail without further delay. Set sail (see 
preceding verse, note). A ship of Alexan- 
dria. Some ship, better fated than that one 
(oh. xxvii. 6) which was wrecked in St. Paul's 
Bay, which had weathered or avoided the 
gale, and probably got into the harbour of 
Valetta in good time. One would have 
thought that this ship wintering nt Malta 
on its way from Alexandria to Italy, vi& 
Sicily, would be of itself a sufficient proof 
that Melita was Malta. Which had wintered 
(TTapoKex^iliaKSTi); see ch. xxvii. 12, note. 
Whose sign was The Twin Brothers {^i6- 
(TKovpoi, in Latin the constellation Oemini). 
The twin sons of Jupiter and Leda, Castor 
and Pollux, brothers of Helena ("fratres 
HelensB, luoida sidera," Horace, ' Od.,' i. 3, 2), 
were called by the Greeks Dioscuri, the sons 
of Jove. It waa their special office to assist 
sailors in danger of shipwreck. Hence 
Horace, in the ode just quoted, prays that 
Castor and Pollux, in conjunction with other 
deities, would carry the ship in which Virgil 
sailed safe to Attica. And in Ode xii. 27, 
eto., he describes the subsidence of the 
storm, and the calming of the waves, at the 
appearance of the twin stars, of Leda's sons. 
It was, therefore, very natural to have the 
Dioscuri for the irapaarifiov, the sign of the 
ship. Every ancient ship had a irapdan/jtov, 
" a painted or carved representation of the 
sign which furnished its name on the prow, 
and at the stem a similar one of their tutelar 
deity" (Alford), which was called the tutela. 
These were sometimes the same, and perhaps 
were so in this instance. Ovid tells us that 
Minerva was the tutela of the ship in which 
he sailed, and that her painted helmet gave 
it its name (' Trist.,' i. ix. 1), Galea, or the 
like. We may notiee the continual trial 
to Jews and Christians of having to face 
idolatry in all the common actions of life. 

Ver. 12. — Touching for landing, A.V. 
Touching (KaTaxflEVrei) ; ch. xxi. 3 ; xxvii. 
S, note. The way in which Syracuse is here 
mentioned is another redundant proof that 
Melita is Malta. " Syracau^e is about eighty 
miles, a days' sail, from Malta" (Alford). 

ACTS — II. 



Tarried there three days. Perhaps wind- 
bound, or possibly having to land part of 

their cargo there. 

Ver. 13. — Made a circuit tot fetched a com- 
pats, A.V. ; arrived at for came to, A.V. ; 
o south for the south, A. V. ; sprang up for 
blew, AV. ; on the second day we came for 
vie came the next day, A.V. We made a oir- 
ouit ; nepteKBdvTes. St. Luke only uses this 
word in one other passiige, ch. xix. 13, " The 
strolling [or, 'vagabond'] Jews ;"andithaa 
the same sense of " wandering " in the only 
other passages where it occurs in the New 
Testament (1 Tim. v. 13 ; Heb. xi. 37). If 
it is the right reading here, the meaning 
must be "tacking," the wind not allowing 
them to sail in a direct course. " I am in- 
clined to suppose that the wind was north- 
west, and that they worked to windward, 
availing themselves of tlie sinuosities of the 
coast. But with this wind they could not 
proceed through the Straits of Messina. . . . 
They were, therefore, obliged to put into 
Rhugium. . . . But after one day the wind 
became fair (from the south), and on the 
following day they arrived at Puteoli, hav- 
ing accomplished about one hundred and 
eighty nautical miles in less than two days " 
(Smith, p. 156). But Meyer explains it, 
'■ after we had come round," viz. from Syra- 
cuse, round the eastern coast of Sicily. Lewin 
thinks they had to stand out to sea to catch 
the wind, and so arrived at Bhegium by a 
circuitous course. The other reading is Trepi- 
e\6i'T€s, as in ch. xxvii. 40 ; but this seems 
to give no proper sense here. A south wind 
sprang up. The force of the preposition in 
iviyevo^^vov shows that there waa a change 
of wind. The south wind would, of course, 
be a very favourable one for sailing from 
Eeggio to Puzzuoli. Hobart remarks of 
eTnyiVeirflai (which ifl also found in oh. xxviL 
27, according to some good manuscripts) that 
it " was a favourite medical word constantly 
employed to denote the coming on of an at- 
tack of illness." It occurs nowhere else in 
the New Testament, but is common in Dio- 
dorus Sicultis, Xenophon, Herodotus, Thucy- 
dides, etc., for the coming on of a storm, wind 
(adverse or favourable), or any other change. 
On the second day ; Sevrepatot. This parti- 
cular numeral occurs nowhere else in the 
New Testament, but the analogous rerap- 
Totos is used in John xi. 39. And Herodotus 
has TpiToios i^iKero, " he went away on the 
third day." TpiTotos is also common in medi- 
cal writers with wp^Tis, a tertian ague, a 
fever that recurs on the third day ; TerapToios, 
a quartan fever*, ire/iirTaTos, one recurring on 
the fifth day ; e$5ofji.aios, on the seventh day ; 
ivvaToios, on the ninth day. The forms J«- 
KaToios, TTfvTTiicoa-Taios, etc., " doing anything 
on the tenth, the fiftieth day," also occur. 
Fnteoli ; now Futzuoli. The Italian port to 



322 



THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. [oh. xivin. 1— 3L 



which ship* from Alexandria tianally came. 
Smith quotes a passage from Seneca (Epist., 
77) describing the arrival of the Alexandrian 
wheat-ships at Puteoli. The whole popu- 
lation of Futeoli went out to see them sail 
into harbour with theii topsails ^lupparwn), 
which they alone were allowed to carry, in 
order to hasten their arrival (p. 157), so 
important to Italy was the corn trade with 
Alexandria. 

Ver. 14. — Intreated{oidenred,A..Y. ; came 
to for loent toward, A.Y. Brethren. It is 
very interesting to find the gospel already 
planted in Italy. The circumstances of Pu- 
teoli as the great emporium of African 
wheat made it a likely place for Chris- 
tianity to reach, whether from Borne or from 
Alexandria (see ch. xviii. 21). Luke calls 
them aSeK<pol, not Xpummol (ch. xi. 26). 
Perhaps the name of Christian was still 
rather the name given by those without, and 
that of " brethren," or " disciples," the name 
used by the Christians among themselves. 
What a joy it must have been to Paul and 
his companions to find themselves among 
brethren 1 Seven days. Surely that they 
might take put in the service and worship 
of the next Sunday (see ch. xx. 6, 7). It is 
implied that the philanthropy of Julius (ch. 
xxvii. 3) did not now fail. So we came to Borne. 
The R.V. is undoubtedly right. We can 
trace in the anticipatory form of speech here 
used by St. Luke, simple as the words are, 
his deep sense of the transcendent interest 
of the arrival of the apostle of the Gentiles 
at the colossal capital of the heathen world. 
Yes ; after all the conspiracies of the Jews 
who sought to take away his life, after the 
two years' delay at Ceesarea, after the perils 
of that terrible shipwreck, in spite of the 
counsel of the soldiers to kill the prisoners, 
and in spite ofthe" venomous beast," — Paul 
came to Borne. The wordof God, " Thou must 
bear witness also at Borne" (ch. xxiii. 11), 
had triumphed over all " the power of the 
enemy" (Luke x. 19). And doubtless the 
hearts both of Paul and Luke beat quicker 
when they first caught sight of the city on 
the seven hills. 

Ver. 15. — The brethren, token, etc., eatne 
for when the brethren, etc., they came, A.V. ; 
The MarJcet of Appiui for Appii forum, 
A.V. The brethren, when they heard of us. 
During the seven days' stay at Puteoli, the 
news of the arrival of the illustrious con- 
fessors reached the Church at Bome. The 
vfriter of that wonderful Epistle which they 
had received some three years tefore, and 
in which he had expressed his earnest desire 
to visit them, and his hope that he should 
come to them in the fulness of the blessing 
of the gospel of Christ (Bom. i. 11, 12, 15; 
XV. 22, 24, 28 — 32), was now almost at their 
gates as a prisoner of state, and they would 



soon see him face to face. They naturally 
determined to go and meet him, to honour 
him as an apostle, and show their love to 
him as a brother. The younger anS more 
active would go as far as Appii Forum, " a 
village on the Via Appia, forty-three miles 
from Bome " (Meyer). The rest only came 
as far as The Three Taverns, ten miles nearer 
to Bome. Alford quotes a passage from 
Cicero's letters to Atticus (ii. 10), in which 
he mentions both "Appii Forum" and tlie 
"Tres Tabernse;" and refers to Josephus 
('Ant. Jud.,' xvii. xii. 1) for a similar 
account of Jews at Rome, who, on hear- 
ing of the arrival of the pretended Alex- 
ander at Puteoli, went out in a body to 
meet him (iray rb 'lovSaiwv irK^Bos {nravTi' 
dCovres i^i^fo-av). He also quotes from 
Suetonius the passage in which he tells 
us that, on Caligula's return from Germany, 
"populi Bomani sexum, setatem, ordiuem 
omnem, usque ad Vicesimum lapidem efiu- 
disse se " (' Calig.,' o. 4). Appii Forum was 
not far from the coast, and was a great place 
for sailors and innkeepers (Horace, ' Sat.,' 
i. 5, 3). The Via Appia was made by 
Appius Claudius, B.o. 442. It led from the 
Porta Capena in Bome through the Pontine 
marshes to Capua. 

Ver. 16. — Entered into for came to, A.V. 
and T.B. ; the words which follow in the 
T.B. and the A.V., the centurion delivered 
the priioneri to the captain of the guard i 
but, are omitted in the B.T. and B.V., 
tbllowing K, A, B, and many versions; 
Alford retains them, Meyer speaks doubt- 
fully ; abide for dwell, A.V. ; the soldier that 
guarded him for a soldier that k^ kim. 
A.V. The captain of the guard (A. v.); r^ 
{rTpaTOTreSdpxp '■ in Latin prafectui pruforia 
(STpari-ireSov was the Greek name for the 
castra prtetoriana). There were usually two 
great oiScers so called, and it was theii 
special duty to take charge of prisoners sent 
from the provinces to be tried at Bome. 
'VinctuB mitti ad prnfectos prsstorii mei 
debet " (Pliny, ' Epist.,' x. 65). It has been 
argued, from the mention of "the captain 
of tlie guard," that Paul's imprisonment 
must have occurred when Burrus was sole 
prefect, as related by Tacitus (' Annal.,' xii. 
42, 1), and that hence we get a precise date 
for it (so Wieseler, ' Ohronologie de Aposto- 
lisch. Geshichte '). But this can hardly be 
depended upon. Luke might speak of " the 
prefect," meaning the one to whom the 
prisoners were actually committed, just as 
we might speak of a magistrate writing to 
" the secretary of state," or an ambassador 
calling upon " the secretary of state," the 
matter in hand determining which of the 
three secretaries we meant. With ths 
soldier that guarded him. It appears from 
ver, 20 that St. Paul was subjected to the 



OH. xxvm. 1— 31.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



323 



euitodia militaris, i.e. that he was fastened 
by a single chain to a praetorian (o-TpoTiiiTrjs), 
but, as a special favour, granted probably 
on the good report of the courteous Julius, 
was allowed to dwell in his own hired house 
(ver. 30) ; see oh. xxiv. 23. 

Ver. n.—He for Paul, A.V. and T.B. ; 
cidled together those that were the chief for 
called the chief . . . together, A.V. ; I, 
brethren, though 1 had done for men and 
brethren, though I have committed, A.V. and 
T.K. ; the oustmns for customs, A.V. ; was I 
for was, A.V. After three days. He could 
but just have got into his hired house, but 
he would not lose a day in seeking out his 
brethren to speak to them of the hope of 
Israel. What marvellous activity! what 
unquenchable love I The chief (touj Sfras 
. . . upwTous). The expression ot irpayroi, for 
the principal people of the district or neigh- 
bourhood, occurs repeatedly in Josephua. 
The Jews. They had returned to Eome, 
after their banishment by Claudius (oh. 
iviii. 2), some time before this (Rom. xvi. 
3, 7). I had done nothing against the people, 
or the customs (comp. oh. xxiii. 1, 6 ; xxiv. 
14—16, 20, 21 ; xxv. 8; xxvi. 6, 7, 22, 23). 

Ver. 18. — Desired to set me at liberty for 
would have let me go, A.V. Had examined 
me {avuKpivavris /iie) ; see oh. iv. 9 ; xii. 19 ; 
xxiv. 8; xxv. 26. Desired to set me at 
liberty (see oh. xxv. 18, 19, 25; xxvi. 
31, 32). 

Ver. 19. — When the Jews spake against it. 
This is a detail not expressly mentioned 
in the direct narrative in ch. xxv., but 
which makes that narrative clearer. It 
shows us that Festus's proposal in ch. xxv. 9 
was made in consequence of the opposition 
of the Jews to the acquittal which he was 
disposed to pronounce. I was constrained 
to appeal. Nothing can be more delicate, 
more conciliatory, or more truly patriotic 
than Paul's manner of addressing the Jews. 
Himself a Hebrew of the Hebrews, devoted 
to bis kinsmen according to the flesh, never 
even putting forward his own privilege aa 
a Bomau citizen till the last necessity, be 
shows himself the constant friend of his 
own people in spite of all tlieir ill usage. TJn- 
dazzled by the splendour ot Bome and the 
power of the Boman people, his heart is 
with his own despised nation, "that they 
might be saved." He wishes to be well 
with them; he wants them to understand 
his position; he speaks to them as a kins- 
man and a brother. His appeal to Caesar 
had been of necessity — to save his life. But 
he was not going to accuse his brethren 
before the dominant race. His first desire 
was that they should be his friends, and 
share with him the hope of the gospel of 
Christ. 

Ver. TtO.—Did I intreat you to tee and to 



speak with me for have I called for you, ti 
see you, and to speak with you, A.V. ; for 
because of for because that for, A.V. To see 
and to speak with me. Meyer, followed by 
Alford, rightly prefers the rendering of the 
A.V. and the margin of the R.V. TlapaKaXta 
is here in its primary sense of calling auy 
one to come to you, and the two iniinitives 
express the object for which he called them, 
viz. to see and speak with tliem. Because 
of the hope of Israel (see ch. xxiii. 6 ; xxiv. 
14, 15, 21 ; xxvi. 6, 22, 23). I am bound 
with this chain (irepi/cei^noi). In Mark ix. 
42 and Luke xvii. 2 tlie millstone " hangs 
about " (nepiKenai) the neck. But here and 
Heb. V. 2 the construction is different, and 
tlie subject and the object are revers&l. 
Instead of the chain enoompiissing Paul, 
Paul is said to be bound with the chain. 
(For the chain, see ver. 16, note, and ch. 
xxiv. 23.) The force of this saying seems 
to be this, " I liave asked you to come to me 
because this chain wliioli binds me is not a 
token of a renegade Israelite who has come 
to Bome to accuse his nation before the 
heathen master, but of a faithful Israelite, 
who lias endured bondage rather than for- 
sake the hope of his fathers." 

Ver. 21. — From for out of, A.V. ; nor for 
neither, A.V. ; did any of the brethren eonn 
hither and report or spiak for any of tk: 
brethren that came showed or spake, A.V 
Nor did any of the brethren come hither, 
etc. This is no improvement on the A.V. ; 
for it implies that they denied that any 
special messenger had been sent to speak 
harm of Paul, which nobody could have 
thought had been done. What they meant to 
say is exactly what the A.V. makes them say, 
viz. that, neither by special letters, nor by 
message nor casual information brought by 
Jews coming to Bome from Judaea, had they 
heard any harm of him. This seems odd ; 
but as the Jews had no apparent motive for 
not speaking the truth, we must accept it 
as true. The expulsion of the Jews from 
Bome by Claudius (ch. xviii. 1) may have 
slackened the intercourse between Judeea 
and Bome ; the attention of the Jews may 
have been absorbed by their accusation of 
Felix ; there had been a very short interval 
between Paul's appeal and his departure for 
Bome; he had only been at Bome three 
days, and so it is very possible that no report 
had yet reached Bome concerning him ai 
this early season of the year. 

Ver. 22. — It is known to to for we knovt, 
A.V. We desire (a|ioC//e;/); or, ice are will- 
ing ; literally, think it right (so ch. xvi. 38). 
'H^iov, followed by a negative, means " was 
unwilling." It has this sense frequently in 
Xenophon, Mlian, Josephus, and other Greek 
writers (see Kuinoel, on oh. ivu 30). This 
sect (rijs alpiffeus TavTi)s) ; see eh. xxiv. 5, 



324 



THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES, [oh. xxvm, 1— 31 



14, notes. It is known to ns ; i.e. though we 
have heard nothing against you Paul, we 
have heard of the sect of the Nazarenes 
and have heard nothing but harm concern- 
ing it. Spoken against (avTi\€7eTai) ; see 
ch. xiii. 45 ; ver. 19 ; Bom. x. 21 ; Titus i. 9. 
It is called a " superstitio prava, maleiica, ex- 
itiabilis " (Pliny, ' Ep.,' x. 96 ; Suetonius, 
' Nero,' 16 ; Tacitus, ' Annal.,' iv. 44 ; 
' Speaker's Commentary '). 

Ver. 23. — They came to him into his lodg- 
ing in great number for there came many to 
him into hit lodging, A.V. ; expounded the 
matter for expounded, A.V. ; testifying for 
and testified, A.V. ; and persuading for per- 
suading, A.V. ; from for out of (twice), A.V. 
His lodging; {Ej/fojelsewhereonly in I^hilem. 
22. It may well be the same as the " hired 
ilwelling " in ver. 30. Expounded (i^sTiBero). 
The verb governs the accusative t^p ^ainXilav 
rov @iov, as in ch. xviii. 26, and is not 
intransitive, as in ch. xi. 4. Testifying; 
la/iapTypd/jifvos, a favourite word of St. 
Luke'i, most commonly intransitive, and 
so to be taken here. It qualifies the verb 
(sie Luke xyi. 28 ; ch. ii. 40 ; viii. 25 ; x. 
42; XX. 23; xxiii. 11). It is transitive in 
uh. XX. 21, 24 ; doubtful in ch. xviii. 5. The 
kingdom of God. The great subject-matter 
f the gospel in all its parts — grace, righteous- 
ness, glory, through Jesus Christ (see ver. 
31 and ch. xx. 25). From the Law of Moses 
and from the prophets (see Luke xxiv. 27, 
14). From morning till evening. So do the 
Jews frequent the houses of the missionaries 
to this day, and listen with great interest 
and apparent earnestness to their teaching. 

Ver. 24. — Disbelieved for believed not, 
A.V. The usual division of the hearers of 
the Word. 

Ver. 25. — Isaiah for Msaiat, A.V. ; your 
for OUT, A.V. and T.B, When they agreed 
flot ; affiix(po)voi ovTfs, only here in the New 
Testament ; but avfi^aveo), to agree, occurs 
repeatedly (Luke v. 36 ; ch. v. 9-; xv. 15 ; 
and Matthew, passim) ; also <rvfj.(pwvos and 
(Tvij.(l>d)nj<ris (1 Cor. vii. 5; 2 Cor. vi. 1.5). 
' haiiitpotvos occurs in Wisd. xviii. 10 and 
in classical writers. Probably the ilisagree- 
ment led to some altercation, and to the 
exhibition of the usual bigotry and preju- 
dice and bitter opposition on the part of 
the unbelieving Jews. They departed; 
airfKiovTo , the proper word for the break- 
ing up of an assembly (Mal^t. xiv. 15, 22, 
23; XV. 32, 39; ch. xv. 80; xix. 41, etc.). 
Well spake the Holy Ohost. Note the dis- 
tinct assertion of the inspiration of Isaiah. 
Compare the words of the Creed, " Who 
spake by the prophets ; " and for similar 
statements, see Mark xii. 36 ; Heb. iii. 7 ; 
X. 13, eto. Note also how resolutely St. 
Paul maintains his own standpoint as the 
Csithful and consistent Isra<'Iit.e in accord 



with Moses and the prophets, while his 
adversaries, with their boasted zeal for the 
Law, were really its antagonists. The atti- 
tude of the true Catholics, in protesting 
against the corruptions and perversions ol 
the Churoli of Kome, and showing that they 
are the faithful followers of Scripture and 
of apostolic tradition, and the true up- 
holders of the primitive discipline and 
doctrine of the Church, is very similar. 

Ver. 26.— Go thou for go, A.V. ; by hear- 
ing for hearing, A.V. ; in no wise for not, 
A.V. ; shall in no wise for not, A.V. Go 
thou, etc. The quotiition is all but ver- 
batim from the LXX. of Isa. vi. 9, 10. 
This particular chapter was evidently 
deemed one of great importance, since our 
Lord quotes from it (Matt. xiii. 14, 15), and 
St. Jolm (Juhn xii. 37 — 41), as well as St. 
Paul in the passage before us. By hearing 
(fiKo^). Wliy the LXX. translated j;iD»' by 
the substantive (aKo^) instead of by the parti- 
ciple (JmoiavTss), as in the precisely similar 
phrase which follows — ^Kiirovres, j8Aei//oTe 
— does not appear. The Hebrew reads, as 
it is rendered in the AV., " Hear ye, . . . 
and see ye," etc., in the imperative mood, 
not diflerino^ much in sense (in prophetical 
language) from the future. It is impossible 
to give the force in English exactly of the 
repetition of the verb in the infinitive mood 
yitte' lypi;', and \in inn by a very common 
Hebrew idiom. It is done imperfectly by 
the word "indeed." Bosenmiiller quotes 
from Demosthenes (' Contr. Aristogit.,' i.) 
the proverbial saying, 'Opatin-as uii io^v, ko) 

&KOX>OVTaS fl^l CLKoisiV. 

Ver. 27. — TJiis people's heart for the heari 
of this people, A.V. ; tliey haoe for liave they, 
A.V. ; lest haply they should perceive for lesi 
they should see, A.V. ; turn again for be con- 
verted, A.V. This people's heart, etc. So tiie 
LXX. But the Hebrew has the imperative 
form, " make fat,'' " niake heavy," ■ shut," 
in the prophetical style (comp. Jer. i. 10). 
They have closed (e/cd^ii/xuffa)'). The verb 
Kafxixiio), contracted from Kara^iuo) (ji^u, to 
close, from the action of the lips in pro- 
nouncing the sound fxv), means " to shut " or 
" clo^e " the eyes. It is I'ound repeatedly 
in tlie LXX., and, in the form KaTo^ria, in 
classical writers. The word " mystery " is 
etymologioally connected with it. The 
word here expresses the wilfulness of their 
unbelief : Ye will not come to me that ye 
might have life." 

Ver. 28. — This salvation for tki salvation, 
A.V. and T.R. ; they will also hear for and 
that they will hear it, A.V. The A.V. gives 
the sense better than the B.V. This sal- 
vation ; Tb auT-fipiov. This form, instead of 
the more common craiTripla, is found in Luke 
ii. 30 ; iii. 6 ; and Bph. vi, 17. The GentUei 
(see ch. xiii. 46 ; xviiL 6 ; ixii 26 ; utL 



ra. xxvm. 1— 31.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



32i 



17, 20, 23). But even at Eome the apostle 
of the Gentiles was faithful to the rule, 
"To the Jew first." 

Ver. 29 (A.V.). — This verse is entirely 
wanting in the R.T. and E.V. It is omitted 
in many good manuscripts ami versions. It 
is condemned by Grotius, Mill, Tischendorf, 
Lachmann, and oihors; but is not abso- 
lutely rejected by Mtyer, Alford, Phimptre, 
and others. Great reasoning {ttoWt)]/ au^-i]- 
rijo-iv) ; see oh. xv. 2, 7 ; and Luke xxii. 
23; xxiv.15; oh. vi. 9; ix. 29. The phrase 
is in St. Liike's style, and the statement 
seems necessary to complete the narrative. 

Ver. 30. — He abode for Paul dwelt, A.V. 
and T.E. ; dwelling for house, A.V. ; went for 
eame, A.V. Two whole years. Aier/a occurs 
also in oh. xxiv. 27, and Sier^s in Matt. ii. 
16; Tpieria in ch. xx. 31. These forms are 
frequent in the IjXX. His own hired dwell- 
ing; iSiif iua6(S>iiaTi, only here. The word 
properly means "hire," the price paid for 
the use of auything, and then by metonymy 
" the thing which is hired." It occurs fre- 
quently in the LXX. in the sense of " hire " 
or " wages ; " e.g. Hoa. ii. 12 ; Deut. xxiii. 18, 
etc. This may be the ^evia. spoken of in 
ver. 23, or he may have removed from tbenoe 
into some house more commodious for 
gathering Jews and Christians around him. 
Ver. 31. — The things for those things, A.V. ; 
concertiiTtg for which concern, A.V. ; bold- 
ness for eonfidence, A.V. ; ncme for no man, 
A.V. Boltoess (Trappria-ias) ; see above, oh. 
ii. 29; iv. 13, 29, 31. The verb jto^^t)- 
(n(Jfo|tioi also occurs frequently (ch. ix. 27 ; 
xiii. 4C; xiv. 3, etc.). The boldness and 
freedom with which he spake the things 
concerning the Lord Jesus Christ would 
naturally increase more and more, as he 
found himself day by day unchecked by 
enemies, and encouraged by the number 
and earnestness of his hearers. None for- 
bidding him ; aicw\iTms, only here in the 
New Testament ; but the adjective is found 
in Symmachus'a version of Job (xxxiv. 31), 
and in the LXX. of Wisd. vii. 22 ; and both 
adjective and adverb are occasionally used 
in classical Greek. But the most common 
use of the adverb is by medical writers, who 
employ it " to denote freedom, unhindered 
action, in a variety of things, such as respi- 
ration, perspiration, the pulse, the muscles, 
the members of the body" (Hobart). In 
two passages quoted from Galen ('Meth. 
Med.,' xiv. 15; 'Usus Part.,' ii. 15) the 
sentence ends, as here, with the word aKa\i- 
Tois. Some derive the word " acolyte " 
hence, from their being admitted to holy 
functions, though not in full orders. 

And so ends this lively and beautiful and 
most faithful sketch of one of the greatest 
men, and one of the greatest works, the 
world has ever seen. "In labours more 



abundant, in stripes above measure, in 
prisons more frequent, in deaths oft," is 
seen, as we read this history, to be no empty 
boast, but a simple statement of the truth. 
The springs of that mind and of that zeal 
were ever roatly to rise to fresh work, how- 
ever crushing a strain had been put upon 
them. " I count not ray life dear unto 
myself, so that I mi;j;ht finish my course 
with joy, and (he ministry which I have 
received of the Lord Jesus to testify the 
gospel of the grace of God," is the true 
description of that life as delineated by 
the beloved pliysician. And yet how re- 
markable it is that in the whole of the 
Acts there is not one single word of pane- 
gyric ! The portraiture is a bare photo- 
graph, without a single additional touch to 
enhance its beauty. Nor must we forget 
the singular brevity with which some epi- 
sodes are passed over. Had we only Luke's 
history, we should not know that the apostle 
was an author — an author whose writings 
have moved the world of mind and spirit 
more than all the writings of Plato, and 
Aristotle, and Cicero, and Bacon combined, 
through a period of eighteen hundred years. 
Thus, to glance at the " two whole years" 
with the record of which the book closes, 
think of tlie work done in that time. What 
gatherings of holy men and women within 
the walls of that " hired dwelling " are we 
sure must have taken place I Prisoa and 
Aquila, and Epsenetus, and Mary, and 
Urban, and Apelles, and Persia, and Her- 
mas, and Olympaa, and all their compeers, 
we may be sure were often there. What 
wrestlings in prayer, what expositions of the 
Scriptures, what descriptions of the king- 
dom of God, what loving exhortations, what 
sympathetic communings, must have made 
that "hired dwelling" a very Bethel in the 
stronghold of lieathenism 1 We think of the 
praetorian soldiers to whom he was succes- 
sively chained; perhaps of the courteous 
Julius ; of the Inmates of Nero's palace 
(Phil. iv. 22); perhaps of Eubulua, and 
Fudens, and Linus, and Claudia (2 Tim. iv. 
21) ; of Epaphras and Epaphroditus, and ot 
Luke, and Mark, and Timothy, and Ariat- 
archuB, and we know not how many more 
besides ; and there rises before our minds s 
crowd of agencies and sober activities di- 
rected by that master mind to the advance 
ment of the kingdom of Gk)d. We feel, 
indeed, that, though he was chained, " the 
word of God was not bound;" but that 
through the marvellous energy and unfail- 
ing wisdom of the great prisoner, his prison 
turned out rather to the furtherance of the 
gospel. And then we turn to the Epistlei 
written at this time. What a contribution 
to the literature of the kingdom of heaven I — 
i the Epistles to the Ephesiana, to the C/olo» 



i>26 



THE AOTS OP THE APOSTLES. [ch. xxvin. 1— 31 



■lona, to Pliilemon, and to the Philippiana, 
and probably muuh help given to Luke in 
the composition of the Acts of the Apoatlea. 
Truly they were two years of infinite 
moment to the Church of God. 

What followed those two years, what 
became of Paul, and what of his saintly 
biographer, we shall never know. It has 
pleased God to draw a curtain over the 
events, which we cannot penetrate. Here 
onr history ends, becanae nothing more had 



happened when it was given to the Chnroh. 
Instead of vain regrets because it reaches 
no further, let us devoutly thauk God for 
all that this book has taught us, and strive 
to show ourselves worthy members of that 
Gentile Church, whose foundation by St. 
Peter and St. Paul, and whose marvellous 
increment, through the labours of him who 
once laid it waste, has been so well set be- 
fore us in Uie Book of Taa Acts or thi 
Apostles. 



H0MILETIC8. 

V«rs. 1 — 10. — Kindneu, Genuine kindness is a pleasant thing to see by whom- 
soever and under whatsoever circumstances it is exercised. God has planted it in the 
human breast, and it is one of the distinctive attributes of man. Too often, indeed, the 
indulgence of bad passions is suffered to choke it, and rival interests to interfere with 
its action. Still, there it is, a faint reflection, it is true, of the love of God, but never- 
theless a remnant of God's image in man ; pleasant to behold, sweetening the relations 
of man with man, and capable, if allowed to exercise its rightful sway over human 
actions, of increasing to an almost infinite extent the happiness of the human race. 
Kindness shows itself, mainly, in two ways. First, in a general inclination to promote 
the well-being of others. But secondly and chiefly, in sentiments of sorrow and 
compassion for the misfortunes of others, and in active endeavours to relieve their 
sufferings and supply their want«. Such was the kindness of these simple Maltese 
peasants. They saw before them nearly three hundred persons in the extremesi 
destitution. Houseless, without food, drenched with wet from the sea and from the 
rain, without any change of raiment, shivering with cold, exhausted with fatigue, theii 
plight was most miserable. When the kind islanders saw them they were touclieri 
with their misfortunes. Nor did they rest in pitiful feelings only. They set actively 
to work to alleviate their sufferings. They opened their humble dwellings to receive 
them. They supplied them with what food they could. They helped them to dry 
their dripping clothes ; they collected fuel to kindle fires by which to warm them ; 
they gave themselves no little trouble and labour to give them every comfort within 
their reach. And what enhances the kindness is that there could be no hope of reward. 
The men whom they were helping had lost everything they possessed. Their whole 
property had gone down to the bottom of the sea. They could give nothing in return for 
what they received. All the more was the uncommon kindness which they showed them 
pure and unalloyed with selfishness. They were unconsciously obeying the precept oi 
Paul's Master, " Do good, hoping for nothing again." May we not hope that they found 
the truth of his promise, " Your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the children 
of the Highest " ? It is a great confirmation of this hope that we read in the following 
▼erses how the hand of the Lord was stretched out in signs and wonders. The miracles 
of Scripture are never useless or gratuitous displays of power. The most obvious 
purpose of those wrought in Malta was the conversion of the natives; and it is very 
pleasant to think that those kind men who were privileged to minister to the neces- 
Bities of Paul and Luke and their companions in the faith, reaped a rich and unexpected 
reward, when they learned at their mouths the blessed promises of God's grace, and 
were received into the number of the children of God through faith in Christ Jesus. 

Vera, 11 — 15. — Befreshment. What a weary time had Paul's three last years oj 
life been I Incessant fightings with his hard-hearted, virulent countrymen ; a pitiless 
stonn of hatred and persecution and false accusation raging incessantly against him ; 
trial succeeding trial, yet bringing no respite from injustice ; weary prison hours, while 
the active spirit was bound by the chain which kept him prisoner at Csesarea ; and 
then the furious tempest, and the labours and anxieties of that terrific voyage, and 
the threats of the savage soldiery, and the loss of all he had in the shipwreck, and the 
Wdships to be endured by his frail body in the cold wintry season. Save tha kindness 



tH. xxvm. 1— 8L] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. St't 

of the barbarians, there had been no rest to mind or body since he arrived at Jerusalem. 
And now his face was set towards Kome. But who could tell what awaited him there? 
He was going there as a prisoner. He was going to another trial. He was going to 
stand before Nero, with no protection but his innocence. He had countrymen at Bome. 
Would they behave towards him as his countrymen in Judsea had done ? And what 
had he to expect from the populace at Bome ? He had never seen Borne. But for a 
poor lone prisoner there was plenty in that city of blood and lust and unbounrled 
power to awaken vague fears and undefined anxieties, and to trouble the firmest spirit. 
And so he walked on toward the goal, hopes and fears perhaps struggling within him 
for the mastery. And now they were jnst arriving at AppU Forum, when, lo I a consider- 
able crowd advanced to meet him. Who could they be ? and what was their errand ? 
A moment or two soon explained it. They were brethren, Christian brethren, issuing 
from the foulness of the great heathen city in all the purity of faith and love, to come 
and greet and welcome the apostle. There, at a thousand miles from his native land, 
he was not among strangers ; he was surrounded by those who had never indeed seen 
his face, but who loved him fervently in Christ Jesus. There, in the land of idolatry, 
amidst heathen temples and every form of wickedness flourishing in that hot-bed of 
corruption, he was in the midst of saints, by whom the Name of Jesus was loved and 
adored. In that stronghold of Satan there was a chosen band not ashamed to confess 
the faith of Christ crucified, not ashamed of Paul his prisoner — a band of men to whom 
Paul's arrival was a joy and a glory, and who were come upwards of forty miles, in all 
the warmth of love and admiration, to honoiir him and welcome him, and to give him 
proof of their obedience and devotion to him. Their presence was like a bright gleam 
of sunshine upon the apostle's way. His heart leaped up in response to that welcome 
greeting. His bruised and wearied spirit revived. Love and joy and hope made 
music in his soul, and his first thought was to give CJod thanks for this refreshment. 
Then with fresh courage he went on his way like a giant refreshed with wine, ready to 
work or to suffer, to contend, to bear vitness, to preach, to travel, to write, to spend 
and be spent, to live or to die for Christ, as his heavenly Father should appoint, till the 
set time should come when all his toil would be over, and the cross would be exchanged 
for the glorious crown of righteousness and of life. 

Vers. 16 — 31. — The fall. The main feature In these concluding verses of the Acts 
of the Apostles, as it is one of the most momentous incidents in the history of God's 
dealings with mankind, is the fall of Israel from their proper place in the Church of 
God. For nearly two thousand years, if we date from the call of Abraham, this 
one family had been separated from the rest of mankind, and eventually received insti- 
tutions of such wonderful strength and vitality as to keep them separate through 
centuries of extraordinary vicissitudes, that they might be depositaries of God's great 
promise, and his witnesses in the world. But when at length the great promise made 
by God to the fathers had its fulfilment in the birth of Jesus Christ into the world, 
and the time of rest and glory to Israel would seem to have arrived, another event 
happened, also foretold by the prophets, viz. the rejection of their Messiah by an 
unbelieving and stiff-necked generation. He came to his own, and his own received 
him not. " Wlio hath believed our report?" was the prophetic announcement of this 
nnbelie£ " Hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand ; and seeing ye shall see, and 
not perceive " was the prophet's description of the gross heart of the people when the 
glad sound of the gospel should come unto them. And so now it came to pass. We 
have seen in the preceding narrative how the most gifted of men, with a profusion of 
love and eloquence and power which has never been surpassed, went about from 
country to country, and from city to city, proclaiming to his Jewish brethren the 
unsearchable riches of Christ. We have seen how everywhere to the. mass he spoke in 
vain. The blessed Word of life fell on ears dull of hearing. They resented the 
message when they should have hailed the messenger with delight. They sought to 
silence that tongue in death which spoke to them of Jesus and the resurrection. And 
now once more a chance is given them. The generous prisoner has no sooner set his 
foot in Rome than he calls to him all his fellow-countrymen. Forgiving all the wrongs 
and injuries and violence which had embittered his life, he once more fitys before them 
tke blessed news of the kingdom of Ghxi, and exhorts tiiem to enter in. The exhorts- 



828 THE ACTb OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xxvm. 1— 31 

tion is in Tain. They judge themselves unworthy of eternal life; they will not have 
God's Christ to reign over them. And so they seal their own doom. The time of theii 
fall is come — the time when the kingdom of Gk)d must he taken from them and given 
to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. But now mark the riches both of the 
wisdom and knowledge of God. See how unsearchable are his judgments, and his 
ways past tracing out. This fall of Israel, so sad in itself, so sad in relation to the great 
fathers of the house of Israel, so fatal, one would have thought, to the interests of the 
kingdom of Christ, becomes the riches of the world. From that fall emerges the great 
mystery of God, which had lain concealed through ages and generations, that the 
Gentiles should be fellow-heirs and partakers of the great Messianic promise. Through 
that fall of Israel salvation came to the breadth and length of the heathen world. " The 
salvation of God is sent unto the Gentiles," and they were ready to hear it. The light 
that had been shut up within the four walls of the commonwealth of Israel, and only 
shining as it were through the chinks and crannies of those walls, now that those walls 
were broken down lilazed forth to fill the world with its heavenly brightness. The 
voice 0^ Divine truth, of which only faint echoes had been heard outside those walls, 
now went out through all lands in all the fulness of its converting power. Now were 
the heathen given to Christ for his inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for 
his possession. The fall of Israel was become the riches of the Gentiles, and their loss 
the world's gain. But the mystery of God was not yet worked out. That had yet to 
be unfolded and shown to the world, which St. Paul told the Roman Church, " The 
gifts and calling of God are without repentance." Israel has not stumbled to his final 
fall. The eternal hand still holds him up through centuries of darkness; and the 
eternal voice will yet say to him, " Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory 
of the Lord is risen upon thee ! " The time will come, for God has spoken it, when the 
heart of stone, which denied the Lord of glory, will be exchanged for a heart of flesh, 
which will love and adore him. The time will come when the long-lost sheep will 
return to the good and loving Shepherd who is waiting to receive them, " and so all Israel 
shall be saved." How or when that promised time will come we know not. But we 
know that it will come. And when it does come it will be to the whole human race 
as life from the dead. Watch for it, ye Gentile Christians ! Watch for it, O 
ye sons of Israel 1 Pray for it, all ye that love Christ ! for it will be the day of the 
fulness of his glory, and the consummation of your bliss. 



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHOES. 

Vers. 1 — 10. — A picture of the human. In these few verses we have a graphic 
picture of some of the experiences of ovu- life and of the instincts or intuitions of our 
nature. 

I. A PICTURE OF THE HUMAN. 1. Human suffering. (1) Trouble. Doubtless the 
first sentiment on escaping death by shipwreck is intense gladness and gratitude. 
But the next is the consciousness of loss. The man who lands on the island after 
battling with the waves first congratulates himself and (if he be a devout man) thanks 
God that his life is preserved; then he realizes what ho has left behind him; and he 
soon becomes conscious of the exposure to which he is subjected — he allows himself to 
be troubled " because of the present rain, and because of the cold " (ver. 2). It is not 
shipwreck only, but many other kinds of wreck which plunge men " into the cold," 
nto adversity, into bereavement of the good which they had enjoyed. (2) Sickness 
(ver. 8). 2. Unspoiled human nature. Such is the dire effect of long-continued sin 
upon the soul, that it often happens that nearly every vestige of the goodness with 
which our Creator first endowed us disappears. As God made us, it was natural that 
we should compassionate our fellows in misery, and that we should be grateful to them 
for their help. Only too often, however, man is found pitiless and thankless. The 
shipwrecked mariner is murdered as he strikes the shore; the benefactor reaps no 
blessing, no honour for his kindness. Not so, however, here. Here was (1) jity, " the 
barbarous people showed no little kindness" (ver. 2). Here, also, was {2) gratitude 
(ver. 10). 3. An ineradicable human conviction. Underlying the conclusion to which 
these natives of Malta came (ver. 4), was the conviction, common to our kind, that 



SH. xxvin. 1— 31.J THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. «2fl 

sin merits punishment and will be overtaken by it. This is a fundamental and 
ultimate principle; we need not try to account for it or to "get behind it." It is 
BufBcient in itself; it is a conviction that comes from the Autliorof our spiritual nature, 
which will not be dislodged, which itself accounts for much that we think, say, and do— 
thkt sin deserves penalty, and sooner or later must bear it. 4. A human error, common 
to the unenlightened. A narrow mind and one unillumined by the teaching of God 
makes a great mistake in applyina; the truth just stated ; it infers that any particular 
misfortune is referable to some special sin (ver. 4 ; see John ix, 3 ; vii. 24). It also 
falls into error of a similar kind, though conducting to an opposite conclusion — it infers 
that a man who has an extraordinary escape is a special favourite of Heaven (ver. 6). 
Taught of God, we know that, while sin brings penalty, inward and circumstantial, and 
while righteousness brings Divine regard and honour, God often permits or sends 
suffering and sorrow in fatherly love for the promotion of the highest well-being (Heb. 
xii. 5 — 11). We have also here — 

II. The manifest pubsencb op the Divine. Clirist was present: 1. In th« 
person of his apostle. That teacher of truth who had been so influential a passenger 
on board ship (ch. xxvii.), and who makes himself so useful now (vers. 3, 8, 9), is there 
in his Master's Name, and on his Master's work. 2. In the exercise of benignant 
power : (1) protection from harm (ver. 5, and Mark xvi. 18) ; (2) exeioiae of healing 
power (vers. 8, 9, and Mark xvi. 18). We may learn three special lessons, (a) That 
true dignity is never above usefulness, even of the humblest kind ; a Paul may gather 
sticks in 'ame of emergency without losing honour. (6) That Christian generosity 
must not be behind native kindness, (c) I'hat bodily benefit is an admirable intro- 
duction to spiritual help. Who can doubt that Paul used the gratitude and honoui 
which he reaped (ver. 10) to find a way for the truth of Christ to the minds and hearts 
of the Maltese ?—C. 

Ver. 15. — Human kindness. A striking and touching instance is this of valuable 
human kindness. It is a positive relief to our minds to think that the faithful veteran 
soldier of Jesus Christ, bearing in his body such marks of lifelong conflict, worn with 
toil and care and suffering, having escaped from one kind of affliction and on his way 
to anotlier, met with such considerate kindness as greatly comforted and cheered him. 
The text may remind us — 

L That human kindness is a divinely implanted disposition. As God created 
as " in his own image," we were made to feel and show kindness one to another ; to 
rejoice in one another's success ; to promote one another's prosperity ; to sympathize 
with one another in sorrow; to be willing to deny ourselves, to run risks, to make 
sacrifices, to help others in their time of need. 

II. That itndeb the curse of sin it mat be eradicated from the soul ; e.g. 
pirates, wreckers, thugs, etc. 

JII. That it should be developed by constant culture. Kindness, like all othei 
graces, needs regular cultivation, or it will decline or even perish. It needs : 1. The 
nurture which comes from the utterance of truth ; the reception of right thoughts into 
the mind. 2. The strengthening which proceeds from daily illustration ; that which 
is derived from the practice of slight and simple acts of considerateness and good will. 
3. The confirmation of larger acts of self-sacrificing love ; such acts as cause trouble, 
as involve difBculty, as entail risk, as necessitate expenditure. 

IV. That it has rendered high service in the kingdom op Christ. 1. To 
the gieat King himself; for shall we not say that much of the ministry of those 
women who waited on him so kindly, and something of the attendance granted by the 
men who tendered him their aid, was the offering of human kindness rather than of 
I livine service ? Yet it was not on that account unacceptable or unserviceable. 2. To 
his apostles. Here is one instance in which human kindness greatly comforted and 
heartened a valued servant of Christ, and helped him on his useful and fruitful course. 
3. To his servants in all succeeding centuries. Who shall tell how nmch the cause of 
Christ has been furthered by the opportune kindness shown by tender hearts and 
gentle hands to those who havo been its representatives and champions? 

V. That it is an admirable thing in itself : one that is highly esteemed 
of God (Heb. xiii. 16 ; Eph. iii. 32) ; onp that is beautiful in the sight of man, that 



330 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xxviii. l-^l 



udortu the doctrine, that is to the character what the bloom is to the plant ; one that 
has a general and precious reflex influence on those that exercise and exhibit it. 

VI. That it is a blessino fob which we should be grateful to Go». Paul 
"thanked God " as well as " took courage." We have reason to thank God for human 
kindness as much as for any blessing we receive. For though this does not come as 
perceptibly from him as the sunshine and the rain, yet ultimately and actually it is 
as much his gift as' they are. Only the loving God can originate love in the human 
heart and in the human life. "God is our Sun," from whom streams every ray of 
human kindness that falls on our path and cheers our souL Let to, too, thank God for 
it, while we take courage from it. — C. 

Vers. 17 — 28. — The Christian and the Jew, Here we have the Christian and the 
Jew brought into close contact ; and there seems to have been as fair an opportunity 
•or the latter to understand and appreciate the former as could ever have beea granted. 
With calmness, with the wisdom and fulness of long study and mature experience, the 
most enlightened Christian apologist presented the case of Christianity to these men of 
the Jewish faith. We may look at — 

I. The iNTHODtroTioN. Paul felt that his position was one which was open to mis- 
understanding on the part of his fellow-countrymen, and he resolved on a free and fiill 
explanation. In this we recognize (1) his constant faithfulness ; for it was in discharge 
of his duty to his Divine Master that he sought to conciliate those who were his 
enemies ; also (2) his habitual courtesy ; for the whole strain of bis address to the 
" chief of the Jews " was suave and courteous in a high degree (vers. 17 — 20). In 
their reply (vers. 21, 22) we recognize (1) a formal impartiality combined with (2) a 
real prepossession of mind decidedly against the cause of which he was the advocate. 

II. The conference. (Vers. 23—28.) We have : 1. Christian earnestness confront- 
ing Jewish curiosity. Paul " expounded and testified the kingdom of God, persuading 
them," etc., evidently with characteristic zeal. They listened, curious and wondering 
what he had to say. " We desire to hear of thee what thou thinkest." Christian 
fervour on the one side, Jewish eagerness on the other. 2. Christian truth striving 
with Jewish prejudice. Paul marshalled his facts and his arguments, we cannot doubt, 
to the full height of his fervour and his practised ability, maintaining his plea at great 
length (ver. 23). But he spoke to men whose minds were occupied with prejudice. 
The " sect was everywhere spoken against," they said to him. They probably used 
much stronger language in speaking to one another. 3. Christian truth prevailing over 
■Jewish prejudice. But seldom do we read of men being "convinced against their will;" 
but we are glad to read here that " some believed," etc. (ver. 24). 4. But we have the 
old sad story of Jewish prejudice prevailing over Christian truth. " Some believed 
not." 5. Finally we have Christian indignation uttering itself freely (vers. 25 — 27). 
We turn to — 

III. The lessons wx gain from it. 1. That it is right for us to invite and address 
tl]e curious as well as the devout. We should summon to the sanctuary not only those 
who are wishful to worship God, but those also who are solicitous to learn what we 
have to say on any subject with which we deal. 2. That we should exert ourselves to 
present truth in all its phases and with all our force. As Paul made his appeal to the 
Law and to the prophets, and developed and illustrated his argument at full length, 
so we should present the truth as it is in Jesus Christ, in all its fulness and in all its 
force, not being satisfied until we have " declared the whole counsel of God." 3. That 
we may reasonably hope for some measure of success. We have to contend, not indeed 
with Jewish prejudice, but with human obduracy. Yet armed with Divine truth and 
aided by the Divine Spirit, we should look lor success. 4. That we need not be 
surprised at partial failure. Where apostles were hafded we may be beaten. 5. That 
the hour of rebuke sometimes comes in the ministry of Christ. 6. That one sphere 
failing, another will open to the earnest worker (ver. 28). The salvation of God is 
sent to all men, and there are those who " will hear it," if there are many who will 
not.— O. 

Vers. 30, 31. — Concerning Christ and his kingdom. " The kingdom of God," whiok 
Paul preached in his own hired house for two years, was none other than the "kingdom 



OH. xxvin. 1— 31.] THE ACTci OF THE APOSTLES. 33] 

of Christ," or the " kingdom of heaven " which Jesus announced, and concerning which 
he said so much when he was on earth (see Matt. vi. 33 ; Lulje xxii. 29 ; John xviii. 36 ; 
Matt. xiii. 24 — 50, etc.). Christ came for the purpose of establishing:, or rather re-estab- 
lishing, the kingdom of &od on earth, of reinstating the Divine Father on the throne 
of the human world. This was the end and aim of his mission ; therefore " those 
things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ" are the same things which concern " the 
kingdom of God " (text and also ver. 23). We look, then, at this kingdom — 

I. Its bpibitual sovereiontt. He has told ng with great distinctness that his king- 
dom is " not of this world." We gather from all that he said and did that it is none 
other and nothing lower than the spiritual and universal sovereignty which God, the 
Divine Father, which he himself, the Divine Saviour, would exercise over mankind ; 
the domain of righteousness and love over the willing minds, the rejoicing hearts, of a 
redeemed and regenerated world — a kingdom in which God is to be the one Sovereign, 
righteousness the only accepted law, love the pervading and prevailing spirit, joy the 
abounding and abiding issue. 

n. The conditions of citizenship. Prom a Divine point of view the condition is 
that of regeneration (John iii. 3). From that point of view which is open to us, and 
from which our action is possible, the conditions are hv/mility (Matt. v. 3 ; Luke xviii. 
17), and faith in Jesus Christ himself, " By faith ... in me " (ch. xxvi. 18 ; John 
Ti. 29, 35, 40, 53, etc.). 

IIL The charaoteeistics op its subjects. 1. Docility (Matt, xviii. 4). 2. Love 
(John xiii. 35). 3. Continued obedience to the will of Christ (John viii. 31). 4. 
Faithfulness imto suffering (Luke xvii. 20). 5. Peacefulness of spirit (Matt. t. 9; 
Kom. xiv. 17). 6. Sacred joy (Rom. v. 11 ; xiv. 17). 

IV. The method of its warfake. Its warfare is wholly spiritual (John viii. 36). 
1. It assails spiritual evils. It does battle with sin in all its forms and in all its con- 
sequences. 2. It employs spiritual weapons (2 Cor. x. 4) ; these are truth, love, faith, 
eonsistency, etc. 

V. Thb manner of its coMma. Some earthly powers come with great ostentation, 
with sound of trumpet, with announcement of herald, with " pomp and circumstance ; " 
but " the kingdom of God cometh not with observation." Se " did not strive nor cry, 
nor cause his voice to be heard in the streets," when he lived below. And now he 
comes in gospel privilege, in gracious invitation, in benignant influences, in Divine 
prompting ; not as the storm comes, but as the dew ; not in the great and strong 
wind that rends the mountains, but in the still small voice that touches the heart and 
makes all things new. 

VI. Its openness to evert bebkinq soul. If there is one thing concerning the 
" kingdom of God, or one thing which " concerns the Lord Jesus Christ " which is a 
more true and faithful saying than another, which is more valuable and precious to 
the human world than another, it is this — that the gates of that blessed kingdom stand 
open night and day, are wide open to receive the most unworthy if they will pass through 
in sincere humility and simple faith ; that the Lord Jesus Christ stands ever waiting to 
receive the heart which is looking for a Saviour from sin ; that he is not only prepared, 
but eager to welcome to his side and his service every human soul that is hungering 
after righteousness, that will accept his mercy, that will take his yoke; that unto all of 
these he will give, not only present and abiding rest, but future and everlasting joy. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 10. — Occurrences at Malta. L The hospitalitt of the heathen. The 
instinct of kindness is God-implanted in the human heart Hospitality was not so 
much a virtue in heathendom as the refusal of it a crime. So much the more must 
any "shutting up of the bowels of compassion" against the needy brother or the 
stranger be an offence against the Son of man. The great charge which he, in his 
depiction of the scene of judgment, brings against the unfaithful is the neglect of the 
common offices of love. 

II. The Christian finds everywhere a eohb. For if he carries the love of God in 
his heart, no coast can he foreign land, no colour or custom of men repel. It was a 
heathen who said, " I am a man, and nothing human is foreign to me." The Christian 
may translate the saying, " I am a follower of the Son of man, and nothing that U 
dear to him is strange to me." 



332 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [<«• ^s^^n- 1— 31 

ni. Yet he meets peril, misconsteuotion, and enmity. How quickly do thi 
open brows of hospitable kindness change into scowls and frowns as the viper fastens 
on Paul's hand I They reason he must be a murderer. Occurrences are full of effects 
without visible causes. The untrained mind makes out of coincidences chains of cause 
and efl'eot which do not exist. The aEElicted man is supposed to be a wicked man. 
In propagating Christianity we need to take the sword of the Spirit, which owes its 
briglit temper to Divine intelligence. We must meet unreason with reason, and cast 
out superstitious darkness by the clear light of all accessible knowledge. 

IV. The Christian is delivered that he mat deliver others. As Paul casts off 
the serpent harmless, he is seen to be under the Divine protection. Here is a man who 
leads apparently a charmed life. The waves could not swallow him, nor the serpent 
sting him (cf. Ps. xci. 11 ; Mark xvi. 18). The heathen mind revolts from one extreme 
of superstition to another. Now Paul must be a god ! " The common mass know no 
measure ; they raise a man to heaven or thrust him into hell " (ch. xiv. 12, 13). The 
Christian may rapidly pass from the extreme of depreciation or shame to that ol 
honour, feeling equally that he deserves neither. Yet both in the one and the other 
the business of the Christian is not to defend himself from misunderstandings, but 
"through good report and evil report," as Paul said, to go on with his work and witness, 
leaving Providence to show the kind of work the hour and the place demand. Here 
Paul is entirely devoted to the healing activity of the body. There are times of 
silence ; and the spectacle of the servant of Christ busy in doing good during his stay 
in the island may have wrought more on the memory of the people than many sermons 
would have done. — J. 

.Vers. 11 — 15. — The pas^ge from Malta to Rome. I. Blessings by the wat. Chris- 
tian fellowship is enjoyed. Unity and relationship in Jesus Christ make the unknown 
as known. The heart di^olves distance and strangeness. God has everywhere hidden 
children. The discovery of them is the discoveiy of a dear bond of brotherhood, and 
this fills the heart with joy (comp. Eom. i. 12). The coming forth of the brethren 
from Home to meet the party showed that his letter to them had not been without 
result. So he thanked God and took heart. This slight word seems to allude to a 
certain failing of heart and dejection, such as the greatest souls are liable to in critical 
moments. His lile was passed in cloud and sunshine, and the record ot both has been 
faithfully left behind. In both there is deep encouragement for us. 

II. The arrival at Eome. It was an epoch : 1. For him. His life-goal is at last 
reached. He comes, a homeless stranger, yet escorted by loving friends ; as an evil- 
doer in bonds, yet with the grace of God in his heart ; as a victim doomed to sacrifice, 
yet as a victorious conqueror, to plant the banner of the cross in the citadel of heathen- 
dom. 2. For heathendom it was a critical moment. It is the signal for the wane of its 
glory and pride. For the next three centuries it was to lead a struggling existence, until 
all that was good in it should be absorbed into the kingdom of God, and the rest be 
cast away with the refuse of time. 3. For Judaism. Paul turns for the last time to 
his people. Exclusiveness is decaying ; the priest and the doctor and their followers, 
who refuse to come to terms with Chiist, must fold their garments about them and pass 
into solitude amidst the life of civilization. Rome is to reiilace Jerusalem. 4. For 
Christianity. Sanguinary struggles await her in Rome, but in the end a glorious 
victory. — J. 

Vers. 16 — 19. — Paul and the Soman Jews. I. A final personal testimony of 
INNOCENCE. It is full of manly courage and simplicity. It was no subversive teaching 
or conduct that had brought him into his present position. No definite charge had 
ever been proved against liim. Like the Master, it was as a fulfiller, not as a destroyerj 
that he had w rought. It was for the " hope of Israel " he had suflered. Great teachers 
are always fulflUers. But because they see that truth is not stagnant, but living, they 
are accused of innovation. When we accuse others of innovation, let us ask whether 
it be not that our own garb of thought has grown old. The whole New Testament 
story is one long protest against imposing fetters on the freedom of the living spirit 
and the course of truth. 

II, A FINAL CONFESSION. Of Jesus as the Messiah. And a final argument with hj» 



OH. xxvin. 1—31.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 833 

countrymen. To point back to Moses and the prophets in evidence of this was to 
show that the doctrine of the cross and the resurrection was the fulfilment and con- 
summation of the ancient faith of Israel. But this was no cold statement, no per- 
functory statement. From morning till evening Paul laboured with his countrymen's 
souls. Men are never weary of speaking of that of which their hearts are full. It is 
not the argumentative side of Christian truth on which every preacher or teacher can 
awell. But whatever be the aspect of truth and life he conceives with force and 
which possesses his soul, let him speak and not be weary. The result will be the same 
as with Paul, and cannot be expected otherwise. Some will be persuarled, others will 
disbelieve. The clear expression of any positive truth will be echoed in assent and 
resisted in negation. Perhaps we can never be sure that we have spoken the truth 
until we have met opposition. 

III. Final effusion of lovb. He addresses them as brethren, and after telling 
them of the enmity and persecution he had experienced at the hands of their fathers 
in Palestine, he still knocks once more at the door of their hearts. The prophetic words 
of his close are full of a solemn pathos. The audience, disunited, falls to two sections. 
It is not that division begins with the preaching of the gospel, but the hidden disunion 
of the heart is brought to light. The sun does not produce difference, but only 
reveals difference, which could not be recognized in darkness. Hardness of heart is 
both a natural consequence of contempt of the truth, and a Divine judgment upon it. 
But the aurora of the future shines brightly against this dark background of Israel's 
rejection. No sin, no ingratitude of man, can dim the splendour of that eternal heaven 
of grace. If the Jews will not come to the great supper of God, the Gentiles shall 
fill his house. — J. 

Vers. 30, 31. — Paul's preaching at Rome. L It was a i'ctlfilmbnt at A. pbomisb. 
(Ch. ix. 15.) 

II. It was A PEOPHBCY OF THE FTTTOEB. Long has the world been ruled from Eome ; 
chough often through corrupt forms, the Spirit of Christ has gone forth from her to heal 
and to civilize. Slowly the dominion of Rome must melt to give place to the idea 
which she has reiiresented — the world-wide dominion of the kingdom of God. 

III. It was the realization of the prbacheb's ideal. 1. There is a welcome for 
all. Nothing inaccessible, forbidding, hard to approach, should be in the preacher's 
manner. No " stand aside, for I am holier than thou 1" He must make men feel that 
hs has no reserves, no keejjing back of anything they ought to know, no half-truths; 
that they are welcome fully lo all the best of head and heart. He must not deal with 
people as sinners beneath him, but as his fellows, as man with men. 2. There is lold- 
ness of utterance. Farrhesia, the last word but one of the book. Without this, the 
preacher is nerveless and inelieotive. If he fears his audience, fears public opinion, 
fears himself, he is undone. The pulpit is the post for a biave man, not less than the 
sentinel's in war-time. "The hour is regal when he mounts on guard." Cowardice 
may be fatal to himself and others. Self-surrender to God, like that of Paul, is the 
secret of the freedom of the preacher. 3. Unfettered e-jternal liberty. These were, 
perhaps, the happiest years of his lile. " Unhindered " (akolutos) — this is the last word 
of the book. How shall the preacher excuse himself, if in a free country, with every 
encouragement to free speech, he fails to utter himself and his message, and declare, so 
far as he understands it, the whole counsel of God ? When shall men feel that the 
Jesus Christ is the Friend of all men, and that his Church is their home ? When, for 
one thing, his ministers rise to the ideal of their high calling as it is illustrated in 
this final scene of the book — Paul the teacher and preacher at Rome. — J. 

Vers. 1—6. — The instability of ignorance, and the stability of the^ true Christian, 
Tl e whole circumstance an apt illusiration of the spiritual forces working in the midst 
of the natural. The shipwrecked company. Paul active in helping. The barbarians 
better than those who abused Divine blessings like the Jews, who violated Divine 
order like the Romans ; but, though actuated by kindness, easily led away by super- 
stition and ignorant (irejudice. 

I. The insufficiency of natural instincts. 1. Justice easily perverted, becausa 
misapplied. 2. The wonders of the material world both misunderstood aad mis- 



334 THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xxvm. 1— 3L 

employed. 3. Eeactions, both intellectual and moral, the curse of the world. 
Irrational depreciation and irrational homage side by side. The world's hero-worship 
a sad comment on its fickleness and blindness. Aut Deus aut diabolus. We want 
some true guiding principles which religion alone furnishes. 

II. The strength which rests on God. 1. Calm in danger, because confident ot 
Divine approval and mission. ,The records of missionary heroism supply many such 
facts. As much as possible we should cherish the same spirit in common life. True 
presence of mind the growth of moral strength. 2. He that is full of the Spirit of Grod 
will shake off vipers into the fire. The viper of detraction and calumny. The vipei 
of personal animosity. The viper of worldly solicitation. The viper of devouring 
anxieties and cares. If we are doing God's work, he will preserve us. And the world 
which at first has misunderstood and injured us will sweep round in its thoughts, and 
do us honour as God's servants. — R. 

Vera. 7 — 10. — " The healing of the nations." The mission of "Christianity to heal 
both body and soul. The powerful appeal which can be made through gratitude. 
The necessity of a prayerful spirit in the exercise of the gifts bestowed. 

I. Lessons on the work op the Christian messenger. 1. Personal character a 
great power in the ministration of truth. " They said he was a god." We must make 
a way for ourselves to men's hearts. 2. Benevolent works an introduction for the 
gospel. " The rest came." 3. The chief men should be won — not merely the lower 
classes. The unconverted rulers and rich have sorrows in their homes. We may reach 
them through their family affections. 

II. The spiritual healing op the world is the hope of its putubb. 1. A 
retrospect of the beneficeut influence of Christianity on the life of man. 2. A contrast 
boiween the method of the gospel and the pretentious but powerless schemes of 
•ooialists and political and scientific enthusiasts. 3. The works of Christ affect the mass 
through the individual. Multitudinism is delusion. But the mass of the Christian 
Church must be aggressive on the mass of the world. — R. 

Ver. 15. — The break in the clouds. " He thanked God, and took courage." Review 
of the apostolic history. The word of God iulfilled. The varied emotions of the 
ambassador's heart, personal in view of his work, in anticipation of the results of the 
future in Rome. The gospel at the gates of the empire. Spiritual power before worldly 
power. 

I. The study op providence a help to the development of Christian character and 
life. 1. It promotes thankfulness. 2. It confirms faith. 3. It draws Christiana 
nearer to one another, as they rejoice together. 4. It prepares for work and suffering. 
Paul needed all the courage he could take. 

II. The use we should make of our opportunities. 1. Not to " rest and be 
thankful," but to press on for the prize. The prosperous times of the Church, as of the 
individual, often precede great trials. Paul is outside Rome, but he is not out of danger. 

2. The opportunity of renewed intercourse with brethren and revived life in the 
Church, for higher testimony. Help each other to be strong. — R. 

Ver. 22. — The reproach which must he home. " As concerning this sect," etc. 
The disciples of Jesus supported by his example. " Despised and rejected of men." 
The tendency of human thought and life to atagnate. The strength of vested interests. 
To be spoken against tries faith, but strengtliens principle. Individually, socially, the 
reproach of Christ must be borne. 

I. The judgment op the world by the manifestation of the truth. 1. The doctrine 
of Christ unwelcome. 2. The prejudices of party an obstacle to the spread of truth. 

3. The victories of the gospel obtained by the grace of God. 

n. The discipline of disciplbship. 1. Healthy. 2. Temporary. Reactions to be 
reckoned for. Hold on, and the world speaks as much for, as once against. 3. The 
life which survives the oppositions of pride and the misrepresentations of enmity is 
trained to a larger sphere. The sect spoken against became the orthodoxy of the 
fiture. The first enemies of Christianity were the Jews, but the opposition of unbelief 
was overruled to the greater victories of truth. So now the time of transition ia severe 



OH. xxTiu. 1— 31.] THE A0T8 OP THE APOSTLEa 335 

discipline, but it will be followed by a time of splendid triumph when the messengers 
have been prepared for it. — ^R. 

Ver. 23. — The Christian advocate putting forth hi* plea*. " Persuading them con- 
cerning Jesus." Importance of the crisis. Jerusalem. Rome. A few years, and 
Jerusalem destroyed, Judaism brouglit Paul in fetters to Rome. The old Jerusalem 
and the new Jerusalem struggling together. Brief notice of Paul's labours at Rome, 
and then the book closes. Significant of the fact that the new dispensation was 
inaugurated. Peculiar population of Rome, representative of the cosmopolitan Roman 
empire, a fitting ground for the gospel to be sown in. 

L The matter op the message. " Concerning Jesus." (Compare the Epistles to the 
Romans and Hebrews.) 1. The righteousness of God set forth, instead of man's right- 
eousness. 2. The priestly office of Christ abolishing ritualism, and opening the gates of 
the spiritual temple. 3. Jesus the promised King, the Lifter-up of the fallen people, 
the Desire of all nations, the Renovator of the world. Compare with such a setting 
forth of Jesus, the state of the Jews and Romans, in faith, worship, and hope, both in 
the individual and in society, both for time and for eternity. 

11. The method adopted by the messenger. Persuasion. 1. The written Word o/ 
Ood the basis. The Old and the New Testaments harmonized. Faith is an outcome 
of faith : " Ye believe in God, believe also in me." 2, Personal testimony. " I am a 
Christian ; be such as I am." True persuasion is personal. We must aim at the heart, 
and not merely at the intellect ; and the heart must direct the aim. 3. Those that 
would persuade must be prepared to use none but spiritual means. Neither sensational 
excitement, nor ritualistic seductions, nor corrupt appeals to lower natures, are per- 
missible to the Christian advocate. Let truth win its victory. — R. 

Ver. 24. — The Word of God trying the hearts of men. " And some believed," etc. 
The end of »11 preaching is practical faith. Not sentiment. Not mere intellectual 
change. Illustrate from those who listened to Paul. What faith involved to a Jew, 
to a heathen. The alternative, not indifference, not neutrality, but "disbelief" 
(Revised Version), exemplified in the opposition of Jews. Moral responsibility for 
faith, as seen in the light of the Old Testament view (vers. 26, 27). Resistance to the 
Spirit a moral perversion and hardening. 

L God's Spirit works by means op human aqbnot. 1. The truth is presented to 
the heart, notwithstanding infirmities of method and manner. 2. The external minis- 
tration corresponds to the internal work of grace. 3. The essential point in all pj eaching 
is the presentation of an object of faith. Jesus. 

II. TnoBE WHO listen to the Word op God are tried by it. 1. The broad dis- 
tinction between acceptance and rejection of Christ. The heart which moves towards 
the Saviour is changed. 2. No compromise in the final result, though hearts may 
deceive themselves. By faith we stand. 3. While there is the opportunity of hearing, 
there is hope of turning the unbelief into faith. God's people must never take it for 
granted that any are beyond reach. They hear not as they might hear. 4. The oppor- 
tunity may be itself decisive. " Now is the accepted time." — R. 

Vers. 30, 31. — The watchman upon the walls of Jerusalem. " And he abode two 
whole years," etc. The last look at Paul significant of the future. The kingdom of 
God traced in Acts from the old Jerusalem to Rome. The apostle of the Gentiles left 
at his work, soon to seal it with his blood. Pauline Christianity in its relation to the 
spread of the kingdom. No one taught better " the things concerning the Lord Jesus 
Christ." 

I. An example op individual devotedness. The value of such a witness to the 
early Church. 1. All his strength derived from Christ, 2. All his life given to 
service. 3. The character of the man opened for him the way of his ministry. He 
lono'ed to be at Rome, and at Rome be fulfilled his own ideal of the Christian mes- 
senger. 

U. A WONDERFUL illustration OF ovBRBULiNa providence. The prophecy fulfilled . 
The restraint of enemies. The provision of opportunities. The sustenance of physica, 
tad moral strength. The preparation of the man for his post. The intellectual 



33« THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xxvni. 1— 13. 

training and world-wide experience all employed, A post is fitted for each, and each ii 
fitted for his post. 

III. A BiQNinoAiJT FACT IN THB wobld's HISTORY. The Hiost momentous facts not 
always those which appear most startliug. The palace of the C»aars beside the hired 
house of the apostle. The world then would have despised the day of small things. A 
germ of new life in the old corruption. The gospel wins its triumphs by simple methods. 
The Acts of the Apostles are greater in the history of the world than the annals of 
Ba>me. The kingdom of Gk>d has come, ia coming, shall come. May we say in heart 
and life, " Thy kingdom come " I — ^B. 

Vers. 1 — 6.—^ strong fa/iMly likenea. This short episode ia. In its proportion, as 
refreshing to the reader as to those who played the actual part in it. It is the oasis of 
narrative. It reads like a brief parable of the human heart. Or we may he impressed 
by it, as by some portrait, which presents to our view features with which we seem to 
be very familiar, and half hiding, half revealing a likeness to some one well known. 
They are the features that " half conceal and half reveal " the likeness of the human 
heart. And throughout the family of human heart, very strong indeed is the family 
likeness, above what can be found anywhere else. Notice these features, so characteristic 
nfit. 

L Its kindnisbb. 1, The heart loves kindness — to receive it. 2. The heart loves 
kindness — to do it. Both of these are deep facts of the heart, and speak not obscurely 
him who made it. 3. The kindness that is in the heart is touched towards bodily want, 
cold, hunger, thirst, shelterless exposure ; and this tells the tale of all the rest (Matt. 
XXV. 85—45). 4. The kindness of the heart contravenes in human life the bare action 
of the principle of natural selection ; it tempers it with irrestibly modifying and Irre- 
sistibly elevating moral influences; it determines and regulates in a way all its own " the 
survival of the fittest," and it is the thing on earth likest what is habitual in heaven ! 
5. The kindness of the human heart is found everywhere, and in every aire of the world. 

IL Its bupeestition. 1. The superstition that is so often betrayed by the human 
heart is an unerring sign of the sense of Ood and the instinct of the infinite present in it. 
2. It means that sense unguided, that instinct baffled. 3. It evidences deep conviction 
of moral distinctions inside man, and of presiding moral judgments outside men, and 
authoritative over them, all unfed as these may be from truth's own springs, and 
unpointed to their infinitely worthy objects. 4. It is a constant rehearsal of judgment 
to come. 

III. Its swiftness to tdbn. Hence come (1) the worse uses of such versatility and 
such swiftness, fickleness, and caprice, and waywardness, and love of mere variety ; but 
(2) the better uses, readiness to forgive, swiftness to ruu and even meet the returning 
prodigal; (3) the thoroughness of contrition and conversion, that need but a moment- 
like those of Paul himself ; and (4) the power to recover, after sorest stricken griefs, and 
most fearful storms of sorrow or ot passion. 

IV. Its addictedness to extremes. The people of Melita began with simplest, 
most unaffected kindness. They saw no instructing proviiience, but when the occasion 
came superstition filled their heart, and Paul is " no doubt a murderer, whom vengeance 
sufifereth not to live, though he hath escaped the sea." This is their short and summary 
theology. But it is not altogether so stiff and unopen to conviction. They are changed 
to the opposite pole when they find, "after a great while," i.e. what seemed a great 
while for eyes fixed in one direction, but which was indeed a very little while, that 
vengeance does not make an end to the life of Paul. And from a pursued murderer, 
they exalt him to the skies of the gods I Happy if the history of every erring heart had 
as much of the kindness as was here, and no more of the error and the mischief and 
the disaster tlian were here. Kindness began the scene, and, when fear clouded it 
over awhile, the last " change of mind " was not from bettor to worse, but from worse 
to better. Yet still how mournfully plain it is that nature's light alone, leaves the 
larharian I For so he must be called justly who exalts the child of God into a god 
himselt — B. 

Vers. 7 — 10. — A type of the heneflceni action of Christianity. Christian truth 
emboilied in (Ihristian men had not long been in an ialand to which it was quite sttange 



OH. XSTOI. 1— 31.J THE ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. ' 337 

before it found its footing, made its mark, and left behind it memories equally lasting 
and fragrant. Amid the wide group of suggestions offered by these verses, we may 
especially note the following as particularly worthy of a place in connection with this 
history : — 

I. Thb watchfulness op the Master oveb his servants to be well trusted. 
God had guided Paul and his companions, after a fierce voyage at all events, to a safe 
haven at last. But here also they found, (1) in common with all the comiiany, for very 
humanity's sake, kindness, and " no common kindness " either ; and (2) they found 
also for themselves honoured and distinguished entertainment. How often sinco has 
this been seen true I What kindness, what entertainment, has been heartily given to 
men as the servants of Christ, which nothing else personal to themselves would have 
either earned for them or entitled them to I 

II. The enoouraqbment to kindness of heart and of act that Christianity 
promotes. Publius showed kindness, doubtless not imagining any reward for himself. 
But most surely he received abundant recompense of reward. The prospect of any 
such return undoubtedly is not to be waited for or reckoned upon, but the bountiful 
hand of Jesus, whose generosity will never be outdone, ought to be noted. Generous, 
indeed, are the acknowledgments of Christianity. It repays kindness of heart and kind- 
ness of act with an inner satisfaction and with a practical beneficence " heaped up and 
flowing over," yea, a thousandfold. 

III. How surely, essentially, it libs in Christian work to spread. It might 
be uttered as a taunt against Christian action, or at all events against this illustration of 
it, that the benefits were those of miraculous help to the body. But the taunt would 
be most unjust, for if there be one thing plainly written on the historic pages of Chris- 
tianity now these eighteen centuries, it is this, that wherever its works are found — not 
simply its profession — life and inquiry and devotion are found. Whenever souls are 
being save^ and wherever, there and then are found a life and spirit of inquiry and— 
the multitude athirst. 

IV. How DEEPLY IT SEEMS TO LIE IN THE GENIUS OF ChRISTIANTTY TO EVOKE 
GRATITUDE OF THE LARGEST AND STRONGEST AND MOST PRACTIOAL. It iS quitC true that 

there is " all the world's " difference between the blessings that Christianity gives and 
the returns that it receives from those most deeply, truly, touched by it. Yet none 
the less is it true that, when these bring of their best, though that best may be far as 
earth below heaven, it is to be accepted as a true testimony of their gratitude, " well 
pleasing to God." For what Paul had done the islanders returned " many honours," 
and actually " laded him with such things as were necessary." 

V. How GREAT A PRACTICAL ADVANTAGE IT IS TO ANY GROUP OR COMMUNITY OP 
PERSONS TO HAVE AMONG THEIR NUMBER ONE OB TWO OF THE REAL CHRISTIAN STAMP. 

Pi obably the special reference of ver. 10 is to Paul and his immediate colldborateurs, 
who had lodged with him at the house of Publius, and had come to be known as 
particularly belonging to him, as he taught or worked miracles among the^ people. Yet, 
at any rate, we are certainly not told of a single thing these said or did, till we are 
told how they came in for a share of all the bountiful, generous things given by the 
islanders, " Who also honoured us with many honours ; and when we departed, laded 
US with such things as were necessary." There were none ever in the company of Jesus 
but had the opportunity of taking infinite advantage from it. And there are none in 
'ihe company of the thorough, honest uncompromising servant of Christ, but get some 
share of the advantage. — B. 

Ver. 14. — A week with Irethrkn. It cannot be that this one verse was written for 
nothing. Like a waif and stray on the wide waters of Scripture, to the careless eye, it 
is anything but really such. We may notice touching the events the verse records — 

I. Their particular significance on this occasion. 1. They included the heighten- 
ing pleasure of a very agreeable surprise. 2. ITiey speak the affection of ahearty invita- 
tion. Invitations are often as superficial and insincere and abased to ill purpose as 
many other good things. But the genius of them is good. They mean care and 
regard, respect and love, willinghood and an anticipation of what may be in brethren's 
hearts. 3. They are timed with a certain sacred hue. Did not a " seven days'" press* 
ing invitation mean to make sure of one " day of the Lord " together ? Those who gave 
ACTS — n. • 



838 THE AOTS OF THE APOSTLES. L«H. zxnn. 1— 8L 

that invitation longed for the opportunity it would bring for themselvea and others. 
They wanted what the memory of it would give them to lay up as though " precious 
itore." Those who received that invitation would read respect to themselvea in it, and 
what was better, the sign of religious life and love. 4. They were a most welcome con- 
trast to the scenes and the dangers, the strife and the talk and the company of all the 
time since Paul and his companions set sail from Gaesarea (ch. xxvii. 1). 

II. Thbib BTANDiNa AND LASTINO SIGNIFICANCE. They tell of the loving, longing, 
purposing communion, of brethren. They stamp the genuineness and even superior sort 
of Ghristian brotherhood. The communion of Christian brethren is : 1. Distinctly 
honouring to the Master, even him who himself once said, " One is your Master, even 
Christ, and all ye are brethren " (Matt. xxiiL 8). 2. It is distinctly adapted to be use- 
ful at the time to those brethren themselves, for reminding them of the relation of all 
of them to One ; and of their mutual relations ; for comparing experiences, for impart- 
ing instruction, for joining in the quickening exercises of united worship, so stirring to 
deepest feelings of the heart, and so stimulating to faith and love. 3. It is, further, in 
one particular direction specially inspiring. While by nature it takes out the painfulness 
of many a strong present impression, it also supersedes these by the materials and the 
very scenery, which are sure to abide, full of the resources of comfort and encouragement 
for " the future distress." How much we live on memory 1 What a force holy memories 
have proved themselves 1 Those that have come out of the silence and the solitude of 
tbe closet have had their peculiar mission. Certainly not less powerful for good have 
those holy memories been which have seemed to come borne by " a cloud of witnesses," 
the former companions of our thoughts, our prayers, and our praises. 4. It is entitled 
to expect special influences from above, and the special presence of the Holy Spirit (ch. 
i. 4; ii. 1). Those who meeting together seek by all means within their reach and by 
prayer, light, and knowledge, love and grace, will be those most abundantly rewarded. 
Light will be reflected from face to face, and love will glow from heart to heart. It ia 
not vainly added, " So we went toward Eome." The weeks, the days, the hours, were 
numbered of Christian converse for Paul — of Christian help and enjoyment, whether 
given or received. And the surprise the Master had graciously prepared is gratefully 
received. It assists Paul, body, mind, and soul, in his journey " toward Borne." — B. 

Ver. 15. — Oratitude and courage well KnTeed together. Paul speaks elsewhere of the 
severity in some sort, at all events of the stress, laid upon his spiritual sympathies at 
times (2 Cor. xi. 28-— 30). We can well understand that any severity, any pain, felt 
from the claim set up by such sympathies lay not iu the act of sympathizing, but in 
the consideration of the state of things, the sins, the errors, the inconsistencies in " all 
the Churches," or in the members of them that called for both " care," on the one hand, 
for the erring, and on the other sympathy with the aggrieved. The sympathy which 
he so ungiudgingly gave, however, at whatever expenditure, he had a wonderful heart to 
receive when profiered to himself. And it is among the signs of his large and susceptible 
heart that it was so, and that he made so much of it. Here we read of another help 
of tills kind given him by the way. How gratefully and with what appreciation he 
received it 1 He felt it was a token of the Divine presence and the Divine goodness, 
and that as such it must be used and improved. Therefore first he " thanked God," 
and then " took courage " afiresh. Let us notice the following implications of this 
verse : — 

I. The highest style of Cheistian pubpose and entebpbise is aided by human 
SYMPATHY. 1. This is great testimony to the fnor<i/?cta2 character of Christianity. 2. 
It is one of its great safeguards against superciliousness and other temptations to aflect 
separateness from or superiority to ordinary humanity. 

n. The simplest style of snowma sympathy and kindness steikks home all 

AS BUBBLY TO THE HBABTS OF TUB GBEATE8T AS TO THOSE OF THE HUMBLEE. 

III. GbATITUDE IB ALWAYS DUB TO GoD, WHO, HOLDING ALL HEARTS IN HIB HAND, 
MOVES NOW THE HEAETS OF THOSE WHO SHALL COME TO GIVE US SPECIAL HELP FOR 

SPECIAL NEED. 1. How often help coming at the exact crisis of need ought to count 
with all as great moral force as a physical miracle, for our persuasion, that a heavenly 
Friend is observantly and graciously watching our every step I 2. What an incentive to 
religious life the network of hope and fear, juy and sorrow, and all the play of liglit and 



«». xxvin. 1— 81.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 338 

shade, liecanae such constitntion of life finds the prized opportunities of Divine inter- 
position, as no mere equable life, were it all light or all shade, could possibly find. 

IV. Thk faithful sebvant of Chbist kevbr more feels how due thanks abi 
TO HIS Master than when that Master appears to show his own commandino 
nsTBBEST IN HIS OWN WORK. How many tbe ways are in which Jesus does this ! 
1. By the occasional manifest blessing upon it that he gives. 2. By the Spirit he puts 
into the hearts of many to uphold the hands and arms of those who do the actual 
work. 3. By such more delicate methods as that now before us, when the help that 
the many bring to the one is seen, ay, and felt, to lie in the life and the love that the 
Divine work has wrought in their heart. They can bring nothing except, perhaps, that 
all to bring, themselves. 

V. That the beal thing, oouraoe, which dobs not burn down, awakened 

THOUGH IT MAT BE BY HUMAN AID AND SYMPATHY, BESTS EVER STILL ON THE DiVINE. 

It was not in obedience to any hollow professionalism that Paul " thanked God." 
Nor did his courage lack the energy that came from sincere acknowledgment of 
dependence on God. This was surely betokened by his " thanking God." — B. 

Vers. 16 — 23. — A unique prisoner. With the masterliness of inspired history, 
exceeding brevity itself in the passage before us seems to reveal rather than conceal. 
A few powerful strokes of the pen portray and very strikingly a hero, and one at the 
same time as real and unusual as ever lived. Great, indeed, must have been the length 
and the fulness of detail given, if the method of detail had been the one chosen, in 
order to attain the result of leaving with us an equally correct and complete appre- 
hension of the position of Paul now, the manner of man he was, and the scope of 
Divine providence. The intense interest for Paul of reaching Borne is lost, lost indeed 
without a moment's mention of it on the part of the history, in the intenser interest 
that gathered round, and which he helped to make gather round, the object of his 
coming there. Of the one the history says nothing, but it says all of the other. And 
no sooner are we told the bare fact that Paul had reached Bome, than these following 
facts find prominent mention. We are told — 

I. That the pbisoneb is not put into the prison. 1. No one there wanted to 
put him in. He had found favour too certainly already. 2. There was no need to put 
him in. His word could be trusted, and " one soldier " was considered enough to save 
appearances. 3. Prisons and "jailors" and authorities had already had too much of 
having him and others of the same sort in prison (ch. v. 19 ; xii. 8 ; xvi. 26), in 
Judsea ; and perhaps, for the present at all events, the Bomans and even the Jews in 
Borne were wiser for their own interest. 

II. That fob the accused there abb found no acousbrs at all. 

III. That the man who is to be tried is dbiven to endbavoub to find 

ANOTHEB SOET OF JURY, AND ONB OF THE MORE UNMERCIFUL KIND, FOR HIMSELF. 

IV. That the same man is not only speedily relieved from any imputation 

OF fault, BUT IS COURTEOUSLY ASKED FOR HIS GOSPEL, BY THIS LARGE AND INFLU- 
ENTIAL JURY. " A great door and effectual " was now at once opened for the apostle. 
His Lord's promises and his own heart's deepest wishes begin to be fulfilled (ch. xxiii. 11). 
With abounding zeal Paul uses his opportunity ; he draws from aU " the Scriptures ; " 
he testifies " from morning till evening ; " he interests his hearers, is the means of the 
conversion of some, and the awakener of much inquiry and " great reasonings " among 
others. Nor withholds the faithful and searching rebuke. It is again "the whole 
counsel of God " which he does not shun to declare. — B. 

Yer. 24. — The leading results foUoteing upon preaching. As Jesus went before 
us all, in our sorrows, difficulties, and holiest joys, so, even if in less degree, his first 
apostles went before us in very many eiperifinces of the first preaching of the gospel 
with which we are now perfectly well acquainted. The successes and the bitter disap- 
pointments of the Christian preacher are at this very time keenly felt by Paul, and 
other of the solemn phenomena lie open before him, and observed by him evidently 
with very pained observation, were treated by him in a way full of instruction for our- 
selves. The short but speaking comment of this verse, on Paul's first preaching of the 
gospel uf Christ in Rome, though no doubt on this occasion almost exclusively to hii 



no THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. [oh. xxTm. 1— 8L 

own people' the Jews, is exceedingly worthy of oar notice. We may notice theie 
typical effects of the gospel of Christ fiiiithfully preached. 

I. It excites the stib of life. 

IL It exoites a fecttliab kind of btib of life. It is not the life of mind dlon*. 
It is not like the interest that gathers quickly round the finest discoveries and investi- 
gatings of science. It has another unmistakable element, and one that refuses to be 
at all ignored, a certain moral element. Very quickly does it beg to be informed 
whether men "believe" or do "not believe." And it states that on this everything 
turns. 

III. It exhibits invabiablt (?) amid gbbat vaeibties in otheb eespbotb one 

UlUFOBM PHENOMENON — SOME TAKE IT, OTHERS BEFUSE IT. It is then that the 

Christian preacher, and the Christian man whoever he is, stands in the presence of the 
grandest, deepest, most inscrutable mystery beneath the sun — this, that the gospel of 
God's love in Christ presumably to be eagerly and intelligently seized by every man, 
sooner than the bread on which he feeds, is taken by some, is rejected by others, 
•* Some believed . . . and some believed not 1 " — B. 

Vers. 80, 31. — A type and a model of the Christian precKher. These striking, 
closing words of a history, than which, take it all in all, there is not a more 
impressive to be found — always excepting the one history — show the performing in 
right earnest of the parting injunction of the ascending Lord of the Church. For 
Home is the scene, that metropolis and type of the world. "All" the various 
inhabitants of it, not Jews only, are now both sought and found. To these "the 
gospel " is preached. And the crucified but now risen Lord is the one central thema 
We have, therefore, in Paul, at this most touching, most amazing episode of his career, 
a living example, and " by the grace of God " a truly worthy example, of " the 
faithful fulfilling " of the work belonging to the minister of Christ. These are the 
leading marks of him, as here instanced. 

I. He has a voice and HEABT fob all whom he can beach ACCOBDINa TO TH« 
OIECOTISTANCBS IN WHICH HE MAT BE PLACED OF PbOVIDKNOB. Paul cannot nOW gO 

out to the highways and byvvays. But " his own hired house'' is one kept, as very 
few others are kept in any analogous circumstances, with open doors. And doors 
open impartially to " all " who would come. 

IL He dobs not feel that he has ant tbuth to make, ob even to dibcotbb, 
BUT ONLT TO PROCLAIM. 1. His message is to his hand. He has discovered its sum 
and substance long ago. He keeps to tins theme. 2. This is his forte. And he does 
not profess another. The mind of the Christian preacher is abundantly open to any, 
or, if possible, to all, " arts and sciences and philosophies ;" but these are not his sterling 
coin. They are not the matters for the pronounced deliverances of his voice. He 
may be beholden to them in his education, and it is a shame if he is not. He may lay 
them under any amoimt of contribution for purposes of illustration. But they are 
not the subject-matter of his preaching and teaching. 

IIL He pboolaims with an uNusnAL cbrtaintt of bound, even with boldness. 
This is the more remarkable, because (1) What he has to say is not that for which 
there is at first any very largespread desire. (2) It is what is sure to be rejected by 
many contemptuously, by other many indifferently, while it will stir strong oppo- 
sition In the heart and in the action of not a few. But, on the other hand, the clear 
ring of his voice and the unstammering declaration of his thoughts result irom : (1) 
Strong personal convictions as to what he proclaims. (2) Determined personal attach 
ment to it. (3) The spirit of loyal fidelity to it — that be it what it may, in the 
esteem of a thousand to one, yet he will lay it open before all as its due. It shall not 
suffer prejudice from suppression or from a timid partial disclosure of it. (4) Honest 
and not merely boastful upliftedness above regard to the personal consequences to self. 
The genuine preacher of the truth of Christ is not, indeed, to hold his life in his own 
hand, but he is " rather " to hold this— and unmistakably — that God holds, that his 
Master Ohrist holds, that life in their hand respectively. (6) An irresistible impulse 
to confront the people with his proclamation, and bring them by all means possible 
into snch contact with it that they can no longer be ignorant of it, even if they flee 
from it and i«ject it. 



CH. xxvm. 1— 31.J THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 34} 

rV. He puts this honoub on his own wobk, on his Mastbe's work, that hi 

CLBAVB8 TO IT, TBAB AFTEE TEAS, WITH PEB8BVBBIN0 DILMENOE. The WOfk of 

Christ does, beyond doubt, stand in this blessed contrast with all other work, even the 
most necessary and the most innocent. It rewards confidence. It merits devotion. 
Its manifest and felt value grows with age and experience and power to gaze beyond 
the limits of sense. And when the use of all other work dwindles to the truer 
dimensions that belong to it, this justly magnifies itself and shines with brighter lustre. 
Paul must have often addressed himself and his own soul in the words in which he 
addresses Christians generally, in the most inspiring connection, " Wherefore be stead- 
fast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord ; forasmuch as . . . your 
labour is not in vain in the Lord." — B. 

Ver. 2. — Humanity. " And the barbarous people showed us no little kindness." 
How that kindness found expression is further detailed. " Heavy showers had come 
on, and the shipwrecked men were half benumbed with fatigue and cold. Pitying 
their condition, the natives lit a huge fire of faggots and brushwood, that they might 
dry their clothes, and gave them in all respects a friendly welcome." The " milk of 
human kindness " has ever made men helpful to each other in circumstances of calamity 
*nd distress, and perhaps the most painful instances of inhumanity the world has known 
may be found in the doings of those " wreckers " who used to entice the ships ashore, 
that they might plunder their cargoes. The terra used here, "barbarous people," is 
somewhat misleading. F. W. Robertson says, " By ' barbarian ' was meant any religion 
but the Roman or Greek — a contemptuous term, the spirit of which is common enough 
in all ages. ,Just as now every sect monopolizes God, claims for itself an exclusive 
heaven, contemptuously looks on all the rest of mankind as sitting in outer darkness, 
and complacently consigns myriads whom God has made to hi» uncovenanted mercies, 
that is, to probable destruction ; so, in ancient times, the Jew scornfully designated all 
nations but his own as Gentiles ; and the Roman and the Greek, each retaliating in his 
way, treated all nations but his own under the common epithet of 'barbarians.'" The 
people of Malta were really of Carthaginian descent, and they probably spoke their 
ancient tongue, though mixed, perhaps, with Latin and Greek, since the island was on 
a great highway of trade. 

I. Humanity as a natural sentiment. It is the common bond uniting together 
mankind in helpfulness, sympathy, and charity. A sentiment which we can see is 
based : 1. On the fact that God hath " made of one blood aU nations to dwell upon the 
earth." This truth of fact is now scientifically accepted, and called the " solidarity of 
the human race ; " but it is the earliest divinely revealed truth, declared in the parentage 
of the race. 2. On the ties of brotherhood which follow the division of the race into 
separate families. The bond which binds together the members of families, binds 
together also tribes and nations, which are but God's great family, 3. On the common 
image of God which men share, and which applies chiefly to moral disposition. The 
most charstcteristio feature of God is his care for others, and, apart from the mischief 
done by sin, this image of God man still bears. Charity is God's image on man; 
selfishness is the devil's image on man. 

II. Humanity ab a national chaeactbbistio. More strikingly marked in some 
nations than in others. 1. Usually found in those whose country is exposed to 
calamity, by reason of a wide seaboard, or an unhealthy condition, or exposure to 
enemies. Men are bound together when a common fate hangs over them all. 2. Also 
found in nations marked by the milder virtues, rather than those energetic, active ones 
which so often lead to war. Peace-loving nations build hospitals, asylums, etc., and 
care for the suffering members. War tends to make men indifferent to suffering. 
England in later times has striven to carry humanity into her war, limiting in every 
way possible the distress it entails. Humanity strives for the day when war shall be 
a sound that men may hear no more for ever 

HI. Humanity as a religious essential. Christian people must be humane. 
They cannot be Christian and wholly fail of brotherly duties. Those who are 
bound to God in the dear bonds of redeemed sonship cannot fail to come nearer in 
sympathy to their brothers of the common humanity. Illustrate fully the Christian 
teaching am the culture of the spirit of humanity ; the New Testament is full ol 



»42 THE A0T8 OP THE APOSTLES. [oh, rxvm. 1—31. 

oouneels dmilar to this : " Bear ye one another's burdens, and so fulfil the law of 
Christ."— R. T. 

Ver. 4. — The superstitions of ignorance. " The natives of Melita, seeing what they 
did, and ignorant of this prisoner's crime, and with their rough notions of the Divine 
government of the world, rushed to the conclusion that they were looking on an 
example of God's vengeance against murder. It was in vain that such a criminal had 
escaped the waves ; a more terrible death was waiting for him." These men misinter- 
preted natural law into vengeance ; yet there is a proneness in man to judge so. We 
expect that nature will execute the chastisement of the spiritual world. Hence all 
nature becomes to the imagination leagued against the transgressor. The stars in their 
courses fight against Sisera. The wall of Siloam falls on guilty men. The sea will 
not carry the criminal, nor the plank bear him ; the viper stings ; everything is a 
minister of wrath. On this conviction nations construct their trial by ordeal. The 
guilty man's sword would fail in the duel, and the foot would strike and be burnt by 
the hot ploughshare. Some idea of this sort lurks in all our minds. We picture to 
ourselves the spectres of the past haunting the nightly bed of the tyrant. We take 
for granted there is an avenger making life miserable. In the incident of this text, 
and the opinions expressed, we find the thoughts of vengeance which are cherished 
by those who do not know the true God. Superstitions are usually akin to truth, 
and contain within them some measure of truth j but they are exaggerations, fashioned 
by men's fears, which too often wholly distort and misrepresent the truth. Esti- 
mating the superstitious fears and sentiments of these "barbarous people," we note 
that they were — 

I. ElQHT IN THEIB OPINION THAT WHONQ-DOINQ NEVEB ESCAPES PUNISHMENT. 

Their idea was that Paul was a criminal, guilty of some great crime, and justice was 
pursuing him; if he had escaped the doom of shipwreck, he could not get away 
from the avenger, who now struck at him in the viper's bite. Explain the early 
notion of the blood avenger, and the classical ideas associated with the Furies. It is 
important that men should have a deep and unquestioning conviction that the guilty 
never escape ; but it does not seem to be absolutely and constantly true so far as this 
life is concerned. Show the moral and social importance of the assurance that punish- 
ment must follow sin, and impress that God's revelation wholly confirms the testimony 
of natural religion. 

II. They weee wbong in this, that vengeance is a mere thino. They 
thought of it as a force ever working, blindly indeed, but certainly. If bafded in one 
way, it set about gaining its end in another. When heathen ignorance is changed to 
Christian knowledge, we find : 1. That the thing which we had called vengeance ia 
but one of the modes of the Divine working. 2. That mere calamities — the things 
that we call accidents — are not necessarily Divine vengeance (see our Lord's teaching, 
Luke xiii. 1 — 5). 3. That God's wrath on sin need not find its entire expression in 
this life, seeing that he has all the ages to work in. This our Lord figuratively 
expressed when he said, " Fear him who can cast body and soul into hell." 4. That 
God's avengings, being those of a holy Father, can never rest satisfied in the suffering 
of the sinful creature, but must go on to secure the creature's redemption from the sin 
which issues in the suffering. Blind vengeance can rest in the destruction of the 
criminal. Fatherly love can never rest save in the recovery of the prodigal child. 
And God alone can be trusted with the avenging work. " Vengeance is mine : I will 
repay, saith the Lord." — R. T. 

"Ver. 5. — Ohrisfs promise precisely fulfilled. In sending forth his disciples on their 
first trial mission, our Lord had given them this distinct assurance (lluke x. 19), 
"Behold, I give unto you power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all the 
power of the enemy : and nothing shall by any means hurt you." And when about to 
pass away from them in a surprising and glorious manner, our Lord commanded them 
to " go and preach his gospel to every creature," assuring them that these signs should 
follow them in their labours, " They shall take up serpents, and if they drink any 
deadly thing, it shall not hurt them." These may, indeed, be regarded as figurative 
Etstem promises that wert only intended to assure the disciples of • general Divine pro- 



CM. Txvm. 1— 31.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLfiS. 341 



tection while they were engaged In Christian service ; but it cannot be uninteresting to 
notice that these promises were precisely fulfilled in the experience of the apostles. St. 
Paul, as narrated in our text, " shook off the beast," the deadly viper, " and felt no 
harm." From the incident it is suggested to us to consider — 

I. That Christian life is covered and hallowed by Divink pbomibbs. We 
learn to speak of the " exceeding great and precious promises." They are stored for us 
in all parts of God's Word. It may be shown that they are (1) abundant ; (2) suffi- 
cient, since no conceivable Christian circumstance or need is unreached ; (8) varied, 
so as to suit all occasions ; (4) adapted, so as to gain gracious influence on all disposi- 
tions. Nothing is more pleasantly surprising in a Christian life than the freshness with 
which the promises appear in every new season of anxiety and trouble. They come to 
us as if they were words just spoken by the all-comforting Father. They are the 
" everlasting arms " which hold us safe. They are the wings that bear us up and 
on and home to Gk)d. They are all true and faithful, " Yea and amen In Christ 
Jesus." 

II. That these promises are both oenebal and special. They assure, ii large 
and comprehensive terms, that grace shall be given according to need; but, at least in 
the case of the apostles, we find them precise and definite. Illustrate from the case of 
taking up deadly serpents. Christians may err in two ways — either by generalizing the 
promises too much, or by particularizing them too much, and over-forcing their adapta- 
tion to the individual. Still, if we had a fuller faith, we might recognize a more 
definite character in God's promises. Illustrate by such a promise or assurance as this, 
" The prayer of faith shall save the sick." 

III. The exact roLriLMENT of the precise promises absubb the certain ful- 
filment OF ALL. This is the lesson which we have to learn from the fulfilment of 
Christ's definite promise in the case of his servant Paul. It may be taken as a test 
case, by the help of which we may know whether we may trust all the promises, even 
those which do not seem easy to grasp, and those which seem to promise too much for 
mortals and for sinners such as we are. He who is true to his word in the little thing 
which we can fuUy test will be true to the great words which assure to us both grace 
and glory. And, as we see the viper falling harmlessly off the apostle's arm, we say, 
" VerUy, he is faithful that promised."— R. T. 

Ver. 8. — Christian returns for Mndmtss shown. " Not far from the scene of the 
shipwreck lay the town now called Alta Veochia, the residence of Publius, the governor 
of the island, who was probably a legate of the Praetor of Sicily. Since Julius was a 
person of distinction, this Boman official, who bore the title of protos (first) — a local 
designation, the accuracy of which is supported by inscriptions — offered to the centurion 
a genial hospitality, in which Paul and Us friends were allowed to share. It happened 
that at that time the father of Publius was lying prostrated by feverish attacks compli- 
cated with dysentery. St. Luke was a physician, but his skill was less effectual than 
the agency of St. Paul, who went into the sick man's chamber, prayed by his bedside, 
laid his hands on him, and healed him. The rumour of the cure spread through the 
Uttle island, and caused all the sick inhabitants to come for help and tendance. We 
may be sure that St. Paul, though we do not hear of his founding any Church, yet lost 
no opportunity of making known the gospel " (Farrar). In this instance the order of 
St. Paul's words have to be changed. He had received their " carnal things," and he 
gladly returned to them his " spiritual things." We observe — 

I. Christians can receive from the world bodily and oirodmbtantiai. bless- 
1K08. These are all that the world has - at its command ; but these Christians need. 
They may be illustrated under the headings : 1. Hospitalities. 2. Charities, 3. Sym' 
pathies. 4. Practical aids. So the barbarous people could light a fire and show 
kindness to St. Paul, and Publius could offer to him and his friends generous hospi- 
talities. Especially dwell on the virtue of hospitality, noticing that it was a characteristio 
excellence of ancient times ; it is a virtue carefully cultivated in the East, and more 
particularly among tribes, in the present day ; and that, while it is retained, it is set 
under very narrow limitations in modem civilized nations, where class prejudices are 
strong. 

D. Chbistuns oak arvx to ths would both bodily asd bfibitual BLxsgnim 



344 THE ACTS 01' THE APOSTLES, [oh. xxvra. 1— 3L 

They have the common powers of brotherhood and helpfulness which belong to men as 
Bet in human relations ; but they can also do for their fellows what no other class of 
men can do. They have a new life ; that life finds its own peculiar and characteristic 
expression. It exerts both (1) an unconscious and (2) a conscious influence for good. 
Illustrate that Christians can save a city, as ten righteous men would have saved Sodom. 
They may preserve from temporal calamity by their calmness in the hour of danger, 
through their faith in God ; as may be seen in times of shipwreck. They may have 
actual power to heal, as the apostles had. They can certainly witness for the living 
God ; commend the service of the Lord Jesus Christ ; carry healing balm to sin-sick 
souls ; comfort the weary and heavy-laden ; and minister truth and sympathy and love 
where these are needed. They can be " preserving salt ; uplifted light-bearers ; and upon 
them may hang, in full clusters, the rich ripe fruits which the world so greatly needs 
for its refreshing and its spiritual health. Impress that what the Christian man can 
be he ought to be and should strive to be. " Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear 
much fruit ; so shall ye be my disciples." — E. T. 

Ver. 16. — " Paul, the prisoner of Jetua Christ." Coflybeare and Howson give very full 
details of the journey of the apostle and his company from Malta to Borne ; reaching 
their destination, the following description of the place of imprisonment is given: — 
" Here was the mUliarium aureum, to which the roads of all the provinces converged. 
All around were the stately buildings, which were raised in the closing years of the 
republic and by the early emperors. In front was the Capitoline Hill, illustrious long 
before the invasion of the Gauls. Close on the left, covering that hill whose name is 
associated in every modern European language with the notion of imperial splendour, 
were the vast ranges of the palace — ' the house of Csesar ' (PhiL iv. 22). Here were 
the household troops quartered in a prastorium attached to the palace. And here Julius 
gave up his prisoner to Burrus, the praetorian prefect, whose official duty it was to keep 
in custody all accused persons who were to be tried before the emperor." There we sea 
the great apostle still a prisoner, in bonds for Christ's sake. His bondage was of that 
kind technically known as a custodia libera, but the prisoner was fastened by a chain 
to a soldier who kept guard over him. For the apostle's references to his imprisonment, 
see Phil. i. 7, 13, 17 ; Bph. iii. 1 ; iv. 1 ; vi. 20 ; Col. iv. 18, etc. The constant chang- 
ing of the guard no doubt brought all the soldiers under his personal influence, and 
enabled him to witness for Christ in the palace and in, other places. 

I. St. Paul's limitations. 1. A prisoner. 2. A sufferer. So all Christian workers 
still find themselves set under limitations of ability, of time.'of means, of physical strength. 
And the question constantly recurs — Will we he mastered by our limitations, or will we 
master them in the power of a sanctified will ? No man works for God on earth with 
an absolute and perfect freedom. The limitations are sent to give quality and character 
to our service. A man's credit lies, not so much in what he does, as in what he twer- 
eomes in order that he may do. 

II. The limit of St. Paul's limitations. They bore relation : 1. Only to body ; 
to restraint of bodily action, and to pain of body. 2. Not to mind ; since no gyves have 
ever been framed that can bind this. 3. Not to character ; which no sort of earthly 
persecutions or calamities need affect. 4, Not to ujill ; which can maintain its set pur- 
poses, even when it is rendered helpless to carry them out. 5. Not to life-work ; which 
the earnest man will surely carry on somehow. The Christian mastery of bodily dis- 
abilities, infirmities, and limitations, may be illustrated from the Apostle Paul, from J. 
Bunyan the prisoner in Bedford jail, or from such sufferers from bodily infirmity as 
B. Baxter, E. Hall, H. Martyn, F. W. Eobertson, etc. There are martyrs who did not 
die, whose service for Christ has been noble and heroic. 

III. St. Paul's true libebtt under bebmino limitations. Illustrate and imptess 
that, with all his bonds and sufferings upon him, he could : 1. Still live Christ. 2. 
Still work for Christ. 3. Still write of Christ. 4. Still speak for Christ. 5, Still per- 
sonally "meeten for the inheritance of the saints in the light." — E. T. 

Ver. 31. — The kingdom of Ood, and things of Jesus. Our historical record of the 
great apostle closes with a picture of him fully and earnestly engaged in the loved work 
of his Ufe, even imder the limitations of captivity, and there la peculiar significance in 



cat. ixvm. 1—31.] THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 8« 

the terms which Luke uses. The apostle is said to have been engaged In "preaching 
the kingdom of God, and teaching those things which concern the Lord Jesus, with all 
confideEce." Hlustration may be given of St. Paul's restless activity and consuming 
leal in preaching Christ. He could say, " Woe is unto me if I pieach not the gospel I" 
He must have held and cherished the holiest convictions ; he is the first and noblest 
instance of absorbing, inspiring enthusiasm for Christ. He was now a prisoner, but he 
would preach Christ with the guard beside him. He could not preach Christ in temple, 
church, or large room, so he would preach Christ in his own house. He could not 
gather the many, so he would preach Christ to the few who came to see him. Compare 
Adolphe Monod, who lay for months on a sick-bed, and could conduct no public ser- 
vices, so spoke of Christ from his bed every Sunday afternoon to the friends that 
gathered round him, as long as he was able. Two things are especially noted by Luke 
in these his closing words. 

L St. Paul preached the kingdom of Gk)D. Under the figure of a Divine kingdom 
Messiah's times had been prophesied by Daniel (ii. 44 ; vii. 14, 27). John the Bap- 
tist stood forth as a prophet to proclaim, " The kingdom of heaven is at hand." Our 
Lord gave the same words to his apostles when he sent them forth upon their trial mis- 
sion ; it was the message which they were everywhere to deliver. The figure was not 
I new one. It was not a fresh thing for God to claim the rule of souls. The govern- 
ment of ancient Israel had been a theocracy, or direct rule of Jehovah. The new thing 
was for God to set up this government on earth in the person of his Son, the Son ol 
man and Son of God. He came to help us more clearly and more fully to see that the 
kingdom of God is the rule of his loving, holy, and fatherly will ; and that will may 
he made known in two ways. 1. By definite and express commands. In this way it 
\aA been made known to Israel. 2. By the immediate and living authority of Jesus 
Christ, who gives us God's will directly, putting it into close relation with all our 
circumstance and need. To be in the kingdom of God now is to be directly dependent, 
day by day, upon the guiding, teaching, leading, of the living Lord Jesus Christ. 

IL St. Paul peeaohed the things concbrnino Jesus Christ. Those things 
include : 1. Trying to make the history and teachings of the Lord Jesus known, so that 
men might have a solid foundation whereon to rest their eternal hopes. 2. Trying to 
make Christ himself known, because his will is the reflection and expression of bimielf. 
3. Trying to make the fulness and freeness of Christ's grace known, so that men's con- 
fidence might be won to him. 4. Trying to make Christ's ofSces and relatioiis known ; 
because he is (1) the Dispenser of pardon ; (2) he has the bestowment of the Spirit ; (3) 
he stands in the place of our High Priest ; and (4) he is to be our final Judge. The 
kingdom of God is come for all hearts that are fully consecrated to Christ. It will 
have come for the world when " every knee shall bow to him, and every tongue confess 
to him." God will reigu when Jesus shall be acknowledged " King of kings, and Lord 
of ]ardfc''-ft. I. 



VOLUME II. 



CHAPTER XV. 

TBtn ,iQj 

The Controversy ... „, ^, 7 

The Paroxysm ... ... „. 8 

A Grave Crisis in the Kingdom of 

God: Lessons ... ... ... 9 

A Grave Crisis in the Kingdom of 

God: more Lessons ... ... 10 

Self-Sacrifice for Christ ... ,.. 11 

Apostles at Fault... ... ... 12 

The Judaizers at Antioch ... ... 13 

The Council at Jerusalem ... ... 14 

Decision of the Council at Jeru- 
salem ... ... ... ... 15 

Effects of the Mission from the Church 15 
Beginning of the Second Missionary 

Journey ... ... ... 15 

The First Council : Spiritual Liberty 

established ... ... ... 16 

The Spirituality of the Gospel ... 16 

Spiritual Heroism ... ... 17 

Contention amongst Brethren ... 17 
A Great Dissension on the Threshold 
of the Gentile Church, and the 

Apostolic Management of it m. 17 

Symptoms more Startling ... m< 19 

Circumcision and Salvation „, 21 

The Jerusalem Church ... ... 22 

Salvation by Grace for all ... ... 22 

The Highest Christian Commendation 23 

Beasonable and Unreasonable Burdens 24 

Contentions and Separations m« 25 

CHAPTER XVL 

The Choice of a Fit Person «. 82 

The Call ^ 83 

Truth and Falsehood ... ... 34 

The Church's Duty and Reward ... 85 
The Call of God and the Appeal of 

Man : a Missionary Sermon ... 36 
The Opened Heart ; or, the Power of 



Divine Gentleness 



37, 45, 52 



THZUE PAGB 

Five Truths from Philippi ... 38 

God in the Earthquake ... m. 89 

Christian Remonstrance m« m. 89 

Paul aod Timothy ... ... 40 

The Journey to Macedonia: the 

Happy Beginning ... 41,44 

The Witness of Evil to the Good ... 42 

Joy in Tribulation ... ... 42 

Unexpected Deliverance ... ... 43 

Paul's Second Missionary Journey 

commenced ... ... ... 44 

A True Epoch in the History of the 

Gospel: Advance from Asia to 

Europe ... ... ... 44 

The Cry of a Perishing World after 

Christ... ... ... ... 45 

The Kingdom of Light revealing 

itself ... ... ... ... 45 

The First European Persecution ,_ 46 

Light in the Darkness ... ,„ 46 

A Remarkable Conversion ... ... 46 

Household Salvation .» •.. 47 

Apostolic Devotion owned .m ••• 47 

The Spirit's Course ... ... 47 

The Day that looked like the Day of 

Small Things ... ... ... 48 

An Illustrious Triple Triumph of 

Christianity ... ... ... 49 

The Ohiiracter of Timothy ... 51 

The Leadings of the Holy Ghost ... 61 

The Witness of Evil Spirits to Christ 53 

Christian Triumph over Circumstances 54 

The Jailor's Question ... ... 55 

The Faith that saves na m« 5fi 

CHAPTER XVn. 

The Strange Alliance ... ... 63 

The Cross of Christ in the Metropolis 

of Art and Philosophy ... ... 64 

A FulflUed and an Unfulfilled Pro- 
phecy ... ... ... ... 65 

The Duty of Individual Research », 65 



Tiii 



INDEX. 



THEVB rAQB 

A Saddening Spectacle : a Missionary 

Sennon ... ... ... 66 

Christianity and Epicnieanigm ... 67 

Christianity and Stoicism ... ... 67 

Curiosity at the Feet of Christ .. 68 
God revealed: his Nature and Rela- 
tion ... ... ... ... 68 

God revealed: his Attitude toward 

the Sinner ... ... ... 69 

God revealed: his Holy Purpose ... 70 
Paul at Thessalonica ... 71, 74 
Nobility of Soul at Beroea ... 71, 75 
Paul at Athens ... ... 72,75 

The Power of God in the WorH ... 74 

Preparation for the Truth ... ... 75 

The World's Want supplied .:. 75 

The Worship of Faith 76 

Man in God ... ... ... 76 

Opportunity ... ... ... 77 

The Work of Three Sabbath Days ... 77 

A Comparison justly Invidious ... 78 
The Gospel's Kindly Encounter with 

Novel Foes ... ... ... 79 

Three Kinds of Hearing ... ... 80 

Paul's Manner ... ... ... 81 

The Three Points of Pauline Preach- 
ing ... ... ... ... 82 

The Nobility of the Inquiring Spirit 83 

The Passion for Something New ... 84 

"The Unknown God" ... ... 85 

Athenian Eeligion ... ... 85 

God's Offspring ... ,„ •.. 86 

CHAPTEB XVm. 

Christian Friendship ... ... 94 

The Testimony ... ... ... 95 

The Concise Narrative ... ... 96 

The.Episode ... ... ... 96 

Truth before the Citadel ... ... 97 

Fanaticism, Pride, Calmness, Short- 
sightedness ... ... ... 97 

The Strength which is of Man ... 98 

Variety in Christian Service ... 99 

Paul at Corinth ... ... ... 100 

Eetnm of Paul to Antiooh ... 101 
The Eloquent ApoJlos ... 102, 103 

A Glimpse into Apostolic Life ... 102 

Faithful Ministry... ... ... 102 

Contrasts in the Attitude of Men 

towards the Gospel „. ... 103 

Betiospeot .„ m4 >.. 103 



Zeal without Knowledge ... m— 101 

Tent-Making a Sermon ... ... 104 

The Complement to Human Uncer- 
tainty found in Divine Fidelity ... 105 
A Novel Instance of Retribution ... 106 
The Opportunities vouchsafed to 
Fitness ... ... ... 106 

Corinth as a Model Sphere of Mis- 
sionary Labour ... ... ... 108 

Personal Beligious Besponsibility ... 109 

God's Grace in Times of Depression 110 

Gallio's Indifference ... ... Ill 

St. Paul's Personal Belations with 

Judaism ... ... ... 112 

Strengthening Disciples ... m« 113 



CHAPTEB XTX. 

The Advance ... ... „, 122 

The Greed of Gain ... ... 123 

Essential but Insufficient: Valuable 

but Temporary ... ... 124 

The Spiritual, the Supernatural, and 

the Natural ... ... ... 125 

The Sign of Sincerity ... ... 126 

The Supreme Conflict ... ... 126 

Paul and the Baptist's, Disciple* ... 127 

Workof PaulatEphesus ... ... 128 

The Spirit of Bebelliou against the 

Gospel ... ... ... 129 

Practical Exemplification of Chris- 
tian Doctrine ... ... ... 130 

Triumphs of the Gospel at Ephesus 130 

The Purpose of a Great Heart ... 131 

A Popular Biot ... ... ... 131 

Baptism in the Name of the Lord 

Jesus, and its Sequel ... ... 131 

The Shelter awhile of Young Converts 132 

" Special Miracles " ... ... 132 

The Prompt Exposure and Punish- 
ment of Human Iniquity by an Evil 

Spirit 133 

Practical Evidence of Genuine £«- 

pentance ... ... .., 134 

A Typical Exhibition of Human 

Nature 135 

Progression in Divine Revelations ... 136 

The First Christian Congregation ... 137 

The Call for Special Miracles ... 138 

Signs of Beligious Sincerity ... 139 

The Prevailing Power of the Word ... 140 

Self-interest opposing Christianity ... 140 



INDEX. 



ii 



CHAPTER XX. 

THEIR PAGE 

•'In Labours more Abundant" ... 149 

The Charge ... .,. ... 150 

Uuman Life : Lights and Shadjwi ... 150 
Paul at Miletus : the Eeview which 

Gratifies 151 

Paul at Miletus : the Substance of 

Christian Doctrine ... ... 152 

Paul at Miletus : the Forecast which 

exalts ... ... ... ... 153 

Paul at Miletus : the Prospect which 

pains ... ... ... ... 151 

Paul at Miletus : the Greater Blessed- 
ness ... ... ... ... 154 

Scenes by the Way ... ... 155 

Paul's Farewell to the Elders of 

Ephesus ... ... ... 156 

Apostolic Supervision of Clmroh Life 157 

A Legacy of Divine Testimony ... 157 

Troas to Miletus ... ... ... 158 

Last Words ... ... „, 158 

The Ambassador's Message ... 158 

The Missionary Spirit ... ... 159 

" The Gospel of the Grace of God " 159 

The True Church ... ... 159 

The Divine Secret of a Blessed Life 160 
The Seven Days' Halt at the Gateway 

between Europe and Asia ... 160 
Mingled Fidelity and Tenderness : 

an Example for Christian Ministers 161 

Sure Springs of Affection ... ... 163 

The Lord's Day Sabbath ... ... 163 

Sleepy Eutychus ... ... ... 164 

Earnestness in Preaching and Hearing 165 

Paul's Testimony ... ... ... 166 

The Cheerful Acceptance of a Hard 

Lot 166 

God's Whole Counsel ... ... 167 

Blood purchased ... ... u. 168 

Th« Blessedness of Giving... ... 168 



OHAPTEB XXL 

The Steadfast Purpose ... m 176 

The Compromise ... ... ••• 177 

Human Affection and Sacred Service 178 

Belations between Disciples ... 179 

Fanaticism and Devotedness ... 180 

Incidents by the Way ... ... 180 

Paul and the Levitical Usages ... 181 

Danger and Deliverance at Jerusalem 182 



THRUB rAOB 

Miletus to Tyre: the Steadfastness 
of a Holy Mind ... ... 182 

Tyre to Csesarea : the Will of God in 

the Heart of his Servant ... 183 

Arrival and Keceptiou at Jerusalem 183 
The Prophecy fuieiled ... ... 183 

The Koman Soldier Face to Face with 
the Cliristian Apostle ... ... 184 

Widening Streams of Christian Love 184 
Tender Heart to a Strong Con- 
science ... ... ... 185 

A Biography of Honour, written in a 
Name and Title only ... ... 185 

The Advocate of the Gentiles ... 185 

The Pastor and Elders of the Chnroh 
not Infallible ... ... ... 187 

The Spirit in Paul, and the Spirit in 
Others... ... ... ... 187 

The Influence of Personal Affection on 
Christian Ministers ... ... 189 

St. Peter and St. Paul compared in 
Boasting ... ... ... 189 

Old Disciples ... ... ... 191 

The Perils of Over-Caution ... 191 

Party Prejudices ... ... ... 192 

CHAPTER XXIL 

The Apology ... ... ... 196 

Argument and Prejudice ... ... 197 

» The Will of God in Christ Josus con- 
cerning us" ... ... ... 198 

The Earthly and the Heavenly Citi- 
zenship ... ... ... 199 

Paul's Self-Defence before the Jews ... 199 
Danger and Deliverance ... ... 200 

Paul before the High Council ... 200 

Paul's Defence of himself to the People 201 
Eescue of the Prisoner and Reference 
of bis Cause to the Jewish Sanhe- 
drim ... ... ... ... 201 

A Model Self-Defence 202 

The Testimony of Beligions Experi- 
ence ... ... ... ... 203 

"That Just One" 203 

The Calling and the Gifts of God ... 204 
Men's Past Sins often the Unknown 
Determiners of their Future Life, its 
Opportunities, and its Disqualiflca- 
tions ... ... ... ... 20S 

The Sincerity of St. Paul's Judaism ... 206 
The Claims of a Personal Divine 
BevelatioB ... ... ... 207 



INDiiX 



TBXmm FAO* 

Panl'i Commieslon to the Gentiles ... 207 
The UnieaBonable Ezcitemeut of 

Crowds ... ... ... 208 

Times to suffer, and Times to get 

Belief from Suffering ... ... 209 

Natoially and Spiritually Free-Bom 210 



CHAPTER XXTTt 

PoUej M. 216 

Speobd ProTidence ... m> 217 
" Good Conscience before God " ... 218 
Things Dubious and Things Certain ... 218 
The Powers that act on us firom With- 
out ... ... ... M. 219 

Paul at CiBsarea ... ... m. 220 

Paul before the Sanhedrim ... 220 

The Human Judge in the Preseuoe of 

the Divine ... ... ... 221 

Light in the Darkness m. ... 221 

Conspiracy defeated ... ... 221 

A Threefold Example of True Great- 
ness 222 

The Hope of the Living and the 

Besunection of the Dead ... 223 

The Sympathizing and Mindful Master 221 

A Good Conscience ... ... 223 

Passion under Insult ... ... 226 

The Besurrection a Dividing Doctrine 227 

Divine Cheer in Anxious Hours ... 228 

Providential Protections ... ... 229 

Strangers' Testimonies to God's Ser- 
vants ... ... — — 229 

CHAPTBK XXIV. 

" Not diis Man, but Barabbas " m. 235 

Malice, Innocency, and Power ... 235 

A Powerful Incentive to a Noble Life 236 

Bare Heroism and Common Folly ... 237 

Paul before Felix 238 

The Divine Word and the Conscience 238 

The Governor's Court ... ... 23» 

The Just Man's Defence n« ... 239 

Practical Beligion ... ... 240 

The Character of Felix in the Light of 

Christianity ... ... ... 240 

The Indictment that was a Self-Indict- 
ment ... ... ... ... 240 

The Defence of Paul ... ... 241 

The Confession of a Coherent Worship 

•Dd Faith «• •t* ••• 242 



THEIIS rAOl 

A Hope grown Cram 8 Deep and Mani- 
fold Root ... ... ... 243 

The Highest Powers eluded by the 

Heitrt's Subterfuges ... ... 243 

The Influence of a Good Ruler on 

National Evils ... ... 244 

" Most Noble Felix ; " at, the Power of 

the Flatterer ... ... ». 245 

Tlie Way called Heresy m. m. 245 

Loyalty to God and Men m. •«• 246 

St. Paul's Liberty ... ... 247 

The Substance of the Faith in Christ 248 

Convenient Seasons ... m. 249 

Covetousness excusing Injnstioe m* 249 

CHAPTER XXV. 

Persistent Hatred ... ... «« 254 

" Audi Alteram Partem " ... „, 254 
The Enliglitened, the Unenlightened, 

and the Great Overruler... ... 255 

Mismeasurement of the Great and 

Small ... ... ... ... 256 

Power, Degeneracy, and Consecration 256 

Tenacity in Bight ... ... 257 

Worldly Judgment on Beligion* 

Matters ... ... ... 258 

The Way opened to Borne ... ... 258 

Paul in the Presence of King Agrippa 259 

Courage to live ... ... ... 259 

Spiritual Deprivation ... ... 260 

Seeking Favour to cover Wicked De- 
vices ... ... ... .„ 261 

Protestations of lunooenoe ... m. 262 

Appeal to Csesar ... ,m m. 262 

Party Accusations ... h. 263 

Interest in the Prisoner for Christ n< 264 

CHAPTEB XXVL 

The Apology ... ... „. 260 

The Credibility of the Besurrection ... 270 

Gradations in Guilt ... ... 270 

Minister and Messenger ... ... 271 

" The Heavenly Vision : " • Sermon 

to the Young ... ... ... 272 

The Penalty and the Besouroes of • 

Devoted Life ... ... ... 273 

The Christian's Desire ... ... 274 

Paul before Festus and Agrippa ... 275 
The Apostolic Defence in the Pre- 
sence of Festus and Agrippa ... 277 
Besurrection in the Light of Revela- 
tion .«. M* tM w* IRI 



INDEX. 



^ 



THna rAsi 

The Miision of the Gospel to the 

World 277 

The Believing Retrospect ,., ... 277 

The Great Oeoigion ... ... 278 

The Conditions of Hearing to Profit ... 278 
Tbe Hope of the Promise ... ... 279 

I'he Ueckless Bushing to assuine the 
Moral Besponsibilities of Others — an 
Exceeding Madness ... ... 280 

The Ascended Saviour's Description 

of his own Work among Men ... 280 
Christ's own Stress laid on Faith in a 
Personal Object ... ... 281 

The Make of a Heavenly Vision, and 
its Use ... ... ... 282 

The Mission and Burden of the Evan- 
gelist ... ... ... ... 283 

A Good Confession ... ... 283 

A Threefold Illustration of the Irre- 
pressible Energy of the Truth ... 281 
An Unwilling Contribution to the 

Truth 284 

A Mournful "Almost," on a Light 

Lip ~. ... 285 

Secret Acquittals ... ... ... 285 

St. Paul a Pharisee ... ... 286 

The Messianic Promise ... ... 287 

The Incredibility of the Eesurreo- 

tion 288 

St. Paul's Message compared with 
Prophecy ... ... ... 288 

" Both Almost, and Altogether " ... 289 

CHAPTER XXVn. 

The Voyage ... ... ... 301 

The Escape from Shipwreck ... 301 

The Voyage of Lito ... ... 303 

Spiritual Refreshment ... ... 303 

Kndeavour and Attainment ... 304 

Disappointment ... ... ... 305 

Divine Ownership and Human Ser- 

Tioe 306 

The Divine and the Human Will ... 307 

The Shipwreck of the Soul ... 307 

The Voyage to Italy : an Allegory of 

the Christian's Course ... ... 308 

I'he Example of Paul in the Storm ... 309 

The Victory of Faith 309 

I'he Bad Man's Extremity, God and 

the Good Man's Opportunity ... 310 
A Glimpse at Human Nature and its 

Behaviour in Three Varieties at One 

•nd the Same Conjuncture ... 311 



THEIfB HOI 

An Unexpected Testimony to the 

Force of Goodnesi ... ... 812 

The Means Human, the Power Divine 813 
The Good Man's Power to win Oonfl- 

dence ... ... ... ... SIS 

The Mission of Divine Warning* ... 814 

Good Cheer from a Good Man ..■ 815 

The Sanctity of Human Life ... 816 

Safety at Last, somehow ... m< S17 

CHAPTER XXVUL 

Kindness ... ... ... 826 

Refreshment ... ... ... 326 

The Fall ... , 327 

A Picture of the Human ... ... 328 

Human Kindness ... ... ... 329 

Tlie Christian and the Jew... ... 330 

Concerning Christ and his Kingdom 330 

Occurrences at Malta ... ... 331 

The Passage from Malta to Borne ... 332 

Paul and the Roman Jews ... ... 332 

Paul's preaching at Rome ... ... 833 

The Instability of Ignorance, and the 

Stability of the True Christian ... 333 

» The Healing of the Nations " ... 834 

The Break in the Clouds ... 334 

The Reproach which must be borne ... 333 
The Christian Advocate putting forth 

his Pleas ... ... 335 

The Word of God trying the Hearts of 

Men ... ... ... ... 335 

The Watchman upon the Walls of 

Jerusalem ... ... ... 335 

A Strong Family Likeness ... ... 836 

A Type of the Beneficent Action of 

Christianity ... ... ... 336 

A Week with Brethren ... ... 837 

Gratitude and Courage well linked 

together ... ... ... 338 

A Unique Prisoner ... ... 339 

The Leading Results following upon 

Preaching ... ... ... 333 

A Type and Model of the Christian 

Preacher ... ... ... 340 

Humanity ... ... ... 841 

The Superstitions of Ignorance ... 842 

Christ's Promise precisely fulfilled ... 842 

Christian Betuins for Kimlness shown 343 

" Paul, the Prisoner of Jesus Christ " 344 
The Kingdom of God, and Things of 

Jesus ... ^ ^ ^ SU 



, I , I 1,1., M ! 




