Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2018  with  funding  from 
Kahle/Austin  Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/possibilitiesofpOOOOboun 


The  Possibilities  of  Prayer 


THE 

POSSIBILITIES 

OF 


E.  M.  BOUNDS 


BAKER  BOOK  HOUSE 
Grand  Rapids,  Michigan 


Reprinted  1979  by  Baker  Book  House 
from  the  edition  issued  in  1923  by 
Fleming  H.  Revell  Company 

ISBN:  0-8010-0757-7 

Fourth  printing,  May  1983 


Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America 


Foreword 


Edward  mckendree  bounds,  like 

Wesley,  was  the  “practical  mystic ”  the 
most  formidable  and  terrible  of  all  spiri¬ 
tual  combinations.  With  an  unceasing  commu¬ 
nion  with  God,  he  united  an  unfailing  interest 
in  the  welfare  of  his  fellows.  The  teachings 
he  sets  forth  in  this,  as  in  his  former  books, 
form  the  only  efficient  barrier  against  the  powers 
of  evil  which  appear  to  prevail  throughout  the 
present  world.  With  Bounds  prayer  was  para¬ 
mount.  It  linked  man  with  God,  and  human 
weakness  with  the  power  of  the  overcoming  Son. 

Dr.  B.  F.  Haynes,  of  Nashville,  Tenn.,  who  was 
converted  under  the  ministry  of  Edward  Bounds, 
wrote  in  1913:  “  Our  first  sight  of  this  great  saint 
was  at  the  close  of  the  Civil  War,  when  he  was 
dropped  into  our  village  in  Tennessee,  with  his  uni¬ 
form  on.  We  remember  how  our  childish  minds 
were  particularly  taken  with  the  gray  jeans  jacket, 
closely  buttoned  with  its  brilliant  brass  buttons. 
He  took  charge  of  our  little  Methodist  church. 
We  remember  with  what  soul-stirring  pathos  and 
fervour  he  read  those  old  classic  hymns,  such  as 
‘  Majestic  Sweetness  Sits  Enthroned,’  *  How 
Sweet  the  Name  of  Jesus  Sounds,’  4  In  Evil  Long 

5 


FOBEWOKD 


6 

I  Took  Delight/  and  many  others.  Often  when 
our  childish  feet  would  near  the  church  door  the 
hope  would  involuntarily  arise  in  our  minds  that 
he  would  read  one  of  those  wonderful  hymns  we 
had  heard  him  read  before.  Always  he  broke  our 
young  hearts  by  the  inimitably  seraphic  way  of  his 
reading  of  the  opening  hymn  before  he  preached 
the  sermon.  And  the  sermon!  Who  can  describe 
it?  Simple,  direct,  soulful,  it  went  where  it  was 
invariably  aimed — to  the  heart  of  the  hearer. 

“  The  form  of  this  holy,  diminutive  man,  lying 
prone  with  a  heavenly  smile  on  his  face,  while  his 
voice  shouted  the  praises  of  God,  in  the  humble 
village  prayer-meeting,  is  a  sweet  and  familiar 
picture  in  our  childhood's  memory. 

“  Great  in  native  intellect,  great  in  spiritual  in¬ 
sight,  great  in  reading  the  Gospel  from  hymn  or 
God's  Word,  great  with  his  pen  and  greater  in 
prevailing  prayer  to  his  Father-God,  great  as  a 
father,  friend,  husband  and  counsellor,  great  in 
simple  faith,  dauntless  adherence  to  the  right  and 
truth  and  God ;  greatest  of  all  in  humility,  uncom¬ 
plaining  submission,  and  in  intercession,  Dr. 
Bounds  lived  comparatively  unknown  for  what  he 
really  was.  But  his  works  will  follow  him,  and  we 
believe  his  posthumous  fame  will  grow  with  the 
years,  and  though  dead  he  will  continue  to  speak 
in  broader  lines  and  larger  visible  results  than  dur¬ 
ing  life.” 

Seven  years  later,  the  books  of  Dr.  Bounds  began 


FOKEWOKD 


7 


to  appear.  On  August  3,  1922,  Dr.  Haynes  wrote 
again:  “  I  am  rejoiced  to  know  that  another  book 
on  prayer  by  Dr.  Bounds  is  to  be  issued.  My 
pleasure  and  delight  grow  daily  that  God  put  it 
into  your  heart  to  bring  out  these  wonderful  books, 
thus  preventing  the  Christian  world  from  losing 
the  rich  inheritance  which  these  books  will  prove 
to  be.  I  congratulate  you  on  being  God’s  chosen 
instrument  for  this  high  mission.  I  never 
doubted  from  the  day  Bounds  died  that  God 
would  put  it  into  the  heart  of  somebody  to 
bring  out  his  wonderful  works.  I  didn’t  believe 
He  would  allow  His  Saints  to  be  defrauded  of 
such  a  needed  and  rich  inheritance.  May  God 
bless  every  book  issued,  and  every  reader  of  every 
book  of  the  immortal  Bounds.” 

It  is  a  matter  for  supreme  thankfulness  that  in 
an  increasing  measure  the  prayer  and  prophecy  of 
Dr.  Haynes  are  being  fulfilled. 

Homer  W.  Hodge 


Flushing,  N.  Y. 


McRobvit4 

icx  Z08  Vt&i  C*.  Zd. 
%D1  Saxfinbtvig  PA160S6 


Contents 


I. 

The  Ministry  of  Prayer  . 

II 

II. 

Prayer  and  the  Promises  . 

16 

III. 

Prayer  and  the  Promises  ( Continued ) 

24 

IV. 

Prayer — Its  Possibilities  . 

34 

V. 

Prayer — Its  Possibilities  ( Continued ) 

45 

VI. 

Prayer — Its  Possibilities  ( Continued ) 

52 

VII. 

Prayer — Its  Wide  Range  . 

60 

VIII. 

Prayer — Facts  and  History 

68 

IX. 

Prayer — Facts  and  History  ( Continued )  76 

X. 

Answered  Prayer  .... 

84 

XI. 

Answered  Prayer  ( Continued )  . 

94 

XII. 

Answered  Prayer  ( Continued )  . 

101 

XIII. 

Prayer  Miracles  .... 

no 

XIV. 

Wonders  of  God  Through  Prayer  . 

123 

XV. 

Prayer  and  Divine  Providence  . 

139 

XVI. 

Prayer  and  Divine  Providence  ( Con¬ 

tinued ) . 

152 

9 


■  ■ 

-V  .  •  ! 

' 

■ 


.  ' 


‘ 


■ 

. 


■ 


I 

THE  MINISTRY  OF  PRAYER 


“  Prayer  should  he  the  breath  of  our  breathing,  the 
thought  of  our  thinking ,  the  soul  of  our  feeling,  and 
the  life  of  our  living,  the  sound  of  our  hearing,  the 
growth  of  our  growing .”  Prayer  in  its  magnitude  is 
length  without  end,  width  without  bounds,  height 
without  top,  and  depth  without  bottom.  Illimitable 
in  its  breadth,  exhaustless  in  height,  fathomless  in 
depths  and  infinite  in  extension. 

— Homer  W.  Hodge 


P^HE  ministry  of  prayer  has  been  the  pe¬ 
culiar  distinction  of  all  of  God’s  saints. 
This  has  been  the  secret  of  their  power. 
The  energy  and  the  soul  of  their  work  has  been 
the  closet.  The  need  of  help  outside  of  man  being 
so  great,  man’s  natural  inability  to  always  judge 
kindly,  justly,  and  truly,  and  to  act  the  Golden 
Rule,  so  prayer  is  enjoined  by  Christ  to  enable 
man  to  act  in  all  these  things  according  to  the  Di¬ 
vine  will.  By  prayer,  the  ability  is  secured  to  feel 
the  law  of  love,  to  speak  according  to  the  law  of 
love,  and  to  do  everything  in  harmony  with  the 
law  of  love. 

God  can  help  us.  God  is  a  Father.  We  need 
God’s  good  things  to  help  us  to  “  do  justly,  to  love 
mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly  before  God.”  We 


ii 


12  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


need  Divine  aid  to  act  brotherly,  wisely,  and  nobly, 
and  to  judge  truly,  and  charitably.  God’s  help  to 
do  all  these  things  in  God’s  way  is  secured  by 
prayer.  “  Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive ;  seek,  and  ye 
shall  find ;  knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you.” 

In  the  marvellous  output  of  Christian  graces  and 
duties,  the  result  of  giving  ourselves  wholly  to  God, 
recorded  in  the  twelfth  chapter  of  Romans,  we 
have  the  words,  “  Continuing  instant  in  prayer,” 
preceded  by  “  rejoicing  in  hope,  patient  in  tribula¬ 
tion,”  followed  by,  “  Distributing  to  the  necessity 
of  the  saints,  given  to  hospitality.”  Paul  thus 
writes  as  if  these  rich  and  rare  graces  and  unselfish 
duties,  so  sweet,  bright,  generous,  and  unselfish, 
had  for  their  center  and  source  the  ability  to  pray. 

This  is  the  same  word  which  is  used  of  the 
prayer  of  the  disciples  which  ushered  in  Pentecost 
with  all  of  its  rich  and  glorious  blessings  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  In  Colossians,  Paul  presses  the  word 
into  the  service  of  prayer  again,  “  Continue  in 
prayer,  and  watch  in  the  same  with  thanksgiving.” 
The  word  in  its  background  and  root  means 
strong,  the  ability  to  stay,  and  persevere  steadfast, 
to  hold  fast  and  firm,  to  give  constant  attention  to. 

In  Acts,  chapter  six,  it  is  translated,  “  Give  our¬ 
selves  continually  to  prayer.”  •  There  is  in  it  con¬ 
stancy,  courage,  un fainting  perseverance.  It 
means  giving  such  marked  attention  to,  and  such 
deep  concern  to  a  thing,  as  will  make  it  conspicu¬ 
ous  and  controlling. 


THE  MINISTRY  OF  PRAYER 


13 


This  is  an  advance  in  demand  on  “  continue.” 
Prayer  is  to  be  incessant,  without  intermission, 
assiduously,  no  check  in  desire,  in  spirit  or  in  act, 
the  spirit  and  the  life  always  in  the  attitude  of 
prayer.  The  knees  may  not  always  be  bended,  the 
lips  may  not  always  be  vocal  with  words  of  prayer, 
but  the  spirit  is  always  in  the  act  and  intercourse 
of  prayer. 

There  ought  to  be  no  adjustment  of  life  or  spirit 
for  closet  hours.  The  closet  spirit  should  sweetly 
rule  and  adjust  all  times  and  occasions.  Our  ac¬ 
tivities  and  work  should  be  performed  in  the  same 
spirit  which  makes  our  devotion  and  which  makes 
our  closet  time  sacred.  “  Without  intermission, 
incessantly,  assiduously,”  describes  an  opulence, 
and  energy,  and  unabated  and  ceaseless  strength 
and  fulness  of  effort;  like  the  full  and  exhaustless 
and  spontaneous  flow  of  an  artesian  stream. 
Touch  the  man  of  God  who  thus  understands 
prayer,  at  any  point,  at  any  time,  and  a  full  cur¬ 
rent  of  prayer  is  seen  flowing  from  him. 

But  all  these  untold  benefits,  of  which  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  made  to  us  the  conveyor,  go  back  in  their 
disposition  and  results  to  prayer.  Not  on  a  little 
process  and  a  mere  performance  of  prayer  is  the 
coming  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  of  His  great  grace 
conditioned,  but  on  prayer  set  on  fire,  by  an  un¬ 
quenchable  desire,  with  such  a  sense  of  need  as 
cannot  be  denied,  with  a  fixed  determination  which 
will  not  let  go,  and  which  will  never  faint  till  it 


14  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PKAYER 

wins  the  greatest  good  and  gets  the  best  and  last 
blessing  God  has  in  store  for  us. 

The  First  Christ,  Jesus,  our  Great  High  Priest, 
forever  blessed  and  adored  be  His  Name,  was  a 
gracious  Comforter,  a  faithful  Guide,  a  gifted 
Teacher,  a  fearless  Advocate,  a  devoted  Friend, 
and  an  all  powerful  Intercessor.  The  other,  “  an¬ 
other  Comforter/’  the  Holy  Spirit,  comes  into  all 
these  blessed  relations  of  fellowship,  authority  and 
aid,  with  all  the  tenderness,  sweetness,  fulness  and 
efficiency  of  the  First  Christ. 

Was  the  First  Christ  the  Christ  of  prayer?  Did 
He  offer  prayers  and  supplications,  with  strong 
crying  and  tears  unto  God?  Did  He  seek  the  si¬ 
lence,  the  solitude  and  the  darkness  that  He  might 
pray  unheard  and  unwitnessed  save  by  heaven,  in 
His  wrestling  agony,  for  man  with  God?  Does 
He  ever  live,  enthroned  above  at  the  Father’s  right 
hand,  there  to  pray  for  us  ? 

Then  how  truly  does  the  other  Christ,  the  other 
Comforter,  the  Holy  Spirit,  represent  Jesus  Christ 
as  the  Christ  of  prayer!  This  other  Christ,  the 
Comforter,  plants  Himself  not  in  the  waste  of  the 
mountain  nor  far  into  the  night,  but  in  the  chill 
and  the  night  of  the  human  heart,  to  rouse  it  to 
the  struggle,  and  to  teach  it  the  need  and  form  of 
prayer.  How  the  Divine  Comforter,  the  Spirit  of 
Truth,  puts  into  the  human  heart  the  burden  of 
earth’s  almighty  need,  and  makes  the  human  lips 
give  voice  to  its  mute  and  unutterable  groanings ! 


THE  MINISTRY  OF  PRAYER 


15 


What  a  mighty  Christ  of  prayer  is  the  Holy 
Spirit!  How  He  quenches  every  flame  in  the 
heart  but  the  flame  of  heavenly  desire!  How  He 
quiets,  like  a  weaned  child,  all  the  self-will,  until 
in  will,  in  brain,  and  in  heart,  and  by  mouth,  we 
pray  only  as  He  prays.  “  Making  intercession  for 
the  saints,  according  to  the  will  of  God.” 


II 


PRAYER  AND  THE  PROMISES 

You  need  not  utterly  despair  even  of  those  who 
for  the  present  “  turn  again  and  rend  you”  For  if 
all  your  arguments  and  persuasives  fail ,  there  is  yet 
another  remedy  left ,  and  one  that  is  frequently  found 
effectual,  when  no  other  method  avails.  This  is 
prayer.  Therefore,  whatsoever  you  desire  or  want, 
either  for  others  or  for  your  own  soul,  “Ask,  and  it 
shall  be  given  you.” — John  Wesley 

WITHOUT  the  promise  prayer  is  eccen¬ 
tric  and  baseless.  Without  prayer,  the 
promise  is  dim,  voiceless,  shadowy,  and 
impersonal.  The  promise  makes  prayer  dauntless 
and  irresistible.  The  Apostle  Peter  declares  that 
God  has  given  to  us  “  exceeding  great  and  precious 
promises/’  “  Precious  ”  and  “  exceeding  great  ” 
promises  they  are,  and  for  this  very  cause  we  are 
to  “  add  to  our  faith,”  and  supply  virtue.  It  is 
the  addition  which  makes  the  promises  current  and 
beneficial  to  us.  It  is  prayer  which  makes  the 
promises  weighty,  precious  and  practical.  The 
Apostle  Paul  did  not  hesitate  to  declare  that  God’s 
grace  so  richly  promised  was  made  operative  and 
efficient  by  prayer.  44  Ye  also  helping  together  by 
prayer  for  us.” 

The  promises  of  God  are  “  exceeding  great  and 

x6 


THE  PKOMISES 


11 


precious,”  words  which  clearly  indicate  their  great 
value  and  their  broad  reach,  as  grounds  upon  which 
to  base  our  expectations  in  praying.  Howsoever 
exceeding  great  and  precious  they  are,  their  reali¬ 
zation,  the  possibility  and  condition  of  that  realiza¬ 
tion,  are  based  on  prayer.  How  glorious  are  these 
promises  to  the  believing  saints  and  to  the  whole 
Church!  How  the  brightness  and  bloom,  the 
fruitage  and  cloudless  midday  glory  of  the  future 
beam  on  us  through  the  promises  of  God!  Yet 
these  promises  never  brought  hope  to  bloom  or 
fruit  to  a  prayerless  heart.  Neither  could  these 
promises,  were  they  a  thousandfold  increased  in 
number  and  preciousness,  bring  millennium  glory  to 
a  prayerless  Church.  Prayer  makes  the  promise 
rich,  fruitful  and  a  conscious  reality. 

Prayer  as  a  spiritual  energy,  and  illustrated  in 
its  enlarged  and  mighty  working,  makes  way  for 
and  brings  into  practical  realization  the  promises 
of  God. 

God's  promises  cover  all  things  which  pertain  to 
life  and  godliness,  which  relate  to  body  and  soul, 
which  have  to  do  with  time  and  eternity.  These 
promises  bless  the  present  and  stretch  out  in  their 
benefactions  to  the  illimitable  and  eternal  future. 
Prayer  holds  these  promises  in  keeping  and  in 
fruition.  Promises  are  God's  golden  fruit  to  be 
plucked  by  the  hand  of  prayer.  Promises  are 
God’s  incorruptible  seed,  to  be  sown  and  tilled  by 
prayer. 


18  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


Prayer  and  the  promises  are  interdependent. 
The  promise  inspires  and  energizes  prayer,  but 
prayer  locates  the  promise,  and  gives  it  realization 
and  location.  The  promise  is  like  the  blessed  rain 
falling  in  full  showers,  but  prayer,  like  the  pipes, 
which  transmit,  preserve  and  direct  the  rain,  lo¬ 
calizes  and  precipitates  these  promises,  until  they 
become  local  and  personal,  and  bless,  refresh  and 
fertilize.  Prayer  takes  hold  of  the  promise  and 
conducts  it  to  its  marvellous  ends,  removes  the 
obstacles,  and  makes  a  highway  for  the  promise  to 
its  glorious  fulfillment. 

While  God’s  promises  are  “  exceeding  great  and 
precious,”  they  are  specific,  clear  and  personal. 
How  pointed  and  plain  God’s  promise  to  Abraham: 

“  And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  called  unto  Abraham 
out  of  heaven  the  second  time, 

“  And  said,  By  myself  have  I  sworn,  saith  the 
Lord,  for  because  thou  hast  done  this  thing,  and 
hast  not  withheld  thy  son,  thine  only  son ; 

“  That  in  blessing  I  will  bless  thee,  and  in  multi¬ 
plying  I  will  multiply  thy  seed  as  the  stars  of  heaven, 
and  as  the  sand  which  is  upon  the  seashore ;  and  thy 
seed  shall  possess  the  gate  of  his  enemies ; 

“  And  in  thy  seed  shall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth 
be  blessed ;  because  thou  hast  obeyed  my  voice.” 

But  Rebekah  through  whom  the  promise  is  to 
flow  is  childless.  Her  barren  womb  forms  an  in¬ 
vincible  obstacle  to  the  fulfillment  of  God’s  prom- 


THE  PROMISES 


19 


ise.  But  in  the  course  of  time  children  are  born 
to  her. 

Isaac  becomes  a  man  of  prayer  through  whom 
the  promise  is  to  be  realized,  and  so  we  read: 

“And  Isaac  entreated  the  Lord  for  his  wife,  be¬ 
cause  she  was  barren,  and  the  Lord  was  entreated 
for  him,  and  Rebekah  his  wife  conceived.,, 

Isaac’s  praying  opened  the  way  for  the  fulfill¬ 
ment  of  God’s  promise,  and  carried  it  on  to  its 
marvellous  fulfillment,  and  made  the  promise  ef¬ 
fectual  in  bringing  forth  marvellous  results. 

God  spoke  to  Jacob  and  made  definite  promises 
to  him : 

“  Return  unto  the  land  of  thy  fathers,  and  to  thy 
kindred,  and  I  will  be  with  thee.” 

Jacob  promptly  moves  out  on  the  promise,  but 
Esau  confronts  him  with  his  awakened  vengeance 
and  his  murderous  intention,  more  dreadful  be¬ 
cause  of  the  long  years,  unappeased  and  waiting. 
Jacob  throws  himself  directly  on  God’s  promise  by 
a  night  of  prayer,  first  in  quietude  and  calmness, 
and  then  when  the  stillness,  the  loneliness  and  the 
darkness  of  the  night  are  upon  him,  he  makes  the 
all-night  wrestling  prayer. 

“  With  thee  I  mean  all  night  to  stay, 

And  wrestle  till  the  break  of  day.” 

God’s  being  is  involved,  His  promise  is  at  stake, 


20  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


and  much  is  involved  in  the  issue.  Esau’s  temper, 
his  conduct  and  his  character  are  involved.  It  is  a 
notable  occasion.  Much  depends  upon  it.  Jacob 
pursues  his  case  and  presses  his  plea  with  great 
struggles  and  hard  wrestling.  It  is  the  highest 
form  of  importunity.  But  the  victory  is  gained  at 
last.  His  name  and  nature  are  changed  and  he 
becomes  a  new  and  different  man.  Jacob  himself 
is  saved  first  of  all.  He  is  blessed  in  his  life  and 
soul.  But  more  still  is  accomplished.  Esau  un¬ 
dergoes  a  radical  change  of  mind.  He  who  came 
forth  with  hate  and  revenge  in  his  heart  against 
his  own  brother,  seeking  Jacob’s  destruction,  is 
strangely  and  wonderfully  affected,  and  he  is 
changed  and  his  whole  attitude  toward  his  brother 
becomes  radically  different.  And  when  the  two 
brothers  meet,  love  takes  the  place  of  fear  and 
hate,  and  they  vie  with  each  other  in  showing  true 
brotherly  affection. 

The  promise  of  God  is  fulfilled.  But  it  took 
that  all  night  of  importunate  praying  to  do  the 
deed.  It  took  that  fearful  night  of  wrestling  on 
Jacob’s  part  to  make  the  promise  sure  and  cause  it 
to  bear  fruit.  Prayer  wrought  the  marvellous 
deed.  So  prayer  of  the  same  kind  will  produce 
like  results  in  this  day.  It  was  God’s  promise  and 
Jacob’s  praying  which  crowned  and  crowded  the 
results  so  wondrously. 

“  Go  show  thyself  to  Ahab  and  I  will  send  rain 
on  the  earth,”  was  God’s  command  and  promise  to 


THE  PROMISES 


21 


His  servant  Elijah  after  the  sore  famine  had  cursed 
the  land.  Many  glorious  results  marked  that  day 
of  heroic  faith  and  dauntless  courage  on  Elijah's 
part.  The  sublime  issue  with  Israel  had  been  suc¬ 
cessful,  the  fire  had  fallen,  Israel  had  been  re¬ 
claimed,  the  prophets  of  Baal  had  been  killed,  but 
there  was  no  rain.  The  one  thing,  the  only  thing, 
which  God  had  promised,  had  not  been  given.  The 
day  was  declining,  and  the  awestruck  crowds  were 
faint,  and  yet  held  by  an  invisible  hand. 

Elijah  turns  from  Israel  to  God  and  from  Baal 
to  the  one  source  of  help  for  a  final  issue  and  a 
final  victory.  But  seven  times  is  the  restless  eager¬ 
ness  of  the  prophet  stayed.  Not  till  the  seventh 
repeated  time  is  his  vigilance  rewarded  and  the 
promise  pressed  to  its  final  fulfillment.  Elijah's 
fiery,  relentless  praying  bore  to  its  triumphant  re¬ 
sults  the  promise  of  God,  and  rain  descended  in 
full  showers. 

“  Thy  promise,  Lord,  is  ever  sure, 

And  they  that  in  Thy  house  would  dwell 
That  happy  station  to  secure, 

Must  still  in  holiness  excel.'' 

Our  prayers  are  too  little  and  feeble  to  execute 
the  purposes  or  to  claim  the  promises  of  God  with 
appropriating  power.  Marvellous  purposes  need 
marvellous  praying  to  execute  them.  Miracle-mak¬ 
ing  promises  need  miracle-making  praying  to 
realize  them.  Only  Divine  praying  can  oper- 


22  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


ate  Divine  promises  or  carry  out  Divine  pur¬ 
poses.  How  great,  how  sublime,  and  how  ex¬ 
alted  are  the  promises  God  makes  to  His  people! 
How  eternal  are  the  purposes  of  God !  Why  are 
we  so  impoverished  in  experience  and  so  low  in 
life  when  God’s  promises  are  so  “  exceeding  great 
and  precious  ”  ?  Why  do  the  eternal  purposes  of 
God  move  so  tardily?  Why  are  they  so  poorly 
executed?  Our  failure  to  appropriate  the  Divine 
promises  and  rest  our  faith  on  them,  and  to  pray 
believingly  is  the  solution.  “  We  have  not  because 
we  ask  not.”  We  ask  and  receive  not  because  we 
ask  amiss.” 

Prayer  is  based  on  the  purpose  and  promise  of 
God.  Prayer  is  submission  to  God.  Prayer  has 
no  sigh  of  disloyalty  against  God’s  will.  It  may 
cry  out  against  the  bitterness  and  the  dread  weight 
of  an  hour  of  unutterable  anguish:  “  If  it  be  pos¬ 
sible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  me.”  But  it  is  sur¬ 
charged  with  the  sweetest  and  promptest  submis¬ 
sion.  “  Yet  not  my  will,  but  thine  be  done.” 

But  prayer  in  its  usual  uniform  and  deep  cur¬ 
rent  is  conscious  conformity  to  God’s  will,  based 
upon  the  direct  promise  of  God’s  Word,  and  under 
the  illumination  and  application  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Nothing  is  surer  than  that  the  Word  of  God  is  the 
sure  foundation  of  prayer.  We  pray  just  as  we 
believe  God’s  Word.  Prayer  is  based  directly  and 
specifically  upon  God’s  revealed  promises  in  Christ 
Jesus.  It  has  no  other  ground  upon  which  to  base 


THE  PKOMISES 


23 


its  plea.  All  else  is  shadowy,  sandy,  fickle.  Not 
our  feelings,  not  our  merits,  not  our  works,  but 
God's  promise  is  the  basis  of  faith  and  the  solid 
ground  of  prayer. 

“  Now  I  have  found  the  ground  wherein 
Sure  my  soul’s  anchor  may  remain ; 

The  wounds  of  Jesus — for  my  sin, 

Before  the  world’s  foundation  slain.” 

The  converse  of  this  proposition  is  also  true. 
God's  promises  are  dependent  and  conditioned 
upon  prayer  to  appropriate  them  and  make  them  a 
conscious  realization.  The  promises  are  inwrought 
in  us,  appropriated  by  us,  and  held  in  the  arms  of 
faith  by  prayer.  Let  it  be  noted  that  prayer  gives 
the  promises  their  efficiency,  localizes  and  appro¬ 
priates  them,  and  utilizes  them.  Prayer  puts  the 
promises  to  practical  and  present  uses.  Prayer 
puts  the  promises  as  the  seed  in  the  fructifying  soil. 
Promises,  like  the  rain,  are  general.  Prayer  em¬ 
bodies,  precipitates,  and  locates  them  for  personal 
use.  Prayer  goes  by  faith  into  the  great  fruit  or¬ 
chard  of  God's  exceeding  great  and  precious  prom¬ 
ises,  and  with  hand  and  heart  picks  the  ripest  and 
richest  fruit.  The  promises,  like  electricity,  may 
sparkle  and  dazzle  and  yet  be  impotent  for  good 
till  these  dynamic,  life-giving  currents  are  chained 
by  prayer,  and  are  made  the  mighty  forces  which 
move  and  bless. 


Ill 


PRAYER  AND  THE  PROMISES  ( Continued ) 

Every  promise  of  Scripture  is  a  writing  of  God, 
which  may  he  pleaded  before  Him  with  this  reason¬ 
able  request:  “Do  as  Thou  hast  said ”  The  Creator 
will  not  cheat  His  creature  who  depends  upon  His 
truth;  and,  far  more,  the  Heavenly  Father  will  not 
break  His  word  to  His  own  child.  “  Remember  the 
word  unto  Thy  servant,  on  which  Thou  hast  caused 
me  to  hope  ”  is  most  prevalent  pleading.  It  is  a  dou¬ 
ble  argument:  It  is  Thy  Word,  wilt  Thou  not  keep  it? 
Why  hast  Thou  spoken  of  it  if  Thou  wilt  not  make  it 
good?  Thou  hast  caused  me  to  hope  in  it;  wilt  Thou 
disappoint  the  hope  which  Thou  hast  Thyself  begot¬ 
ten  in  me? — C.  H.  Spurgeon 

THE  great  promises  find  their  fulfillment 
along  the  lines  of  prayer.  They  inspire 
prayer,  and  through  prayer  the  promises 
flow  out  to  their  full  realization  and  bear  their 
ripest  fruit. 

The  magnificent  and  sanctifying  promise  in  Eze¬ 
kiel,  thirty-sixth  chapter,  a  promise  finding  its  full, 
ripe,  and  richest  fruit  in  the  New  Testament,  is  an 
illustration  of  how  the  promise  waits  on  prayer: 

“  Then  will  I  sprinkle  clean  water  upon  you,  and  ye 
shall  be  clean ;  from  all  your  filthiness,  and  from  all 
your  idols  will  I  cleanse  you. 

24 


THE  PKOMISES 


25 


“A  new  heart  also  will  I  give  you,  and  a  new  spirit 
will  I  put  within  you ;  and  I  will  take  away  the  stony 
heart  out  of  your  flesh,  and  I  will  give  you  a  heart  of 
flesh. 

“And  I  will  put  my  Spirit  within  you,  and  cause 
you  to  walk  in  my  statutes,  and  ye  shall  keep  my 
judgments  and  do  them. 

“And  ye  shall  dwell  in  the  land  that  I  gave  to  your 
fathers ;  and  ye  shall  be  my  people,  and  I  will  be  your 
God.” 

And  concerning  this  promise,  and  this  work,  God 
definitely  says: 

“  I  will  yet  for  this  be  inquired  of  by  the  house  of 
Israel,  to  do  it  for  them.” 

The  more  truly  men  have  prayed  for  these  rich 
things,  the  more  fully  have  they  entered  into  this 
exceeding  great  and  precious  promise,  for  in  its 
initial,  and  final  results  as  well  as  in  all  of  its  proc¬ 
esses,  realized,  it  is  entirely  dependent  on  prayer. 

“  Give  me  a  new,  a  perfect  heart. 

From  doubt,  and  fear,  and  sorrow  free; 

The  mind  which  was  in  Christ  impart. 

And  let  my  spirit  cleave  to  thee. 

“  O  take  this  heart  of  stone  away ! 

Thy  sway  it  doth  not,  cannot  own; 

In  me  no  longer  let  it  stay; 

O  take  away  this  heart  of  stone !  ” 

No  new  heart  ever  throbbed  with  its  pulsations 


26  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


of  Divine  life  in  one  whose  lips  have  never  sought 
in  prayer  with  contrite  spirit,  that  precious  boon  of 
a  perfect  heart  of  love  and  cleanness.  God  never 
has  put  His  Spirit  into  the  realm  of  a  human  heart 
which  had  never  invoked  by  ardent  praying  the 
coming  and  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  A 
prayerless  spirit  has  no  affinity  for  a  clean  heart. 
Prayer  and  a  pure  heart  go  hand  in  hand.  Purity 
of  heart  follows  praying,  while  prayer  is  the  natu¬ 
ral,  spontaneous  outflowing  of  a  heart  made  clean 
by  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ. 

In  this  connection  let  it  be  noted  that  God's 
promises  are  always  personal  and  specific.  They 
are  not  general,  indefinite,  vague.  They  do  not 
have  to  do  with  multitudes  and  classes  of  people  in 
a  mass,  but  are  directed  to  individuals.  They  deal 
with  persons.  Each  believer  can  claim  the  promise 
as  his  own.  God  deals  with  each  one  personally. 
So  that  every  saint  can  put  the  promises  to  the  test. 
“  Prove  me  now  herewith,  saith  the  Lord.”  No 
need  of  generalizing,  nor  of  being  lost  in  vague¬ 
ness.  The  praying  saint  has  the  right  to  put  his 
hand  upon  the  promise  and  claim  it  as  his  own, 
one  made  especially  to  him,  and  one  intended  to 
embrace  all  his  needs,  present  and  future. 

“  Though  troubles  assail, 

And  dangers  affright, 

Though  friends  should  all  fail, 

And  foes  all  unite. 


THE  PROMISES 


27 


Yet  one  thing  secures  us. 

Whatever  betide, 

The  promise  assures  us, 

The  Lord  will  provide.” 

Jeremiah  once  said,  speaking  of  the  captivity  of 
Israel  and  of  its  ending,  speaking  for  Almighty 
God:  “ After  seventy  years  be  accomplished  at 
Babylon,  I  will  visit  you,  and  will  perform  my 
good  word  toward  you,  in  causing  you  to  return  to 
this  place.” 

But  this  strong  and  definite  promise  of  God  was 
accompanied  by  these  words,  coupling  the  promise 
with  prayer:  “  Then  shall  ye  call  upon  me,  and  ye 
shall  go  and  pray  unto  me,  and  I  will  hearken  unto 
you.  And  ye  shall  seek  me  and  find  me,  when  ye 
shall  search  for  me  with  all  your  heart.”  This 
seems  to  indicate  very  clearly  that  the  promise  was 
dependent  for  its  fulfillment  on  prayer. 

In  Daniel  we  have  this  record,  “  I,  Daniel,  un¬ 
derstood  by  books  the  number  of  the  years  whereof 
the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Jeremiah,  the 
prophet,  that  he  would  accomplish  seventy  years  in 
the  desolations  of  Jerusalem.  And  I  set  my  face 
unto  the  Lord  God  to  seek  by  prayer  and  supplica¬ 
tions  with  fastings  and  sackcloth  and  ashes.” 

So  Daniel,  as  the  time  of  the  captivity  was  ex¬ 
piring,  set  himself  in  mighty  prayer  in  order  that 
the  promise  should  be  fulfilled  and  the  captivity  be 
brought  to  an  end.  It  was  God’s  promise  by  Jere- 


28  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PEA  YEP 


miah  and  Daniel’s  praying  which  broke  the  chains 
of  Babylonish  captivity,  set  Israel  free  and  brought 
God’s  ancient  people  back  to  their  native  land. 
The  promise  and  prayer  went  together  to  carry  out 
God’s  purpose  and  to  execute  His  plans. 

God  had  promised  through  His  prophets  that  the 
coming  Messiah  should  have  a  forerunner.  How 
many  homes  and  wombs  in  Israel  had  longed  for 
the  coming  to  them  of  this  great  honour!  Per¬ 
chance  Zacharias  and  Elizabeth  were  the  only  ones 
who  were  trying  to  realize  by  prayer  this  great  dig¬ 
nity  and  blessing.  At  least  we  do  know  that  the 
angel  said  to  Zacharias,  as  he  announced  to  him 
the  coming  of  this  great  personage,  “  Thy  prayer  is 
heard.”  It  was  then  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  as 
spoken  by  the  prophets  and  the  prayer  of  the  old 
priest  and  his  wife  brought  John  the  Baptist  into 
the  withered  womb,  and  into  the  childless  home  of 
Zacharias  and  Elizabeth. 

The  promise  given  to  Paul,  engraven  on  his 
apostolic  commission,  as  related  by  him  after  his 
arrest  in  Jerusalem,  when  he  was  making  his  de¬ 
fense  before  King  Agrippa,  was  on  this  wise: 
“  Delivering  thee  from  the  people  and  from  the 
Gentiles,  unto  whom  I  now  send  thee.”  How  did 
Paul  make  this  promise  efficient?  How  did  he 
make  the  promise  real?  Here  is  the  answer.  In 
trouble  by  men,  Jew  and  Gentile,  pressed  by  them 
sorely,  he  writes  to  his  brethren  at  Rome,  with  a 
pressing  request  for  prayer: 


THE  PROMISES 


29 


“  Now  I  beseech  you,  brethren,  for  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ’s  sake,  and  for  the  love  of  the  Spirit,  that  ye 
strive  together  with  me  in  your  prayers  to  God 
for  me; 

“  That  I  may  be  delivered  from  them  that  do  not 
believe  in  Judea.” 

Their  prayers,  united  with  his  prayer,  were  to 
secure  his  deliverance  and  secure  his  safety,  and 
were  also  to  make  the  apostolic  promise  vital  and 
cause  it  to  be  fully  realized. 

All  is  to  be  sanctified  and  realized  by  the  Word 
of  God  and  prayer.  God’s  deep  and  wide  river  of 
promise  will  turn  into  the  deadly  miasma  or  be  lost 
in  the  morass,  if  we  do  not  utilize  these  promises 
by  prayer,  and  receive  their  full  and  life-giving 
waters  into  our  hearts. 

The  promise  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  the  disciples 
was  in  a  very  marked  way  the  “  Promise  of  the 
Father,”  but  it  was  only  realized  after  many  days 
of  continued  and  importunate  praying.  The  prom¬ 
ise  was  clear  and  definite  that  the  disciples  should 
be  endued  with  power  from  on  high,  but  as  a  con¬ 
dition  of  receiving  that  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
they  were  instructed  to  “  tarry  in  the  city  of  Jeru¬ 
salem  till  ye  be  endued  with  power  from  on  high.” 
The  fulfillment  of  the  promise  depended  upon  the 
“  tarrying.”  The  promise  of  this  “  enduement  of 
power  ”  was  made  sure  by  prayer.  Prayer  sealed 
it  to  glorious  results.  So  we  find  it  written, 
“  These  continued  with  one  accord,  in  prayer  and 


30  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


supplication,  with  the  women.”  And  it  is  signifi¬ 
cant  that  it  was  while  they  were  praying,  resting 
their  expectations  on  the  surety  of  the  promise, 
that  the  Holy  Spirit  fell  upon  them  and  they  were 
all  “  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost.”  The  promise 
and  the  prayer  went  hand  in  hand. 

After  Jesus  Christ  made  this  large  and  definite 
promise  to  His  disciples,  He  ascended  on  high,  and 
was  seated  at  His  Father’s  right  hand  of  exaltation 
and  power.  Yet  the  promise  given  by  Him  of 
sending  the  Holy  Spirit  was  not  fulfilled  by  His 
enthronement  merely,  nor  by  the  promise  only,  nor 
by  the  fact  that  the  Prophet  Joel  had  foretold  with 
transported  raptures  of  the  bright  day  of  the  Spir¬ 
it’s  coming.  Neither  was  it  that  the  Spirit’s  com¬ 
ing  was  the  only  hope  of  God’s  cause  in  this  world. 
All  these  all-powerful  and  all-engaging  reasons 
were  not  the  immediate  operative  cause  of  the  com¬ 
ing  of  the  Holy  Spirit  The  solution  is  found  in 
the  attitude  of  the  disciples.  The  answer  is  found 
in  the  fact  that  the  disciples,  with  the  women, 
spent  several  days  in  that  upper  room,  in  earnest, 
specific,  continued  prayer.  It  was  prayer  that 
brought  to  pass  the  famous  day  of  Pentecost.  And 
as  it  was  then,  so  it  can  be  now.  Prayer  can  bring 
a  Pentecost  in  this  day  if  there  be  the  same  kind  of 
praying,  for  the  promise  has  not  exhausted  its 
power  and  vitality.  The  “  promise  of  the  Father  ” 
still  holds  good  for  the  present-day  disciples. 

Prayer,  mighty  prayer,  united,  continued,  ear- 


THE  PEOMISES 


31 


nest  prayer,  for  nearly  two  weeks,  brought  the 
Holy  Spirit  to  the  Church  and  to  the  world  in  Pen¬ 
tecostal  glory  and  power.  And  mighty  continued 
and  united  prayer  will  do  the  same  now. 

“  Lord  God,  the  Holy  Ghost, 

In  this  accepted  hour; 

As  on  the  day  of  Pentecost, 

Descend  in  all  Thy  power. 

“  We  meet  with  one  accord, 

In  our  appointed  place, 

And  wait  the  promise  of  our  Lord, 

The  Spirit  of  all  grace.” 

Nor  must  it  be  passed  by  that  the  promises  of 
God  to  sinners  of  every  kind  and  degree  are  equally 
sure  and  steadfast,  and  are  made  real  and  true  by 
the  earnest  cries  of  all  true  penitents.  It  is  just  as 
true  with  the  Divine  promises  made  to  the  unsaved 
when  they  repent  and  seek  God,  that  they  are  real¬ 
ized  in  answer  to  the  prayers  of  broken-hearted 
sinners,  as  it  is  true  that  the  promises  to  believers 
are  realized  in  answer  to  their  prayers.  The  prom¬ 
ise  of  pardon  and  peace  was  the  basis  of  the 
prayers  of  Saul  of  Tarsus  during  those  days  of 
darkness  and  distress  in  the  house  of  Judas,  when 
the  Lord  told  Ananias  in  order  to  allay  his  fears, 
“  Behold  he  prayeth.” 

The  promise  of  mercy  and  an  abundant  pardon 
is  tied  up  with  seeking  God  and  calling  upon  Him 
by  Isaiah: 


32  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


“  Seek  ye  the  Lord  while  he  may  be  found,  and  call 
ye  upon  him  while  he  is  near. 

“  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way  and  the  unright¬ 
eous  man  his  thoughts;  and  let  him  return  unto  the 
Lord,  and  he  will  have  mercy,  and  to  our  God,  for  he 
will  abundantly  pardon.” 

The  praying  sinner  receives  mercy  because  his 
prayer  is  grounded  on  the  promise  of  pardon  made 
by  Him  whose  right  it  is  to  pardon  guilty  sinners. 
The  penitent  seeker  after  God  obtains  mercy  be¬ 
cause  there  is  a  definite  promise  of  mercy  to  all 
who  seek  the  Lord  in  repentance  and  faith.  Prayer 
always  brings  forgiveness  to  the  seeking  soul.  The 
abundant  pardon  is  dependent  upon  the  promise 
made  real  by  the  promise  of  God  to  the  sinner. 

While  salvation  is  promised  to  him  who  believes, 
the  believing  sinner  is  always  a  praying  sinner. 
God  has  no  promise  of  pardon  for  a  prayerless  sin¬ 
ner  just  as  He  has  no  promise  for  the  prayerless 
professor  of  religion.  “  Behold  he  prayeth  ”  is 
not  only  the  unfailing  sign  of  sincerity  and  the  evi¬ 
dence  that  the  sinner  is  proceeding  in  the  right  way 
to  find  God,  but  it  is  the  unfailing  prophecy  of  an 
abundant  pardon.  Get  the  sinner  to  praying  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  Divine  promise,  and  he  then  is  near 
the  kingdom  of  God.  The  very  best  sign  of  the 
returning  prodigal  is  that  he  confesses  his  sins  and 
begins  to  ask  for  the  lowliest  place  in  his  father's 
house. 

It  is  the  Divine  promise  of  mercy,  of  forgiveness 


THE  PROMISES 


33 


and  of  adoption  which  gives  the  poor  sinner  hope. 
This  encourages  him  to  pray.  This  moves  him  in 
distress  to  cry  out,  “Jesus,  thou  Son  of  David, 
have  mercy  upon  me.5’ 

“  Thy  promise  is  my  only  plea. 

With  this  I  venture  nigh ; 

Thou  call’st  the  burdened  soul  to  Thee, 

And  such,  O  Lord,  am  I.” 

How  large  are  the  promises  made  to  the  saint ! 
How  great  the  promises  given  to  poor,  hungry- 
hearted,  lost  sinners,  ruined  by  the  fall!  And 
prayer  has  arms  sufficient  to  encompass  them  all, 
and  prove  them.  How  great  the  encouragement  to 
all  souls,  these  promises  of  God!  How  firm  the 
ground  on  which  to  rest  our  faith !  How  stimulat¬ 
ing  to  prayer!  What  firm  ground  on  which  to 
base  our  pleas  in  praying ! 

“  The  Lord  hath  promised  good  to  me, 

His  word  my  hope  secures; 

He  will  my  shield  and  portion  be 
As  long  as  life  endures.” 


IV 

PRAYER— ITS  POSSIBILITIES 

The  Holy  Ghost  comes  down  into  our  hearts  some¬ 
times  in  prayer  with  a  beam  from  heaven ,  whereby 
we  see  more  at  once  of  God  and  His  glory ,  more  as¬ 
tounding  thoughts  and  enlarged  apprehensions  of 
God,  many  beams  meeting  in  one  and  falling  to  the 
center  of  our  hearts.  By  these  coming  downs  or  di¬ 
vine  influxes,  God  slides  into  our  hearts  by  beams  of 
Himself ;  we  come  not  to  have  communion  with  God 
by  way  of  many  broken  thoughts  put  together,  but 
there  is  a  contraction  of  many  beams  from  heaven, 
which  is  shed  into  our  souls,  so  that  we  know  more  of 
God  and  have  more  communion  with  Him  in  a  quar¬ 
ter-hour  than  we  could  know  in  a  year  by  the  way  of 
wisdom  only. — Taos.  Goodwin 

HOW  vast  are  the  possibilities  of  prayer! 

How  wide  is  its  reach!  What  great 
things  are  accomplished  by  this  divinely 
appointed  means  of  grace!  It  lays  its  hand  on 
Almighty  God  and  moves  Him  to  do  what  He 
would  not  otherwise  do  if  prayer  was  not  offered. 
It  brings  things  to  pass  which  would  never  other¬ 
wise  occur.  The  story  of  prayer  is  the  story  of 
great  achievements.  Prayer  is  a  wonderful  power 
placed  by  Almighty  God  in  the  hands  of  His  saints, 
which  may  be  used  to  accomplish  great  purposes 

3% 


PRAYER — ITS  POSSIBILITIES 


35 


and  to  achieve  unusual  results.  Prayer  reaches  to 
everything,  takes  in  all  things  great  and  small 
which  are  promised  by  God  to  the  children  of  men. 
The  only  limit  to  prayer  are  the  promises  of  God 
and  His  ability  to  fulfill  those  promises.  “  Open 
thy  mouth  wide  and  I  will  fill  it.” 

The  records  of  prayer’s  achievements  are  en¬ 
couraging  to  faith,  cheering  to  the  expectations  of 
saints,  and  is  an  inspiration  to  all  who  would  pray 
and  test  its  value.  Prayer  is  no  mere  untried  the¬ 
ory.  It  is  not  some  strange  unique  scheme,  con¬ 
cocted  in  the  brains  of  men,  and  set  on  foot  by 
them,  an  invention  which  has  never  been  tried  nor 
put  to  the  test.  Prayer  is  a  Divine  arrangement  in 
the  moral  government  of  God,  designed  for  the 
benefit  of  men  and  intended  as  a  means  for  fur¬ 
thering  the  interests  of  His  cause  on  earth,  and 
carrying  out  His  gracious  purposes  in  redemption 
and  providence.  Prayer  proves  itself.  It  is  suscep¬ 
tible  of  proving  its  virtue  by  those  who  pray. 
Prayer  needs  no  proof  other  than  its  accomplish¬ 
ments.  “  If  any  man  will  do  his  will,  he  shall 
know  of  the  doctrine.”  If  any  man  will  know  the 
virtue  of  prayer,  if  he  will  know  what  it  will  do, 
let  him  pray.  Let  him  put  prayer  to  the  test. 

What  a  breadth  is  given  to  prayer!  What 
heights  it  reaches!  It  is  the  breathing  of  a  soul 
inflamed  for  God,  and  inflamed  for  man.  It  goes 
as  far  as  the  Gospel  goes,  and  is  as  wide,  compas¬ 
sionate  and  prayerful  as  is  that  Gospel. 


36  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


How  much  of  prayer  do  all  these  unpossessed, 
alienated  provinces  of  earth  demand  in  order  to 
enlighten  them,  to  impress  them  and  to  move  them 
toward  God  and  His  Son,  Jesus  Christ?  Had  the 
professed  disciples  of  Christ  only  have  prayed  in 
the  past  as  they  ought  to  have  done,  the  centuries 
would  not  have  found  these  provinces  still  bound 
in  death,  in  sin,  and  in  ignorance. 

Alas!  how  the  unbelief  of  men  has  limited  the 
power  of  God  to  work  through  prayer!  What 
limitations  have  disciples  of  Jesus  Christ  put  upon 
prayer  by  their  prayerlessness !  How  the  Church, 
with  her  neglect  of  prayer,  has  hedged  about  the 
Gospel  and  shut  up  doors  of  access ! 

Prayer  possibilities  open  doors  for  the  entrance 
of  the  Gospel:  “  Withal  praying  also  for  us  that 
God  would  open  to  us  a  door  of  utterance/' 
Prayer  opened  for  the  Apostles  doors  of  utterance, 
created  opportunities  and  made  openings  to  preach 
the  Gospel.  The  appeal  by  prayer  was  to  God,  be¬ 
cause  God  was  moved  by  prayer.  God  was  thereby 
moved  to  do  His  own  work  in  an  enlarged  way  and 
by  new  ways.  Prayer  possibility  gives  not  only 
great  power,  and  opens  doors  to  the  Gospel,  but  it 
gives  facility  as  well  to  the  Gospel.  Prayer  makes 
the  Gospel  to  go  fast  and  to  move  with  glorious 
fastness.  A  Gospel  projected  by  the  mighty  ener¬ 
gies  of  prayer  is  neither  slow,  lazy  nor  dull.  It 
moves  with  God’s  power,  with  God’s  effulgence 
and  with  angelic  swiftness. 


PRAYER— ITS  POSSIBILITIES  37 


“  Brethren,  pray  for  us  that  the  word  of  the 
Lord  may  have  free  course  and  be  glorified,1 ”  is  the 
request  of  the  Apostle  Paul,  whose  faith  reached  to 
the  possibilities  of  prayer  for  the  preached  Word. 
The  Gospel  moves  altogether  too  slowly,  often  tim¬ 
idly,  and  with  feeble  steps.  What  will  make  this 
Gospel  go  rapidly  like  a  race  runner?  What  will 
give  this  Gospel  Divine  effulgence  and  glory,  and 
cause  it  to  move  worthy  of  God  and  of  Christ? 
The  answer  is  at  hand.  Prayer,  more  prayer,  bet¬ 
ter  prayer  will  do  the  deed.  This  means  of  grace 
will  give  fast  going,  splendour  and  divinity  to  the 
Gospel. 

The  possibilities  of  prayer  reach  to  all  things. 
Whatever  concerns  man's  highest  welfare,  and 
whatever  has  to  do  with  God’s  plans  and  purposes 
concerning  men  on  earth,  is  a  subject  for  prayer. 
In  “  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask,”  is  embraced  all  that 
concerns  us  or  the  children  of  men  and  God.  And 
whatever  is  left  out  of  “  whatsoever  ”  is  left  out  of 
prayer.  Where  will  we  draw  the  lines  which  leave 
out  or  which  will  limit  the  word  “  whatsoever  ”  ? 
Define  it,  and  search  out  and  publish  the  things 
which  the  word  does  not  include.  If  “  whatso¬ 
ever  ”  does  not  include  all  things,  then  add  to  it  the 
word  “  anything.”  “If  ye  shall  ask  anything  in 
my  name,  I  will  do  it.” 

What  riches  of  grace,  what  blessings,  spiritual 
and  temporal,  what  good  for  time  and  eternity, 


38  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


would  have  been  ours  had  we  learned  the  possibili¬ 
ties  of  prayer  and  our  faith  had  taken  in  the  wide 
range  of  the  Divine  promises  to  us  to  answer 
prayer!  What  blessings  on  our  times  and  what 
furtherance  to  God’s  cause  had  we  but  learned  how 
to  pray  with  large  expectations!  Who  will  rise 
up  in  this  generation  and  teach  the  Church  this 
lesson?  It  is  a  child’s  lesson  in  simplicity,  but  who 
has  learned  it  well  enough  to  put  prayer  to  the  test  ? 
It  is  a  great  lesson  in  its  matchless  and  universal 
good.  The  possibilities  of  prayer  are  unspeakable, 
but  the  lesson  of  prayer  which  realizes  and  meas¬ 
ures  up  to  these  possibilities,  who  has  learned? 

In  His  discourse  in  John,  fifteenth  chapter,  our 
Lord  seems  to  connect  friendship  for  Him  with 
that  of  prayer,  and  His  choosing  of  His  disciples 
seemed  to  have  been  with  a  design  that  through 
prayer  they  should  bear  much  fruit. 

“  Ye  are  my  friends  if  ye  do  whatsoever  I  com¬ 
mand  you. 

“Ye  have  not  chosen  me,  but  I  have  chosen  you, 
and  ordained  you,  that  ye  should  go  and  bring  forth 
fruit,  and  that  your  fruit  should  remain;  that  whatso¬ 
ever  ye  shall  ask  the  Father  in  my  name,  he  may  give 
it  to  you.” 

Jesus  puts  fruit-bearing  and  fruit-remaining, 
ripe,  unwithered,  and  rich  fruit,  that  prayer  might 
come  to  its  full  possibilities  in  order  that  the  Father 
might  give.  Here  we  have  again  the  undefined 


PRAYER — ITS  POSSIBILITIES 


39 


&nd  unlimited  word,  “  whatsoever,”  as  covering  the 
rights  and  the  things  for  which  we  are  to  pray  in 
the  possibilities  of  prayer. 

We  have  still  another  declaration  from  Jesus; 

“  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you.  Whatsoever  ye 
shall  ask  the  Father  in  my  name,  he  will  give  it  to 
you. 

“  Hitherto  ye  have  asked  nothing  in  my  name ;  ask, 
and  ye  shall  receive,  that  your  joy  may  be  full.” 

Here  is  a  very  definite  exhortation  from  our 
Lord  to  largeness  in  praying.  Here  we  are  defi¬ 
nitely  urged  by  Him  to  ask  for  large  things,  and 
announced  with  the  dignity  and  solemnity  indicated 
by  the  double  amen,  “  Verily,  Verily.”  Why  these 
marvellous  urgencies  in  this  last  recorded  and  vital 
conversation  of  our  Lord  with  His  disciples?  The 
answer  is  that  our  Lord  might  prepare  them  for 
the  New  Dispensation,  in  which  prayer  was  to  have 
such  marvellous  results,  and  in  which  prayer  was  to 
be  the  chief  agency  to  conserve  and  make  aggres¬ 
sive  His  Gospel. 

In  our  Lord’s  language  to  His  disciples  about 
choosing  them  that  should  bear  fruit,  in  this  afflu¬ 
ent  statement  of  our  Lord,  He  clearly  teaches  us 
that  this  matter  of  praying  and  fruit-bearing  is  not 
a  petty  business  of  our  choice,  or  a  secondary  mat¬ 
ter  in  relation  to  other  matters,  but  that  He  has 
chosen  us  for  this  very  business  of  praying.  He 


40  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


had  specially  in  mind  our  praying,  and  He  has 
chosen  us  of  His  own  Divine  selection,  and  He  ex¬ 
pects  us  to  do  this  one  thing  of  praying  and  to  do 
it  intelligently  and  well.  For  He  before  says  that 
He  had  made  us  His  friends,  and  had  brought  us 
into  bosom  confidence  with  Him,  and  also  into  free 
and  full  conference  with  Him.  The  main  object 
of  choosing  us  as  His  disciples  and  of  friendship 
for  Him  was  that  we  might  be  the  better  fitted  to 
bear  the  fruit  of  prayer. 

Let  us  not  forget  that  we  are  noting  the  possibili¬ 
ties  of  the  true  praying  ones.  “Anything  ”  is  the 
word  of  area  and  circumference.  How  far  it 
reaches  we  may  not  know.  How  wide  it  spreads, 
our  minds  fail  to  discover.  What  is  there  which 
is  not  within  its  reach?  Why  does  Jesus  repeat 
and  exhaust  these  words,  all-inclusive  and  bound¬ 
less  words,  if  He  does  not  desire  to  emphasize  the 
unbounded  magnificence  and  illimitable  munifi¬ 
cence  of  prayer?  Why  does  He  press  men  to  pray, 
so  that  our  very  poverty  might  be  enriched  and  our 
limitless  inheritance  by  prayer  be  secured? 

We  affirm  with  absolute  certainty  that  Almighty 
God  answers  prayer.  The  vast  possibilities  and 

the  urgent  necessity  of  prayer  lie  in  this  stupen- 

* 

dous  fact  that  God  hears  and  answers  prayer.  And 
God  hears  and  answers  all  prayer.  He  hears  and 
answers  every  prayer,  where  the  true  conditions  of 
praying  are  met.  Either  this  is  so  or  it  is  not.  If 
not,  then  is  there  nothing  in  prayer.  Then  prayer 


PRAYER— ITS  POSSIBILITIES  41 


is  but  the  recitation  of  words,  a  mere  verbal  per¬ 
formance,  an  empty  ceremony.  Then  prayer  is  an 
altogether  useless  exercise.  But  if  what  we  have 
said  is  true,  then  are  there  vast  possibilities  in 
prayer.  Then  is  it  far  reaching  in  its  scope,  and 
wide  in  its  range.  Then  is  it  true  that  prayer  can 
lay  its  hand  upon  Almighty  God  and  move  Him  to 
do  great  and  wonderful  things. 

The  benefits,  the  possibilities  and  the  necessity  of 
prayer  are  not  merely  subjective  but  are  peculiarly 
objective  in  their  character.  Prayer  aims  at  a  defi¬ 
nite  object.  Prayer  has  a  direct  design  in  view. 
Prayer  always  has  something  specific  before  the 
mind's  eye.  There  may  be  some  subjective  bene¬ 
fits  which  accrue  from  praying,  but  this  is  alto¬ 
gether  secondary  and  incidental.  Prayer  always 
drives  directly  at  an  object  and  seeks  to  secure  a 
desired  end.  Prayer  is  asking,  seeking  and  knock¬ 
ing  at  a  door  for  something  we  have  not,  which  we 
desire,  and  which  God  has  promised  to  us. 

Prayer  is  a  direct  address  to  God.  “  In  every¬ 
thing  let  your  requests  be  made  known  unto  God.” 
Prayer  secures  blessings,  and  makes  men  better  be¬ 
cause  it  reaches  the  ear  of  God.  Prayer  is  only  for 
the  betterment  of  men  when  it  has  affected  God 
and  moved  Him  to  do  something  for  men.  Prayer 
affects  men  by  affecting  God.  Prayer  moves  men 
because  it  moves  God  to  move  men.  Prayer  influ¬ 
ences  men  by  influencing  God  to  influence  them. 
Prayer  moves  the  hand  that  moves  the  world. 


42  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


“  That  power  is  prayer,  which  soars  on  high. 
Through  Jesus  to  the  throne; 

And  moves  the  hand  which  moves  the  world, 

To  bring  salvation  down/* 

The  utmost  possibilities  of  prayer  have  rarely 
been  realized.  The  promises  of  God  are  so  great 
to  those  who  truly  pray,  when  He  puts  Himself  so 
fully  into  the  hands  of  the  praying  ones,  that  it  al¬ 
most  staggers  our  faith  and  causes  us  to  hesitate 
with  astonishment.  His  promise  to  answer,  and  to 
do  and  to  give  “  all  things,”  “  anything,”  “  whatso¬ 
ever,”  and  “  all  things  whatsoever,”  are  so  large, 
so  great,  so  exceeding  broad,  that  we  stand  back  in 
amazement  and  give  ourselves  to  questioning  and 
doubt.  We  “  stagger  at  the  promises  through  un¬ 
belief.”  Really  the  promises  of  God  to  prayer 
have  been  pared  down  by  us  to  our  little  faith,  and 
have  been  brought  down  to  the  low  level  of  our 
narrow  notions  about  God’s  ability,  liberality  and 
resources.  Let  us  ever  keep  in  mind  and  never  for 
one  moment  allow  ourselves  to  doubt  the  statement 
that  God  means  what  He  says  in  all  of  His  prom¬ 
ises.  God’s  promises  are  His  own  word.  His 
veracity  is  at  stake  in  them.  To  question  them  is 
to  doubt  His  veracity.  He  cannot  afford  to  prove 
faithless  to  His  word.  “  In  hope  of  eternal  life, 
which  God  that  cannot  lie,  promised  before  the 
world  began.”  His  promises  are  for  plain  people, 
and  He  means  to  do  for  all  who  pray  just  what  He 


PRAYER— ITS  POSSIBILITIES  43 


says  He  will  do.  “  For  He  is  faithful  that  hath 
promised.” 

Unfortunately  we  have  failed  to  lay  ourselves 
out  in  praying.  We  have  limited  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel.  The  ability  to  pray  can  be  secured  by  the 
grace  and  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  it  demands 
so  strenuous  and  high  a  character  that  it  is  a  rare 
thing  for  a  man  or  woman  to  be  on  “  praying 
ground  and  on  pleading  terms  with  God.”  It  is  as 
true  to-day  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Elijah,  that 
“  the  fervent,  effectual  prayer  of  a  righteous  man 
availeth  much.”  How  much  such  a  prayer  avails, 
who  can  tell  ? 

The  possibilities  of  prayer  are  the  possibilities  of 
faith.  Prayer  and  faith  are  Siamese  twins.  One 
heart  animates  them  both.  Faith  is  always  pray¬ 
ing.  Prayer  is  always  believing.  Faith  must  have 
a  tongue  by  which  it  can  speak.  Prayer  is  the 
tongue  of  faith.  Faith  must  receive.  Prayei  is 
the  hand  of  faith  stretched  out  to  receive.  Prayer 
must  rise  and  soar.  Faith  must  give  prayer  the 
wings  to  fly  and  soar.  Prayer  must  have  an  audi¬ 
ence  with  God.  Faith  opens  the  door,  and  access 
and  audience  are  given.  Prayer  asks.  Faith  lays 
its  hand  on  the  thing  asked  for. 

God’s  omnipotent  power  is  the  basis  of  omnipo¬ 
tent  faith  and  omnipotent  praying.  “All  things  are 
possible  to  him  that  believeth,”  and  “  all  things 
whatsoever  ”  are  given  to  him  who  prays.  God’s 
decree  and  death  yield  readily  to  Hezekiah’s  faith 


44  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


and  prayer.  When  God’s  promise  and  man’s  pray¬ 
ing  are  united  by  faith,  then  “  nothing  shall  be  im¬ 
possible.”  Importunate  prayer  is  so  all-powerful 
and  irresistible  that  it  obtains  promises,  or  wins 
where  the  prospect  and  the  promise  seem  to  be 
against  it.  In  fact,  the  New  Testament  promise 
includes  all  things  in  heaven  and  in  earth.  God, 
by  promise,  puts  all  things  He  possesses  into  man’s 
hands.  Prayer  and  faith  put  man  in  possession 
of  this  boundless  inheritance. 

Prayer  is  not  an  indifferent  or  a  small  thing.  It 
is  not  a  sweet  little  privilege.  It  is  a  great  pre¬ 
rogative,  far-reaching  in  its  effects.  Failure  to 
pray  entails  losses  far  beyond  the  person  who  neg¬ 
lects  it.  Prayer  is  not  a  mere  episode  of  the  Chris¬ 
tian  life.  Rather  the  whole  life  is  a  preparation 
for  and  the  result  of  prayer.  In  its  condition, 
prayer  is  the  sum  of  religion.  Faith  is  but  a  chan¬ 
nel  of  prayer.  Faith  gives  it  wings  and  swiftness. 
Prayer  is  the  lungs  through  which  holiness 
breathes.  Prayer  is  not  only  the  language  of  spiri¬ 
tual  life,  but  makes  its  very  essence  and  forms  its 
real  character. 

“  O  for  a  faith  that  will  not  shrink 
Though  pressed  by  every  foe ; 

That  will  not  tremble  on  the  brink 
Of  any  earthly  woe. 

“  Lord,  give  us  such  a  faith  as  this, 

And  then,  whate’er  may  come, 

We’ll  taste  e’en  here,  the  hallowed  bliss 
Of  our  eternal  home.” 


V 

PRAYER— ITS  POSSIBILITIES  ( Continued ) 

He  who  has  the  spirit  of  prayer  has  the  highest 
interest  in  the  court  of  heaven.  And  the  only  way  to 
retain  it  is  to  keep  it  in  constant  employment.  Apos¬ 
tasy  begins  in  the  closet.  No  man  ever  backslid  from 
the  life  and  power  of  Christianity  who  continued  con¬ 
stant  and  fervent  in  private  prayer.  He  who  prays 
without  ceasing  is  likely  to  rejoice  evermore. 

— Adam  Clarke 

AFTER  a  comprehensive  and  cursory  view 
of  the  possibilities  of  prayer,  as  mapped 
out  in  what  has  been  said,  it  is  important 
to  descend  to  particulars,  to  Bible  facts  and  prin¬ 
ciples  in  regard  to  this  great  subject.  What  are 
the  possibilities  of  prayer  as  disclosed  by  Divine 
revelation?  The  necessity  of  prayer  and  its  being 
are  coexistent  with  man.  Nature,  even  before  a 
clear  and  full  revelation,  cries  out  in  prayer.  Man 
is,  therefore  prayer  is.  God  is,  therefore  prayer  is. 
Prayer  is  born  of  the  instincts,  the  needs  and  the 
cravings  and  the  very  being  of  man. 

The  prayer  of  Solomon  at  the  dedication  of  the 
temple  is  the  product  of  inspired  wisdom  and  piety, 
and  gives  a  lucid  and  powerful  view  of  prayer  in 
the  wideness  of  its  range,  the  minuteness  of  its  de¬ 
tails,  and  its  abounding  possibilities  and  its  urgent 

45 


46  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


necessity.  How  minute  and  exactly  comprehend¬ 
ing  is  this  prayer!  National  and  individual  bless¬ 
ings  are  in  it,  and  temporal  and  spiritual  good  is 
embraced  by  it.  Individual  sins,  national  calami¬ 
ties,  sins,  sickness,  exile,  famine,  war,  pestilence, 
mildew,  drought,  insects,  damage  to  crops,  what¬ 
ever  affects  husbandry,  enemies — whatsoever  sick¬ 
ness,  one’s  own  sore,  one’s  own  guilt,  one’s  own 
sin — one  and  all  are  in  this  prayer,  and  all  are  for 
prayer. 

For  all  these  evils  prayer  is  the  one  universal 
remedy.  Pure  praying  remedies  all  ills,  cures  all 
diseases,  relieves  all  situations,  however  dire,  most 
calamitous,  most  fearful  and  despairing.  Prayer 
to  God,  pure  praying,  relieves  dire  situations  be¬ 
cause  God  can  relieve  when  no  one  else  can.  Noth¬ 
ing  is  too  hard  for  God.  No  cause  is  hopeless 
which  God  undertakes.  No  case  is  mortal  when 
Almighty  God  is  the  physician.  No  conditions  are 
despairing  which  can  deter  or  defy  God. 

Almighty  God  heard  this  prayer  of  Solomon, 
and  committed  Himself  to  undertake,  to  relieve 
and  to  remedy  if  real  praying  be  done,  despite  all 
adverse  and  inexorable  conditions.  He  will  al¬ 
ways  relieve,  answer  and  bless  if  men  will  pray 
from  the  heart,  and  if  they  will  give  themselves  to 
real,  true  praying. 

After  Solomon  had  finished  his  magnificent,  il¬ 
limitable  and  all-comprehending  prayer,  this  is  the 
record  of  what  God  said  to  him: 


PKAYER— ITS  POSSIBILITIES  47 


‘‘And  the  Lord  appeared  to  Solomon  by  night,  and 
said  to  him,  I  have  heard  thy  prayer,  and  have  chosen 
this  place  to  myself  for  a  house  of  sacrifice. 

“  If  I  shut  up  heaven  that  there  be  no  rain,  or  if  I 
command  the  locusts  that  they  devour  the  land,  or  if 
I  send  pestilence  among  the  people ; 

“  If  my  people  which  are  called  by  my  name,  shall 
humble  themselves  and  pray,  and  seek  my  face,  and 
turn  from  their  wicked  ways,  then  will  I  hear  from 
heaven,  and  will  forgive  their  sin,  and  will  heal  their 
land ; 

“  Now  my  eyes  shall  be  open,  and  my  ears  attentive 
to  the  prayer  that  is  made  in  this  place. 

“  For  now  I  have  chosen  and  sanctified  this  house^ 
that  my  name  may  be  there  forever.” 

God  put  no  limitation  to  His  ability  to  save 
through  true  praying.  No  hopeless  conditions,  no 
accumulation  of  difficulties,  and  no  desperation  in 
distance  or  circumstance  can  hinder  the  success  of 
real  prayer.  The  possibilities  of  prayer  are  linked 
to  the  infinite  rectitude  and  to  the  omnipotent 
power  of  God.  There  is  nothing  too  hard  for  God 
to  do.  God  is  pledged  that  if  we  ask,  we  shall  re¬ 
ceive.  God  can  withhold  nothing  from  faith  and 
prayer. 

"  The  thing  surpasses  all  my  thought, 

But  faithful  is  my  Lord ; 

Through  unbelief  I  stagger  not, 

For  God  hath  spoke  the  word. 


48  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


“  Faith,  mighty  faith,  the  promise  sees. 

And  looks  to  that  alone ; 

Laughs  at  impossibilities, 

And  cries,  4  It  shall  be  done !  ’  ” 

The  many  statements  of  God's  Word  fully  set 
forth  the  possibilities  and  far-reaching  nature  of 
prayer.  How  full  of  pathos !  “  Call  upon  me  in 

the  day  of  trouble;  I  will  deliver  thee,  and  thou 
shalt  glorify  me.”  Again,  read  the  cheering 
words:  “  He  shall  call  upon  me,  and  I  will  answet 
him;  I  will  be  with  him  in  trouble;  I  will  deliver 
him  and  honour  him.” 

How  diversified  the  range  of  trouble !  How  al¬ 
most  infinite  its  extent!  How  universal  and  dire 
its  conditions!  How  despairing  its  waves!  Yet 
the  range  of  prayer  is  as  great  as  trouble,  is  as  uni¬ 
versal  as  sorrow,  as  infinite  as  grief.  And  prayer 
can  relieve  all  these  evils  which  come  to  the  chil¬ 
dren  of  men.  There  is  no  tear  which  prayer  can¬ 
not  wipe  away  or  dry  up.  There  is  no  depression 
of  spirits  which  it  cannot  relieve  and  elevate. 
There  is  no  despair  which  it  cannot  dispel. 

“  Call  unto  me,  and  I  will  answer  thee,  and  show 
thee  great  things  and  difficult,  which  thou  knowest 
not.”  How  broad  these  words  of  the  Lord,  how 
great  the  promise,  how  cheering  to  faith!  They 
really  challenge  the  faith  of  the  saint.  Prayer  al¬ 
ways  brings  God  to  our  relief  to  bless  and  to  aid, 
and  brings  marvellous  revelations  of  His  power. 
What  impossibilities  are  there  with  God?  Name 


PRAYER— ITS  POSSIBILITIES 


49 


them.  “  Nothing,”  He  says, “  is  impossible  to  the 
Lord.”  And  all  the  possibilities  in  God  are  in 
prayer. 

Samuel,  under  the  Judges  of  Israel,  will  fully 
illustrate  the  possibility  and  the  necessity  of  prayer. 
He  himself  was  the  beneficiary  of  the  greatness  of 
faith  and  prayer  in  a  mother  who  knew  what  pray¬ 
ing  meant.  Hannah,  his  mother,  was  a  woman  of 
mark,  in  character  and  in  piety,  who  was  childless. 
That  privation  was  a  source  of  worry  and  weak¬ 
ness  and  grief.  She  sought  unto  God  for  relief, 
and  prayed  and  poured  out  her  soul  before  the 
Lord.  She  continued  her  praying,  in  fact  she  mul¬ 
tiplied  her  praying,  to  such  an  extent  that  to  Old 
Eli  she  seemed  to  be  intoxicated,  almost  beside  her¬ 
self  in  the  intensity  of  her  supplications.  She  was 
specific  in  her  prayers.  She  wanted  a  child.  For 
a  man  child  she  prayed. 

And  God  was  specific  in  His  answer.  A  man 
child  God  gave  her,  a  man  indeed  he  became.  He 
was  the  creation  of  prayer,  and  grew  himself  to  a 
man  of  prayer.  He  was  a  mighty  intercessor,  es¬ 
pecially  in  emergencies  in  the  history  of  God’s  peo¬ 
ple.  The  epitome  of  his  life  and  character  is 
found  in  the  statement,  “  Samuel  cried  unto  the 
Lord  for  Israel,  and  the  Lord  heard  him.”  The 
victory  was  complete,  and  the  Ebenezer  was  the 
memorial  of  the  possibilities  and  necessity  of 
prayer. 

Again,  at  another  time,  Samuel  called  unto  the 


50  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PEAYEE 


Lord,  and  thunder  and  rain  came  out  of  season  in 
wheat  harvest.  Here  are  some  statements  con¬ 
cerning  this  mighty  intercessor,  who  knew  how  to 
pray,  and  whom  God  always  regarded  when  he 
prayed:  “  Samuel  cried  unto  the  Lord  all  night.” 

Says  he  at  another  time  in  speaking  to  the  Lord’s 
people,  “  Moreover,  as  for  me,  God  forbid  that  I 
should  sin  against  the  Lord  in  ceasing  to  pray  for 
you.” 

These  great  occasions  show  how  this  notable 
ruler  of  Israel  made  prayer  a  habit,  and  that  this 
was  a  notable  and  conspicuous  characteristic  of  his 
dispensation.  Prayer  was  no  strange  exercise  to 
Samuel.  He  was  accustomed  to  it.  He  was  in 
the  habit  of  praying,  knew  the  way  to  God,  and 
received  answers  from  God.  Through  him  and 
his  praying  God’s  cause  was  brought  out  of  its  low, 
depressed  condition,  and  a  great  national  revival 
began,  of  which  David  was  one  of  its  fruits. 

Samuel  was  one  of  the  notable  men  of  the  Old 
Dispensation  who  stood  out  prominently  as  one 
who  had  great  influence  with  God  in  prayer.  God 
could  not  deny  him  anything  he  asked  of  Him. 
Samuel’s  praying  always  affected  God,  and  moved 
God  to  do  what  would  not  have  otherwise  been 
done  had  he  not  prayed.  Samuel  stands  out  as  a 
striking  illustration  of  the  possibilities  of  prayer. 
He  shows  conclusively  the  achievements  of  prayer. 

Jacob  is  an  illustration  for  all  time  of  the  com¬ 
manding  and  conquering  forces  of  prayer.  God 
came  to  him  as  an  antagonist.  He  grappled  Jacob, 


PRAYER— ITS  POSSIBILITIES  51 


and  shook  him  as  if  he  were  in  the  embrace  of  a 
deadly  foe.  Jacob,  the  deceitful  supplanter,  the 
wily,  unscrupulous  trader,  had  no  eyes  to  see  God. 
His  perverted  principles,  and  his  deliberate  over¬ 
reaching  and  wrong-doing  had  blinded  his  vision. 

To  reach  God,  to  know  God,  and  to  conquer 
God,  that  was  the  demand  of  this  critical  hour. 
Jacob  was  alone,  and  all  night  witnessed  to  the  in¬ 
tensity  of  the  struggle,  its  changing  issues,  and  its 
veering  fortunes,  as  well  as  the  receding  and  ad¬ 
vancing  lines  in  the  conflict.  Here  was  the  strength 
of  weakness,  the  power  of  self-despair,  the  energy 
of  perseverance,  the  elevation  of  humility,  and  the 
victory  of  surrender.  Jacob's  salvation  issued 
from  the  forces  which  he  massed  in  that  all-night 
conflict. 

He  prayed  and  wept  and  importuned  until  the 
fiery  hate  of  Esau’s  heart  died  and  it  was  softened 
into  love.  A  greater  miracle  was  wrought  on 
Jacob  than  on  Esau.  His  name,  his  character  and 
his  destiny  were  all  changed  by  that  all-night  pray¬ 
ing.  Here  is  the  record  of  the  results  of  that 
night’s  praying  struggle:  “As  a  prince  hast  thou 
power  with  God  and  with  men,  and  hast  prevailed.” 
“  By  his  strength  he  had  power  with  God,  yea,  he 
had  power  over  the  angel  and  prevailed.” 

What  forces  lie  in  importunate  prayer!  What 
mighty  results  are  gained  by  it  in  one  night’s  strug¬ 
gle  in  praying !  God  is  affected  and  changed  in  at¬ 
titude,  and  two  men  are  transformed  in  character 
and  destiny. 


V. 


VI 

PRAYER— ITS  POSSIBILITIES  ( Continued ) 

Satan  dreads  nothing  hut  prayer.  •  .  .  The 
Church  that  lost  its  Christ  was  full  of  good  works . 
Activities  are  multiplied  that  meditation  may  he 
ousted,  and  organizations  are  increased  that  prayer 
may  have  no  chance.  Souls  may  be  lost  in  good 
works,  as  surely  as  in  evil  ways.  The  one  concern 
of  the  devil  is  to  keep  the  saints  from  praying.  He 
fears  nothing  from  prayerless  studies,  prayerless 
work,  prayerless  religion.  He  laughs  at  our  toil, 
mocks  at  our  wisdom,  hut  trembles  when  we  pray . 

— Samuel  Chadwick 

THE  possibilities  of  prayer  are  seen  in  its 
results  in  temporal  matters.  Prayer 
reaches  to  everything  which  concerns 
man,  whether  it  be  his  body,  his  mind  or  his  soul. 
Prayer  embraces  the  very  smallest  things  of  life. 
Prayer  takes  in  the  wants  of  the  body,  food,  rai¬ 
ment,  business,  finances,  in  fact  everything  which 
belongs  to  this  life,  as  well  as  those  things  which 
have  to  do  with  the  eternal  interests  of  the  soul. 
Its  achievements  are  seen  not  only  in  the  large 
things  of  earth,  but  more  especially  in  what  might 
be  called  the  little  things  of  life.  It  brings  to  pass 
not  only  large  things,  speaking  after  the  manner  of 
men,  but  also  the  small  things. 

Temporal  matters  are  of  a  lower  order  than  the 

52 


PRAYER— ITS  POSSIBILITIES  53 


spiritual,  but  they  concern  us  greatly.  Our  tem¬ 
poral  interests  make  up  a  great  part  of  our  lives. 
They  are  the  main  source  of  our  cares  and  worries. 
They  have  much  to  do  with  our  religion.  We  have 
bodies,  with  their  wants,  their  pains,  their  disabili¬ 
ties  and  their  limitations.  That  which  concerns 
our  bodies  necessarily  engages  our  minds.  These 
are  subjects  of  prayer,  and  prayer  takes  in  all  of 
them,  and  large  are  the  accomplishments  of  prayer 
in  this  realm  of  our  being. 

Our  temporal  matters  have  much  to  do  with  our 
health  and  happiness.  They  form  our  relations. 
They  are  tests  of  honesty  and  belong  to  the  sphere 
of  justice  and  righteousness.  Not  to  pray  about 
temporal  matters  is  to  leave  God  out  of  the  largest 
sphere  of  our  being.  He  who  cannot  pray  in  every¬ 
thing,  as  we  are  charged  to  do  by  Paul  in  Philip- 
pians,  fourth  chapter,  has  never  learned  in  any  true 
sense  the  nature  and  worth  of  prayer.  To  leave 
business  and  time  out  of  prayer  is  to  leave  religion 
and  eternity  out  of  it.  He  who  does  not  pray 
about  temporal  matters  cannot  pray  with  confi¬ 
dence  about  spiritual  matters.  He  who  does  not 
put  God  by  prayer  in  his  struggling  toil  for  daily 
bread  will  never  put  Him  in  his  struggle  for 
heaven.  He  who  does  not  cover  and  supply  the 
wants  of  the  body  by  prayer  will  never  cover  and 
supply  the  wants  of  his  soul.  Both  body  and  soul 
are  dependent  on  God,  and  prayer  is  but  the  crying 
expression  of  that  dependence. 


54  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


The  Syrophenician  woman  prayed  for  the  health 
things.  In  fact  the  Old  Testament  is  but  the  rec¬ 
ord  of  God  in  dealing  with  His  people  through  the 
Divine  appointment  of  prayer.  Abraham  prayed 
that  Sodom  might  be  saved  from  destruction. 
Abraham’s  servant  prayed  and  received  God’s  di¬ 
rection  in  choosing  a  wife  for  Isaac.  Hannah 
prayed,  and  Samuel  was  given  unto  her.  Elijah 
prayed,  and  no  rain  came  for  three  years.  And  he 
prayed  again,  and  the  clouds  gave  rain.  Hezekiah 
was  saved  from  a  mortal  sickness  by  his  praying. 
Jacob’s  praying  saved  him  from  Esau’s  revenge. 
The  Old  Bible  is  the  history  of  prayer  for  temporal 
blessings  as  well  as  for  spiritual  blessings. 

In  the  New  Testament  we  have  the  same  prin¬ 
ciples  illustrated  and  enforced.  Prayer  in  this  sec¬ 
tion  of  God’s  Word  covers  the  whole  realm  of 
good,  both  temporal  and  spiritual.  Our  Lord,  in 
His  universal  prayer,  the  prayer  for  humanity,  in 
every  clime,  in  every  age  and  for  every  condition, 
puts  in  it  the  petition,  “  Give  us  this  day  our  daily 
bread.”  This  embraces  all  necessary  earthly  good. 

In  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  a  whole  paragraph 
is  taken  up  by  our  Lord  about  food  and  raiment, 
where  He  is  cautioned  against  undue  care  or  anxi¬ 
ety  for  these  things,  and  at  the  same  time  encourag¬ 
ing  to  a  faith  which  takes  in  and  claims  all  these 
necessary  bodily  comforts  and  necessaries.  And 
this  teaching  stands  in  close  connection  with  His 
teachings  about  prayer.  Food  and  raiment  are 


PRAYER— ITS  POSSIBILITIES  55 


taught  as  subjects  of  prayer.  Not  for  one  moment 
is  it  even  hinted  that  they  are  things  beneath  the 
notice  of  a  great  God,  nor  too  material  and  earthly 
for  such  a  spiritual  exercise  as  prayer. 

The  Syrophenician  woman  prayed  for  the  health 
of  her  daughter.  Peter  prayed  for  Dorcas  to  be 
brought  back  to  life.  Paul  prayed  for  the  father 
of  Publius  on  his  way  to  Rome,  when  cast  on  the 
island  by  a  shipwreck,  and  God  healed  the  man 
who  was  sick  with  a  fever.  He  urged  the  Chris¬ 
tians  at  Rome  to  strive  with  him  together  in  prayer 
that  he  might  be  delivered  from  bad  men. 

When  Peter  was  put  in  prison  by  Herod,  the 
Church  was  instant  in  prayer  that  Peter  might  be 
delivered  from  the  prison,  and  God  honoured  the 
praying  of  these  early  Christians.  John  prayed 
that  Gaius  might  “  prosper  and  be  in  health,  even 
as  his  soul  prospered.” 

The  Divine  directory  in  James,  fifth  chapter, 
says:  “  Is  any  among  you  afflicted,  let  him  pray. 
Is  any  sick  among  you?  Let  him  call  for  the 
elders  of  the  Church,  and  let  them  pray  over  him.” 

Paul,  in  writing  to  the  Philippians,  fourth  chap¬ 
ter,  says:  “  Be  careful  for  nothing;  but  in  every¬ 
thing,  by  prayer  and  supplication,  with  thanksgiv¬ 
ing,  let  your  requests  be  made  known  to  God.” 
This  provides  for  all  kinds  of  cares — business 
cares,  home  cares,  body  cares,  and  soul  cares.  All 
are  to  be  brought  to  God  by  prayer,  and  at  the 
mercy  seat  our  minds  and  souls  are  to  be  disbur- 


56  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PKAYER 


dened  of  all  that  affects  us  or  causes  anxiety  or  un¬ 
easiness.  These  words  of  Paul  stand  in  close  con¬ 
nection  with  what  he  says  about  temporal  matters 
specially:  “  But  now  I  rejoiced  in  the  Lord  greatly 
that  now  at  the  last  your  care  of  me  hath  flourished 
again:  wherein  ye  were  also  careful,  but  ye  lacked 
opportunity.  Not  that  I  speak  in  respect  to  want, 
for  I  have  learned  in  whatsoever  state  I  am,  there¬ 
with  to  be  content.,, 

And  Paul  closes  his  Epistle  to  these  Christians 
with  the  words,  which  embrace  all  temporal  needs 
as  well  as  spiritual  wants: 

“  But  my  God  shall  supply  all  your  need,  according 
to  his  riches  in  glory,  by  Christ  Jesus.” 

Unbelief  in  the  doctrine  that  prayer  covers  all 
things  which  have  to  do  with  the  body  and  business 
affairs,  breeds  undue  anxiety  about  earth’s  affairs, 
causes  unnecessary  worry,  and  creates  very  un- 
happy  states  of  mind.  How  much  needless  care 
would  we  save  ourselves  if  we  but  believed  in 
prayer  as  the  means  of  relieving  those  cares,  and 
would  learn  the  happy  art  of  casting  all  our  cares 
in  prayer  upon  God,  “  who  careth  for  us !  ”  Unbe¬ 
lief  in  God  as  one  who  is  concerned  about  even  the 
smallest  affairs  which  affect  our  happiness  and 
comfort  limits  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  and  makes 
our  lives  altogether  devoid  of  real  happiness  and 
sweet  contentment. 


PKAYER— ITS  POSSIBILITIES  57 


We  have  in  the  instance  of  the  failure  of  the  dis¬ 
ciples  to  cast  the  devil  out  of  the  lunatic  son, 
brought  to  them  by  his  father,  while  Jesus  was  on 
the  Mount  of  Transfiguration,  a  suggestive  lesson 
of  the  union  of  faith,  prayer  and  fasting,  and  the 
failure  to  reach  the  possibilities  and  obligations  of 
an  occasion.  The  disciples  ought  to  have  cast  the 
devil  out  of  the  boy.  They  had  been  sent  out  to  do 
this  very  work,  and  had  been  empowered  by  their 
Lord  and  Master  to  do  it.  And  yet  they  signally 
failed.  Christ  reproved  them  with  sharp  upbraid- 
ings  for  not  doing  it.  They  had  been  sent  out  on 
this  very  specific  mission.  This  one  thing  was 
specified  by  our  Lord  when  He  sent  them  out. 
Their  failure  brought  shame  and  confession  on 
them,  and  discounted  their  Lord  and  Master  and 
His  cause.  They  brought  Him  into  disrepute,  and 
reflected  very  seriously  upon  the  cause  which  they 
represented.  Their  faith  to  cast  out  the  devil  had 
signally  failed,  simply  because  it  had  not  been  nur¬ 
tured  by  prayer  and  fasting.  Failure  to  pray  broke 
the  ability  of  faith,  and  failure  came  because  they 
had  not  the  energy  of  a  strong  authoritative  faith. 

The  promise  reads,  and  we  cannot  too  often 
refer  to  it,  for  it  is  the  very  basis  of  our  faith  and 
the  ground  on  which  we  stand  when  we  pray:  “All 
things  whatsoever  ye  ask  in  prayer,  believing,  ye 
shall  receive.”  What  enumeration  table  can  tabu¬ 
late,  itemize,  and  aggregate  “  all  things  whatso¬ 
ever”?  The  possibilities  of  prayer  and  faith  go 


58  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PKAYER 


to  the  length  of  the  endless  chain,  and  cover  the 
unmeasurable  area.. 

In  Hebrews,  eleventh  chapter,  the  sacred  pen¬ 
man,  wearied  with  trying  to  specify  the  examples 
of  faith,  and  to  recite  the  wonderful  exploits  of 
faith,  pauses  a  moment,  and  then  cries  out,  giving 
us  almost  unheard-of  achievements  of  prayer  and 
faith  as  exemplified  by  the  saints  of  the  olden 
times.  Here  is  what  he  says: 

“And  what  shall  I  say  more?  For  the  time  would 
fail  me  to  tell  of  Gideon,  of  Barak,  of  Samson,  of 
Jephtha,  of  David  also;  and  Samuel,  and  the 
prophets ; 

“  Who  through  faith,  subdued  kingdoms,  wrought 
righteousness,  obtained  promises,  stopped  the  mouths 
of  lions; 

“  Quenched  the  violence  of  fire,  escaped  the  edge 
of  the  sword,  out  of  weakness  were  made  strong, 
waxed  valiant  in  fight,  turned  to  flight  the  armies  of 
the  aliens ; 

“  Women  received  their  dead  raised  to  life  again, 
and  others  were  tortured,  not  accepting  deliverance; 
that  they  might  obtain  a  better  resurrection.” 

What  an  illustrious  record  is  this !  What  mar¬ 
vellous  accomplishments,  wrought  not  by  armies, 
or  by  man’s  superhuman  strength,  nor  by  magic, 
but  all  accomplished  simply  by  men  and  women 
noted  alone  for  their  faith  and  prayer!  Hand  in 
hand  with  these  records  of  faith’s  illimitable  range 


PRAYER — ITS  POSSIBILITIES  59 


are  the  illustrious  records  of  prayer,  for  they  are 
all  one.  Faith  has  never  won  a  victory  nor  gained 
a  crown  where  prayer  was  not  the  weapon  of  the 
victory,  and  where  prayer  did  not  jewel  the  crown. 
If  “  all  things  are  possible  to  him  that  believeth,” 
then  all  things  are  possible  to  him  that  prayeth. 

“  Depend  on  him;  thou  canst  not  fail; 

Make  all  thy  wants  and  wishes  known: 

Fear  not;  his  merits  must  prevail; 

Ask  but  in  faith,  it  shall  be  done.” 


VII 

PRAYER— ITS  WIDE  RANGE 


Nothing  so  pleases  God  in  connection  with  our 
prayer  as  our  praise ,  .  .  .  and  nothing  so 

blesses  the  man  who  prays  as  the  praise  which  he 

offers.  I  got  a  great  blessing  once  in  China  in  this 
connection.  I  had  received  bad  and  sad  news  from 
home,  and  deep  shadows  had  covered  my  soul.  I 

prayed,  but  the  darkness  did  not  vanish.  I  sum¬ 

moned  myself  to  endure,  but  the  darkness  only  deep¬ 
ened.  Just  then  I  went  to  an  inland  station  and  saw 
on  the  wall  of  the  mission  home  these  words:  “Try 
Thanks  giving.”  I  did,  and  in  a  moment  every 
shadow  was  gone,  not  to  return.  Yes ,  the  Psalmist 
was  right,  “  It  is  a  good  thing  to  give  thanks  unto 
the  Lord.” — Henry  W.  Frost 

THE  possibilities  of  prayer  are  gauged  by 
faith  in  God’s  ability  to  do.  Faith  is  the 
one  prime  condition  by  which  God  works. 
Faith  is  the  one  prime  condition  by  which  man 
prays.  Faith  draws  on  God  to  its  full  extent. 
Faith  gives  character  to  prayer.  A  feeble  faith  has 
always  brought  forth  feeble  praying.  Vigorous 
faith  creates  vigorous  praying.  At  the  close  of  a 
parable,  “And  he  spake  a  parable  unto  them  to  this 

end,  that  men  always  ought  to  pray,  and  not  to 

60 


ITS  WIDE  RANGE 


61 


faint,”  In  which  He  stressed  the  necessity  of  vigor¬ 
ous  praying,  Christ  asks  this  pointed  question, 
“  When  the  Son  of  Man  cometh,  shall  he  find  faith 
on  the  earth  ?  ” 

In  the  case  of  the  lunatic  child  which  the  father 
brought  first  to  the  disciples,  who  could  not  cure 
him,  and  then  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  father 
cried  out  with  all  the  pathos  of  a  declining  faith 
and  of  a  great  sorrow,  “If  thou  canst  do  anything 
for  us,  have  compassion  on  us  and  help  us.”  And 
Jesus  said  unto  him,  “If  thou  canst  believe,  all 
things  are  possible  to  him  that  believeth.”  The 
healing  turned  on  the  faith  in  the  ability  of  Christ 
to  heal  the  boy.  The  ability  to  do  was  in  Christ 
essentially  and  eternally,  but  the  doing  of  the  thing 
turned  on  the  ability  of  the  faith.  Great  faith  en¬ 
ables  Christ  to  do  great  things. 

We  need  a  quickening  faith  in  God’s  power.  We 
have  hedged  God  in  till  we  have  little  faith  in  His 
power.  We  have  conditioned  the  exercise  of  His 
power  till  we  have  a  little  God,  and  a  little  faith  in 
a  little  God. 

The  only  condition  which  restrains  God’s  power, 
and  which  disables  Him  to  act,  is  unfaith.  He 
is  not  limited  in  action  nor  restrained  by  the  con¬ 
ditions  which  limit  men. 

The  conditions  of  time,  place,  nearness,  ability 
and  all  others  which  could  possibly  be  named,  upon 
which  the  actions  of  men  hinge,  have  no  bearing 
on  God.  If  men  will  look  to  God  and  cry  to  Him 


62  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


with  true  prayer,  He  will  hear  and  can  deliver,  no 
matter  how  dire  soever  may  be  the  state,  how 
remediless  their  conditions  may  be. 

Strange  how  God  has  to  school  His  people  in 
His  ability  to  do !  He  made  a  promise  to  Abraham 
and  Sarah  that  Isaac  would  be  born.  Abraham 
was  then  nearly  one  hundred  years  old,  and  Sarah 
was  barren  by  natural  defect,  and  had  passed  into 
a  barren,  wombless  age.  She  laughed  at  the 
thought  of  having  a  child  as  preposterous.  God 
asked,  “  Why  did  Sarah  laugh  ?  Is  anything  too 
hard  for  the  Lord  ?  ”  And  God  fulfilled  His 
promise  to  these  old  people  to  the  letter. 

Moses  hesitated  to  undertake  God’s  purpose  to 
liberate  Israel  from  Egyptian  bondage,  because  of 
his  inability  to  talk  well.  God  checks  him  at  once 
by  an  inquiry: 

“And  Moses  said  unto  the  Lord,  O  my  Lord,  I  am 
not  eloquent,  neither  heretofore,  nor  since  thou  hast 
spoken  unto  thy  servant ;  but  I  am  slow  of  speech  and 
of  a  slow  tongue. 

“And  the  Lord  said  unto  him,  Who  hath  made 
man’s  mouth?  or  who  maketh  the  dumb,  or  deaf,  or 
the  seeing,  or  the  blind  ?  Have  not  I  the  Lord  ? 

“  Now,  therefore,  go,  and  I  will  be  with  thy  mouth, 
and  teach  thee  what  thou  shalt  say.” 

When  God  said  He  would  feed  the  children  of 
Israel  a  whole  month  with  meat,  Moses  questioned 
His  ability  to  do  it.  The  Lord  said  unto  Moses, 


ITS  WIDE  KANGE 


63 


“Is  the  Lord’s  hand  waxed  short?  Thou  shalt 
see  now  whether  my  word  shall  come  to  pass  unto 
thee  or  not.” 

Nothing  is  too  hard  for  the  Lord  to  do.  As 
Paul  declared,  “  He  is  able  to  do  exceeding  abun¬ 
dantly  above  all  that  we  can  ask  or  think.”  Prayer 
has  to  do  with  God,  with  His  ability  to  do.  The 
possibility  of  prayer  is  the  measure  of  God’s  ability 
to  do. 

The  “  all  things,”  the  “  all  things  whatsoever,” 
and  the  “  anything,”  are  all  covered  by  the  ability 
of  God.  The  urgent  entreaty  reads,  “  Ask  what¬ 
soever  ye  will,”  because  God  is  able  to  do  anything 
and  all  things  that  my  desires  may  crave,  and  that 
He  has  promised.  In  God’s  ability  to  do,  He  goes 
far  beyond  man’s  ability  to  ask.  Human  thoughts, 
human  words,  human  imaginations,  human  desires 
and  human  needs,  cannot  in  any  way  measure  God’s 
ability  to  do. 

Prayer  in  its  legitimate  possibilities  goes  out  on 
God  Himself.  Prayer  goes  out  with  faith  not 
only  in  the  promise  of  God,  but  faith  in  God  Him¬ 
self,  and  in  God’s  ability  to  do.  Prayer  goes  out 
not  on  the  promise  merely,  but  “  obtains  promises,” 
and  creates  promises. 

Elijah  had  the  promise  that  God  would  send  the 
rain,  but  no  promise  that  He  would  send  the  fire. 
But  by  faith  and  prayer  he  obtained  the  fire,  as 
well  as  the  rain,  but  the  fire  came  first. 

Daniel  had  no  specific  promise  that  God  would 


64  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


make  known  to  him  the  dream  of  the  king,  but 
he  and  his  associates  joined  in  united  prayer,  and 
God  revealed  to  Daniel  the  king’s  dream  and  the 
interpretation,  and  their  lives  were  spared  thereby. 

Hezekiah  had  no  promise  that  God  would  cure 
him  of  his  desperate  sickness  which  threatened  his 
life.  On  the  contrary  the  word  of  the  Lord  came 
to  him  by  the  mouth  of  the  prophet,  that  he  should 
die.  However,  he  prayed  against  this  decree  of 
Almighty  God,  with  faith,  and  he  succeeded  in 
obtaining  a  reversal  of  God’s  word  and  lived. 

God  makes  it  marvellous  when  He  says  by  the 
mouth  of  His  prophet:  “  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  the 
Holy  One  of  Israel  and  his  Maker:  Ask  me  of 
things  to  come,  concerning  my  sons,  and  concern¬ 
ing  the  work  of  my  hands,  command  ye  me.”  And 
in  this  strong  promise  in  which  He  commits  Him¬ 
self  into  the  hands  of  His  praying  people,  He  ap¬ 
peals  in  it  to  His  great  creative  power:  “  I  have 
created  the  earth  and  made  man  upon  it.  I,  even 
my  hands,  have  stretched  out  the  heavens,  and  all 
their  hosts  have  I  commanded.,, 

The  majesty  and  power  of  God  in  making  man 
and  man’s  world,  and  constantly  upholding  all 
things,  are  ever  kept  before  us  as  the  basis  of  our 
faith  in  God,  and  as  an  assurance  and  urgency  to 
prayer1.  Then  God  calls  us  away  from  what  He 
Himself  has  done,  and  turns  our  minds  to  Him¬ 
self  personally.  The  infinite  glory  and  power  of 
His  Person  are  set  before  our  contemplation: 


ITS  WIDE  RANGE 


65 


“  Remember  ye  not  the  former  things  neither  con¬ 
sider  the  things  of  old?”  He  declares  that  He 
will  do  a  “  new  thing,”  that  He  does  not  have  to 
repeat  Himself,  that  all  He  has  done  neither  limits 
His  doing  nor  the  manner  of  His  doing,  and  that  if 
we  have  prayer  and  faith,  He  will  so  answer  our 
prayers  and  so  work  for  us,  that  His  former  work 
shall  not  be  remembered  nor  come  into  mind.  If 
men  would  pray  as  they  ought  to  pray,  the  marvels 
of  the  past  would  be  more  than  reproduced.  The 
Gospel  would  advance  with  a  facility  and  power 
it  has  never  known.  Doors  would  be  thrown  open 
to  the  Gospel,  and  the  Word  of  God  would  have 
a  conquering  force  rarely  if  ever  known  before. 

If  Christians  prayed  as  Christians  ought,  with 
Strong  commanding  faith,  with  earnestness  and 
sincerity,  men,  God-called  men,  God-empowered 
men  everywhere,  would  be  all  burning  to  go  and 
spread  the  Gospel  world-wide.  The  Word  of  the 
Lord  would  run  and  be  glorified  as  never  known 
heretofore.  The  God-influenced  men,  the  God-in¬ 
spired  men,  the  God-commissioned  men,  would  go 
and  kindle  the  flame  of  sacred  fire  for  Christ,  sal¬ 
vation  and  heaven,  everywhere  in  all  nations,  and 
soon  all  men  would  hear  the  glad  tidings  of  salva¬ 
tion  and  have  an  opportunity  to  receive  Jesus 
Christ  as  their  personal  Saviour.  Let  us  read  an¬ 
other  one  of  those  large  illimitable  statements  in 
God's  Word,  which  are  a  direct  challenge  to  prayer 
and  faith: 


66  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


“  He  that  spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  delivered 
him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall  he  not  with  him  freely 
give  us  all  things  ?  ” 

What  a  basis  have  we  here  for  prayer  and  faith, 
illimitable,  measureless  in  breadth,  in  depth  and 
in  height!  The  promise  to  give  us  all  things  is 
backed  up  by  the  calling  to  our  remembrance  of 
the  fact  that  God  freely  gave  His  only  Begotten 
Son  for  our  redemption.  His  giving  His  Son  is 
the  assurance  and  guarantee  that  He  will  freely 
give  all  things  to  him  who  believes  and  prays. 

What  confidence  have  we  in  this  Divine  state¬ 
ment  for  inspired  asking !  What  holy  boldness  we 
have  here  for  the  largest  asking!  No  common¬ 
place  tameness  should  restrain  our  largest  asking. 
Large,  larger,  and  largest  asking  magnifies  grace 
and  adds  to  God’s  glory.  Feeble  asking  impover¬ 
ishes  the  asker,  and  restrains  God’s  purposes  for 
the  greatest  good  and  obscures  His  glory. 

How  enthroned,  magnificent  and  royal  the  in¬ 
tercession  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  at  His  Father’s 
right  hand  in  heaven!  The  benefits  of  His  inter¬ 
cession  flow  to  us  through  our  intercessions.  Our 
intercession  ought  to  catch  by  contagion,  and  by 
necessity  the  inspiration  and  largeness  of  Christ’s 
great  work  at  His  Father’s  right  hand.  His  busi¬ 
ness  and  His  life  are  to  pray.  Our  business  and 
our  lives  ought  to  be  to  pray,  and  to  pray  without 
ceasing. 


ITS  WIDE  KANGE 


67 


Failure  in  our  intercession  affects  the  fruits  of 
His  intercession.  Lazy,  heartless,  feeble,  and  in¬ 
different  praying  by  us  mars  and  hinders  the  ef¬ 
fects  of  Christ’s  praying. 


VIII 


PRAYER— FACTS  AND  HISTORY 

The  particular  value  of  private  prayer  consists  in 
being  able  to  approach  God  with  more  freedom ,  and 
unbosom  ourselves  more  fully  than  in  any  other  way. 
Between  us  and  God  there  are  private  and  personal 
interests ,  sins  to  confess  and  wants  to  be  supplied, 
which  it  would  be  improper  to  disclose  to  the  world. 
This  duty  is  enforced  by  the  example  of  good  men 
in  all  ages. — Amos  Binney 

THE  possibilities  of  prayer  are  established 
by  the  facts  and  the  history  of  prayer. 
Facts  are  stubborn  things.  Facts  are  the 
true  things.  Theories  may  be  but  speculations. 
Opinions  may  be  wholly  at  fault.  But  facts  must 
be  deferred  to.  They  cannot  be  ignored.  What 
are  the  possibilities  of  prayer  judged  by  the  facts? 
What  is  the  history  of  prayer?  What  does  it  re¬ 
veal  to  us?  Prayer  has  a  history,  written  in  God's 
Word  and  recorded  in  the  experiences  and  lives  of 
God's  saints.  History  is  truth  teaching  by  ex¬ 
ample.  We  may  miss  the  truth  by  perverting  the 
history,  but  the  truth  is  in  the  facts  of  history. 

“  He  spake  with  Abraham  at  the  oak. 

He  called  Elisha  from  the  plough; 

David  he  from  the  sheepfolds  took, 

Thy  day,  thine  hour  of  grace,  is  now." 

68 


FACTS  AND  HISTORY 


69 


God  reveals  the  truth  by  the  facts.  God  reveals 
Himself  by  the  facts  of  religious  history.  God 
teaches  us  His  will  by  the  facts  and  examples  of 
Bible  history.  God’s  facts,  God’s  Word  and  God’s 
history  are  all  in  perfect  harmony,  and  have  much 
of  God  in  them  all.  God  has  ruled  the  world  by 
prayer;  and  God  still  rules  the  world  by  the  same 
divinely  ordained  means. 

The  possibilities  of  prayer  cover  not  only  indi¬ 
viduals  but  reach  to  cities  and  nations.  They  take 
in  classes  and  peoples.  The  praying  of  Moses  was 
the  one  thing  which  stood  between  the  wrath  of 
God  against  the  Israelites  and  His  declared  pur¬ 
pose  to  destroy  them  and  the  execution  of  that 
Divine  purpose,  and  the  Hebrew  nation  still  sur¬ 
vived.  Notwithstanding  Sodom  was  not  spared, 
because  ten  righteous  men  could  not  be  found  in¬ 
side  its  limits,  yet  the  little  city  of  Zoar  was  spared 
because  Lot  prayed  for  it  as  he  fled  from  the  storm 
of  fire  and  brimstone  which  burned  up  Sodom. 
Nineveh  was  saved  because  the  king  and  its  people 
repented  of  their  evil  ways  and  gave  themselves  to 
prayer  and  fasting. 

Paul  in  his  remarkable  prayer  in  Ephesians, 
chapter  three,  honours  the  illimitable  possibilities 
of  prayer  and  glorifies  the  ability  of  God  to  answer 
prayer.  Closing  that  memorable  prayer,  so  far- 
reaching  in  its  petitions,  and  setting  forth  the  very 
deepest  religious  experience,  he  declares  that  “  God 
is  able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that 


70  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


we  can  ask  or  think.”  He  makes  prayer  all-in¬ 
clusive,  comprehending  all  things,  great  and  small. 
There  is  no  time  nor  place  which  prayer  does  not 
cover  and  sanctify.  All  things  in  earth  and  in 
heaven,  everything  for  time  and  for  eternity,  all 
are  embraced  in  prayer.  Nothing  is  too  great  and 
nothing  is  too  small  to  be  subject  of  prayer.  Prayer 
reaches  down  to  the  least  things  of  life  and  in¬ 
cludes  the  greatest  things  which  concern  us. 

“  If  pain  afflict  or  wrongs  oppress, 

If  cares  distract,  or  fears  dismay; 

If  guilt  deject,  or  sin  distress, 

In  every  case  still  watch  and  pray.” 

One  of  the  most  important,  far-reaching,  peace¬ 
giving,  necessary  and  practical  prayer  possibilities 
we  have  in  Paul's  words  in  Philippians,  chapter 
four,  dealing  with  prayer  as  a  cure  for  undue  care: 

“Be  careful  for  nothing;  but  in  everything,  by 
prayer  and  supplication,  with  thanksgiving,  let  your 
requests  be  made  known  unto  God.” 

“  And  the  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  under¬ 
standing  shall  keep  your  hearts  and  minds  through 
Christ  Jesus.” 

“Cares”  are  the  epidemic  evil  of  mankind. 
They  are  universal  in  their  reach.  They  belong  to 
man  in  his  fallen  condition.  The  predisposition 
to  undue  anxiety  is  the  natural  result  of  sin.  Care 
comes  in  all  shapes,  at  all  times,  and  from  all 


FACTS  AND  HISTORY 


71 


sources.  It  comes  to  all  of  every  age  and  station. 
There  are  the  cares  of  the  home  circle,  from  which 
there  is  no  escape  save  in  prayer.  There  are  the 
cares  of  business,  the  cares  of  poverty,  and  the 
cares  of  riches.  Ours  is  an  anxious  world,  and 
ours  is  an  anxious  race.  The  caution  of  Paul  is 
well  addressed,  “  In  nothing  be  anxious.”  This  is 
the  Divine  injunction,  and  that  we  might  be  able 
to  live  above  anxiety  and  freed  from  undue  care, 
“  In  everything,  by  prayer  and  supplication,  let 
your  requests  be  made  known  unto  God.”  This  is 
the  divinely  prescribed  remedy  for  all  anxious 
cares,  for  all  worry,  for  all  inward  fretting. 

The  word,  “  careful,”  means  to  be  drawn  in 
different  directions,  distraction,  anxious,  disturbed, 
annoyed  in  spirit.  Jesus  had  warned  against  this 
very  thing  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  where  He 
had  earnestly  urged  His  disciples,  “  Take  no 
thought  for  the  morrow,”  in  things  concerning  the 
needs  of  the  body.  He  was  endeavouring  to  show 
them  the  true  secret  of  a  quiet  mind,  freed  from 
anxiety  and  unnecessary  care  about  food  and  rai¬ 
ment.  To-morrow’s  evils  were  not  to  be  considered. 
He  was  simply  teaching  the  same  lesson  found  in 
Psalm  37:  3,  “  Trust  in  the  Lord,  and  do  good; 
so  shalt  thou  dwell  in  the  land,  and  verily  thou 
shalt  be  fed.”  In  cautioning  against  the  fears  of 
to-morrow’s  prospective  evils,  and  the  material 
wants  of  the  body,  our  Lord  was  teaching  the  great 
lesson  of  an  implicit  and  childlike  confidence  in 


72  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


God.  “  Commit  thy  way  unto  the  Lord:  trust  also 
in  him,  and  he  shall  bring  it  to  pass.” 

“  ‘  Day  by  day/  the  promise  reads, 

Daily  strength  for  daily  needs 
Cast  foreboding  fears  away; 

Take  the  manna  of  to-day .” 

Paul’s  direction  is  very  specific,  “  Be  careful 
for  nothing.”  Be  careful  for  not  one  thing.  Be 
careful  for  not  anything,  for  any  condition,  chance 
or  happening.  Be  troubled  about  not  anything 
which  creates  one  disturbing  anxiety.  Have  a 
mind  freed  from  all  anxieties,  all  cares,  all  fretting, 
and  all  worries.  Cares  divide,  distract,  bewilder, 
and  destroy  unity,  forces  and  quietness  of  mind. 
Cares  are  fatal  to  weak  piety  and  are  enfeebling 
to  strong  piety.  What  great  need  to  guard  against 
them  and  learn  the  one  secret  of  their  cure,  even 
prayer ! 

What  boundless  possibilities  there  are  in  prayer 
to  remedy  the  situation  of  mind  of  which  Paul  is 
speaking !  Prayer  over  everything  can  quiet  every 
distraction,  hush  every  anxiety,  and  lift  every  care 
from  care-enslaved  lives  and  from  care-bewildered 
hearts.  The  prayer  specific  is  the  perfect  cure  for 
all  ills  of  this  character  which  belong  to  anxieties, 
cares  and  worries.  Only  prayer  in  everything  can 
drive  dull  care  away,  relieve  of  unnecessary  heart 
burdens,  and  save  from  the  besetting  sin  of  worry¬ 
ing  over  things  which  we  cannot  help.  Only  prayer 


FACTS  AND  HISTORY 


73 


ean  bring  into  the  heart  and  mind  the  “  peace  which 
passeth  all  understanding,”  and  keep  mind  and 
heart  at  ease,  free  from  carking  care. 

Oh,  the  needless  heart  burdens  borne  by  fretting 
Christians!  How  few  know  the  real  secret  of  a 
happy  Christian  life,  filled  with  perfect  peace,  hid 
from  the  storms  and  billows  of  a  fretting  care¬ 
worn  life!  Prayer  has  a  possibility  of  saving  us 
from  “  carefulness/’  the  bane  of  human  lives. 
Paul  in  writing  to  the  Corinthians  says,  “  I  would 
have  you  without  carefulness/’  and  this  is  the  will 
of  God.  Prayer  has  the  ability  to  do  this  very 
thing.  “  Casting  all  your  care  on  him,  for  he 
careth  for  you,”  is  the  way  Peter  puts  it,  while 
the  Psalmist  says,  “  Fret  not  thyself  in  any  wise 
to  do  evil.”  Oh,  the  blessedness  of  a  heart  at  ease 
from  all  inward  care,  exempt  from  undue  anxiety, 
in  the  enjoyment  of  the  peace  of  God  which  pass¬ 
eth  all  understanding! 

Paul’s  injunction  which  includes  both  God’s 
promise  and  His  purpose,  and  which  immediately 
precedes  his  entreaty  to  be  “  careful  for  nothing,” 
reads  on  this  wise: 

“  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  always,  and  again  I  say. 
Rejoice. 

“  Let  your  moderation  be  made  known  to  all  men. 
The  Lord  is  at  hand.” 

In  a  world  filled  with  cares  of  every  kind,  where 
temptation  is  the  rule,  where  there  are  so  many 


n  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


things  to  try  us,  how  is  it  possible  to  rejoice  al¬ 
ways?  We  look  at  the  naked,  dry  command,  and 
we  accept  it  and  reverence  it  as  the  Word  of  God, 
but  no  joy  comes.  How  are  we  to  let  our  modera¬ 
tion,  our  mildness,  and  our  gentleness  be  univer¬ 
sally  and  always  known?  We  resolve  to  be  benign 
and  gentle.  We  remember  the  nearness  of  the 
Lord,  but  still  we  are  hasty,  quick,  hard  and  salty. 
We  listen  to  the  Divine  charge,  “  Be  careful  for 
nothing,”  yet  still  we  are  anxious,  care-worn,  care- 
eaten,  and  care-tossed.  How  can  we  fulfill  the  Di¬ 
vine  word,  so  sweet  and  so  large  in  promise,  so 
beautiful  in  the  eye,  and  yet  so  far  from  being 
realized?  How  can  we  enter  upon  the  rich  patri¬ 
mony  of  being  true,  honest,  just,  pure,  and  possess 
lovely  things  ?  The  recipe  is  infallible,  the  remedy 
is  universal,  and  the  cure  is  unfailing.  It  is  found 
in  the  words  which  we  have  so  often  herein  re¬ 
ferred  to  of  Paul:  “  Be  careful  for  nothing,  but  in 
everything,  by  prayer  and  supplication,  with 
thanksgiving,  let  your  requests  be  made  known 
unto  God.” 

This  joyous,  care-free,  peaceful  experience 
bringing  the  believer  into  a  joyousness,  living  sim¬ 
ply  by  faith  day  by  day,  is  the  will  of  God.  Writ¬ 
ing  to  the  Thessalonians,  Paul  tells  them:  “  Re¬ 
joice  evermore;  pray  without  ceasing,  and  in 
everything  give  thanks,  for  this  is  the  will  of  God 
in  Christ  Jesus  concerning  you.”  So  that  not  only 
is  it  God’s  will  that  we  should  find  full  deliverance 


FACTS  AND  HISTORY 


75 


from  all  care  and  undue  anxiety,  but  He  has  or¬ 
dained  prayer  as  the  means  by  which  we  can  reach 
that  happy  state  of  heart. 

The  Revised  Version  makes  some  changes  in  the 
passage  of  Paul,  about  which  we  have  been  speak¬ 
ing.  The  reading  there  is  “  In  nothing  be  anxious,” 
and  “  the  peace  of  God  shall  guard  your  hearts  and 
your  minds.”  And  Paul  puts  the  antecedent  in  the 
air  of  prayer,  which  is  “  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  al¬ 
ways.”  That  is,  be  always  glad  in  the  Lord,  and 
be  happy  with  Him.  And  that  you  may  thus  be 
happy,  “  Be  careful  for  nothing.”  This  rejoicing 
is  the  doorway  for  prayer,  and  its  pathway  too. 
The  sunshine  and  buoyancy  of  joy  in  the  Lord  are 
the  strength  and  boldness  of  prayer,  the  peans  of 
its  victory.  “  Moderation  ”  makes  the  rainbow  of 
prayer.  The  word  means  mildness,  fairness,  gen¬ 
tleness,  sweet  reasonableness.  The  Revised  Ver¬ 
sion  changes  it  to  “  forbearance,”  with  the  margin 
reading  “  gentleness.”  What  rare  ingredients  and 
beautiful  colourings!  These  are  colourings  and 
ingredients  which  make  a  strong  and  beautiful 
character  and  a  wide  and  positive  reputation.  A 
rejoicing,  gentle  spirit,  positive  in  reputation,  is 
well  fitted  for  prayer,  rid  of  the  distractions  and 
unrest  of  care. 


•>  »- 


IX 

PRAYER— FACTS  AND  HISTORY 

{Continued) 

The  neglect  of  prayer  is  a  grand  hindrance  to  holi¬ 
ness.  “  We  have  not  because  we  ask  not.,}  Oh,  how 
meek  and  gentle,  how  lowly  in  heart ,  how  full  of  love 
both  to  God  and  to  man,  might  you  have  been  at  this 
day ,  if  you  had  only  asked !  If  you  had  continued 
instant  in  prayer!  Ask,  that  you  may  thoroughly 
experience  and  perfectly  practice  the  whole  of  that 
religion  which  our  Lord  has  so  beautifully  described 
in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount. — John  Wesley 

IT  is  to  the  closet  Paul  directs  us  to  go.  The 
unfailing  remedy  for  all  carking,  distressing 
care  is  prayer.  The  place  where  the  Lord  is 
at  hand  is  the  closet  of  prayer.  There  He  is  al¬ 
ways  found,  and  there  He  is  at  hand  to  bless,  to 
deliver  and  to  help.  The  one  place  where  the 
Lord’s  presence  and  power  will  be  more  fully  real¬ 
ized  than  any  other  place  is  the  closet  of  prayer. 

Paul  gives  the  various  terms  of  prayer,  suppli¬ 
cation  and  giving  of  thanks  as  the  complement  of 
true  praying.  The  soul  must  be  in  all  of  these 
spiritual  exercises.  There  must  be  no  half-hearted 
praying,  no  abridging  its  nature,  and  no  abating  its 
force,  if  we  would  be  freed  from  this  undue 
anxiety  which  causes  friction  and  internal  distress, 

and  if  we  would  receive  the  rich  fruit  of  that 

76 


FACTS  AND  HISTOEY 


n 


peace  which  passeth  all  understanding.  He  who 
prays  must  be  an  earnest  soul,  all  round  in  spiritual 
attributes. 

“  In  everything,  let  your  requests  be  made  known 
unto  God,”  says  Paul.  Nothing  is  too  great  to 
be  handled  in  prayer,  or  to  be  sought  in  prayer. 
Nothing  is  too  small  to  be  weighed  in  the  secret 
councils  of  the  closet,  and  nothing  is  too  little  for 
its  final  arbitrament.  As  care  comes  from  every 
source,  so  prayer  goes  to  every  source.  As  there 
are  no  small  things  in  prayer,  so  there  are  no  small 
things  with  God.  He  who  counts  the  hairs  of  our 
head,  and  who  is  not  too  lofty  and  high  to  notice 
the  little  sparrow  which  falls  to  the  ground,  is  not 
too  great  and  high  to  note  everything  which  con¬ 
cerns  the  happiness,  the  needs  and  the  safety  of 
His  children.  Prayer  brings  God  into  what  men 
are  pleased  to  term  the  little  affairs  of  life.  The 
lives  of  people  are  made  up  of  these  small  matters, 
and  yet  how  often  do  great  consequences  come 
from  small  beginnings  ? 

“  There  is  no  sorrow,  Lord,  too  light 
To  bring  in  prayer  to  Thee; 

There  is  no  anxious  care  too  slight 
To  wake  Thy  sympathy. 

“  There  is  no  secret  sigh  we  breathe, 

But  meets  Thine  ear  Divine, 

And  every  cross  grows  light  beneath 
The  shadow.  Lord,  of  Thine.” 


78  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PEA  YEP 


As  everything  by  prayer  is  to  be  brought  to  the 
notice  of  Almighty  God,  so  we  are  assured  that 
whatever  affects  us  concerns  Him.  How  compre¬ 
hensive  is  this  direction  about  prayer !  “  In  every¬ 
thing  by  prayer.”  There  is  no  distinction  here  be¬ 
tween  temporal  and  spiritual  things.  Such  a  dis¬ 
tinction  is  against  faith,  wisdom  and  reverence. 
God  rules  everything  in  nature  and  in  grace.  Man 
is  affected  for  time  and  eternity  by  things  secular 
as  well  as  by  things  spiritual.  Man’s  salvation 
hangs  on  his  business  as  well  as  on  his  prayers.  A 
man’s  business  hangs  on  his  prayers  just  as  it  hangs 
on  his  diligence. 

The  chief  hindrances  to  piety,  the  wiliest  and  the 
deadliest  temptations  of  the  devil,  are  in  business, 
and  lie  alongside  the  things  of  time.  The  heaviest, 
the  most  confusing  and  the  most  stupefying  cares 
lie  beside  secular  and  worldly  matters.  So  in 
everything  which  comes  to  us  and  which  concerns 
us,  in  everything  which  we  want  to  come  to  us,  and 
in  everything  which  we  do  not  want  to  come  to  us, 
prayer  is  to  be  made  for  all.  Prayer  blesses  all 
things,  brings  all  things,  relieves  all  things  and  pre¬ 
vents  all  things.  Everything  as  well  as  every  place 
and  every  hour  is  to  be  ordered  by  prayer.  Prayer 
has  in  it  the  possibility  to  affect  everything  which 
affects  us.  Here  are  the  vast  possibilities  of  prayer. 

How  much  is  the  bitter  of  life  sweetened  by 
prayer!  How  are  the  feeble  made  strong  by 
prayer!  Sickness  flees  before  the  health  of  prayer. 


FACTS  AND  HISTOKY 


79 


Doubts,  misgivings,  and  trembling  fears  retire 
before  prayer.  Wisdom,  knowledge,  holiness  and 
heaven  are  at  the  command  of  prayer.  Nothing  is 
outside  of  prayer.  It  has  the  power  to  gain  all 
things  in  the  provision  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Paul  covers  all  departments  and  sweeps  the  entire 
field  of  human  concernment,  conditions,  and  hap¬ 
penings  by  saying,  “  In  everything  by  prayer.” 

Supplications  and  thanksgiving  are  to  be  joined 
with  prayer.  It  is  not  the  dignity  of  worship,  the 
gorgeousness  of  ceremonials,  the  magnificence  of 
its  ritual,  nor  the  plainness  of  its  sacraments,  which 
avail.  It  is  not  simply  the  soul’s  hallowed  and 
lowly  abasement  before  God,  neither  the  speechless 
awe,  which  benefits  in  this  prayer  service,  but  the 
intensity  of  supplication,  the  looking  and  the  lifting 
of  the  soul  in  ardent  plea  to  God  for  the  things 
desired  and  for  which  request  is  made. 

The  radiance  and  gratitude  and  utterance  of 
thanksgiving  must  be  there.  This  is  not  simply  the 
poetry  of  praise,  but  the  deep-toned  words  and  the 
prose  of  thanks.  There  must  be  hearty  thanks, 
which  remembers  the  past,  sees  God  in  it,  and  voices 
that  recognition  in  sincere  thanksgiving.  The  hid¬ 
den  depths  within  must  have  utterance.  The  lips 
must  speak  the  music  of  the  soul.  A  heart  en¬ 
thused  of  God,  a  heart  illumined  by  His  presence,  a 
life  guided  by  His  right  hand,  must  have  some¬ 
thing  to  say  for  God  in  gratitude.  Such  is  to 
recognize  God  in  the  events  of  past  life,  to  exalt 


80  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


God  for  His  goodness,  and  to  honour  God  who 
has  honoured  it. 

“  Make  known  your  requests  unto  God.”  The 
“  requests  ”  must  be  made  known  unto  God.  Si¬ 
lence  is  not  prayer.  Prayer  is  asking  God  for 
something  which  we  have  not,  which  we  desire, 
and  which  He  has  promised  to  give  in  answer  to 
prayer.  Prayer  is  really  verbal  asking.  Words  are 
in  prayer.  Strong  words  and  true  words  are  found 
in  prayer.  Desires  in  prayer  are  put  in  words. 
The  praying  one  is  a  pleader.  He  urges  his  prayer 
by  arguments,  promises,  and  needs. 

Sometimes  loud  words  are  in  prayer.  The 
Psalmist  said,  “  Evening,  morning  and  at  noon  will 
I  pray,  and  cry  aloud.”  The  praying  one  wants 
something  which  he  has  not  got.  He  wants  some¬ 
thing  which  God  has  in  His  possession,  and  which 
he  can  get  by  praying.  He  is  beggared,  bewil¬ 
dered,  oppressed  and  confused.  He  is  before  God 
in  supplication,  in  prayer,  and  in  thanksgiving. 
These  are  the  attitudes,  the  incense,  the  parapher¬ 
nalia,  and  the  fashion  of  this  hour,  the  court  at¬ 
tendance  of  his  soul  before  God. 

“  Requests  ”  mean  to  ask  for  one’s  self.  The 
man  is  in  a  strait.  He  needs  something,  and  he 
needs  it  badly.  Other  help  has  failed.  It  means 
a  plea  for  something  to  be  given  which  has  not 
been  done.  The  request  is  for  the  Giver, — not 
alone  His  gifts  but  Himself.  The  requests  of  the 
praying  one  are  to  be  made  known  unto  God.  The 


FACTS  AND  HISTORY 


81 


requests  are  to  be  brought  to  the  knowledge  of 
God.  It  is  then  that  cares  fly  away,  anxieties  dis¬ 
appear,  worries  depart,  and  the  soul  gets  at  ease. 
Then  it  is  there  steals  into  the  heart  “the  peace 
of  God  that  passeth  all  under  standing/ * 

“  Peace !  doubting  heart,  my  God’s  I  am, 

Who  formed  me  man,  forbids  my  fear; 
The  Lord  hath  called  me  by  my  name ; 

The  Lord  protects,  forever  near ; 

His  blood  for  me  did  once  atone, 

And  still  He  loves  and  guards  His  own.” 

In  James,  chapter  five,  we  have  another  marvel¬ 
lous  description  of  prayer  and  its  possibilities.  It 
has  to  do  with  sickness  and  health,  sin  and  for¬ 
giveness,  and  rain  and  drouth.  Here  we  have 
James’  directory  for  praying: 

“  Is  any  among  you  afflicted  ?  Let  him  pray.  Is 
any  merry  ?  Let  him  sing  psalms. 

“  Is  any  sick  among  you  ?  Let  him  call  for  the 
elders  of  the  Church,  and  let  them  pray  over  him, 
anointing  him  with  oil  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

“  And  the  prayer  of  faith  shall  save  the  sick ;  and 
the  Lord  shall  raise  him  up ;  and  if  he  have  committed 
sins,  they  shall  be  forgiven  him. 

“  Confess  your  faults  one  to  another,  and  pray  one 
for  another*  that  ye  may  be  healed.  The  effectual, 
fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth  much. 

“  Elias  was  a  man  subject  to  like  passions  as  we 


82  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PBAYEB 


are,  and  he  prayed  earnestly  that  it  might  not  rain, 
and  it  rained  not  on  the  earth  by  the  space  of  three 
years  and  six  months. 

“And  he  prayed  again,  and  the  heaven  gave  rain, 
and  the  earth  brought  forth  her  fruit.” 

Here  is  prayer  for  one’s  own  needs  and  inter¬ 
cessory  prayer  for  others;  prayer  for  physical 
needs  and  prayer  for  spiritual  needs;  prayer  for 
drouth  and  prayer  for  rain;  prayer  for  temporal 
matters  and  prayer  for  spiritual  things.  How  vast 
the  reach  of  prayer !  How  wonderful  under  these 
words  its  possibilities ! 

Here  is  the  remedy  for  affliction  and  depression 
of  every  sort,  and  here  we  find  the  remedy  for 
sickness  and  for  rain  in  the  time  of  drouth.  Here 
is  the  way  to  obtain  forgiveness  of  sins.  A  stroke 
of  prayer  paralyzes  the  energies  of  nature,  stays  its 
clouds,  rain  and  dew,  and  blasts  field  and  farm  like 
the  simoon.  Prayer  brings  clouds,  and  rain  and 
fertility  to  the  famished  and  wasted  earth. 

The  general  statement,  “  The  effectual,  fervent 
prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth  much,”  is  a 
statement  of  prayer  as  an  energetic  force.  Two 
words  are  used.  One  signifies  power  in  exercise, 
operative  power,  while  the  other  is  power  as  an  en¬ 
dowment.  Prayer  is  power  and  strength,  a  power 
and  strength  which  influences  God,  and  is  most 
salutary,  widespread  and  marvellous  in  its  gracious 
benefits  to  man.  Prayer  influences  God.  The 


FACTS  AND  HISTOKY 


83 


ability  of  God  to  do  for  man  is  the  measure  of  the 
possibility  of  prayer. 

“  Thou  art  coming  to  a  king. 

Large  petitions  with  thee  bring ; 

For  His  grace  and  power  are  such 
None  can  ever  ask  too  much.” 


X 


ANSWERED  PRAYER 

In  his  “ Soldier's  Pocket  Book,”  Lord  Wolseley 
says  if  a  young  officer  wishes  to  get  on,  he  must  vol¬ 
unteer  for  the  most  hazardous  duties  and  take  every 
possible  chance  of  risking  his  life.  It  was  a  spirit 
and  courage  like  that  which  was  shown  in  the  service 
of  God  by  a  good  soldier  of  lesus  Christ  named  John 
McKenzie  who  died  a  few  years  ago.  One  evening 
when  he  was  a  lad  and  eager  for  work  in  the  Foreign 
Mission  field  he  knelt  down  at  the  foot  of  a  tree  in 
the  Ladies'  Walk  on  the  banks  of  the  Lossie  at  Elgin 
and  offered  up  this  prayer:  “  0  Lord  send  me  to  the 
darkest  spot  on  earth.”  And  God  heard  him  and  sent 
him  to  South  Africa  where  he  laboured  many  years 
first  under  the  London  Missionary  Society  and  then 
under  the  British  Government  as  the  first  Resident 
Commissioner  among  the  natives  of  Bechuanaland. — 
J.  O.  Struthers 

IT  is  answered  prayer  which  brings  praying  out 
of  the  realm  of  dry,  dead  things,  and  makes 
praying  a  thing  of  life  and  power.  It  is  the 
answer  to  prayer  which  brings  things  to  pass, 
changes  the  natural  trend  of  things,  and  orders  all 
things  according  to  the  will  of  God.  It  is  the  an¬ 
swer  to  prayer  which  takes  praying  out  of  the 
regions  of  fanaticism,  and  saves  it  from  being 
Eutopian,  or  from  being  merely  fanciful.  It  is  the 
answer  to  prayer  which  makes  praying  a  power 

for  God  and  for  man,  and  makes  praying  real  and 

84 


ANSWERED  PRAYER 


85 


divine.  Unanswered  prayers  are  training  schools 
for  unbelief,  an  imposition  and  a  nuisance,  an  im¬ 
pertinence  to  God  and  to  man. 

Answers  to  prayer  are  the  only  surety  that  we 
have  prayed  aright.  What  marvellous  power  there 
is  in  prayer!  What  untold  miracles  it  works  in 
this  world !  What  untold  benefits  to  men  does  it 
secure  to  those  who  pray!  Why  is  it  that  the 
average  prayer  by  the  million  goes  a  begging  for 
an  answer? 

The  millions  of  unanswered  prayers  are  not  to  be 
solved  by  the  mystery  of  God’s  will.  We  are  not 
the  sport  of  His  sovereign  power.  He  is  not  play¬ 
ing  at  “  make-believe  ”  in  His  marvellous  promises 
to  answer  prayer.  The  whole  explanation  is  found 
in  our  wrong  praying.  “  We  ask  and  receive  not 
because  we  ask  amiss.”  If  all  unanswered  prayers 
were  dumped  into  the  ocean,  they  would  come  very 
near  filling  it.  Child  of  God,  can  you  pray?  Are 
your  prayers  answered?  If  not,  why  not?  An¬ 
swered  prayer  is  the  proof  of  your  real  praying. 

The  efficacy  of  prayer  from  a  Bible  standpoint 
lies  solely  in  the  answer  to  prayer.  The  benefit  of 
prayer  has  been  well  and  popularly  maximized  by 
the  saying,  “  It  moves  the  arm  which  moves  the 
universe.”  To  get  unquestioned  answers  to 
prayer  is  not  only  important  as  to  the  satisfying 
of  our  desires,  but  is  the  evidence  of  our  abiding  in 
Christ.  It  becomes  more  important  still.  The 
mere  act  of  praying  is  no  test  of  our  relation  to 


86  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER, 


God.  The  act  of  praying  may  be  a  real  dead  per¬ 
formance.  It  may  be  the  routine  of  habit.  But 
to  pray  and  receive  clear  answers,  not  once  or 
twice,  but  daily,  this  is  the  sure  test,  and  is  the 
gracious  point  of  our  vital  connection  with  Jesus 
Christ. 

Read  our  Lord's  words  in  this  connection: 

“  If  ye  abide  in  me,  and  my  words  abide  in  you,  ye 
shall  ask  what  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you.” 

To  God  and  to  man,  the  answer  to  prayer  is  the 
all-important  part  of  our  praying.  The  answer  to 
prayer,  direct  and  unmistakable,  is  the  evidence  of 
God's  being.  It  proves  that  God  lives,  that  there 
is  a  God,  an  intelligent  being,  who  is  interested  in 
His  creatures,  and  who  listens  to  them  when  they 
approach  Him  in  prayer.  There  is  no  proof  so 
clear  and  demonstrative  that  God  exists  than 
prayer  and  its  answer.  This  was  Elijah's  plea: 
“  Hear  me,  O  Lord,  hear  me,  that  this  people  may 
know  that  thou  art  the  Lord  God.” 

The  answer  to  prayer  is  the  part  of  prayer  which 
glorifies  God.  Unanswered  prayers  are  dumb 
oracles  which  leave  the  praying  ones  in  darkness, 
doubt  and  bewilderment,  and  which  carry  no  con¬ 
viction  to  the  unbeliever.  It  is  not  the  act  or  the 
attitude  of  praying  which  gives  efficacy  to  prayer. 
It  is  not  abject  prostration  of  the  body  before  God, 
the  vehement  or  quiet  utterance  to  God,  the  ex¬ 
quisite  beauty  and  poetry  of  the  diction  of  our 


ANSWERED  PRAYER 


87 


prayers,  which  do  the  deed.  It  is  not  the  marvel¬ 
lous  array  of  argument  and  eloquence  in  praying 
which  makes  prayer  effectual.  Not  one  or  all  of 
these  are  the  things  which  glorify  God.  It  is  the 
answer  which  brings  glory  to  His  Name. 

Elijah  might  have  prayed  on  Carmel’s  heights 
till  this  good  day  with  all  the  fire  and  energy  of  his 
soul,  and  if  no  answer  had  been  given,  no  glory 
would  have  come  to  God.  Peter  might  have  shut 
himself  up  with  Dorcas’  dead  body  till  he  himself 
died  on  his  knees,  and  if  no  answer  had  come,  no 
glory  to  God  nor  good  to  man  would  have  fol¬ 
lowed,  but  only  doubt,  blight  and  dismay. 

Answer  to  prayer  is  the  convincing  proof  of  our 
right  relations  to  God.  Jesus  said  at  the  grave  of 
Lazarus: 

“  Father,  I  thank  thee  that  thou  hast  heard  me. 

“  And  I  knew  that  thou  hearest  me  always,  but 
because  of  the  people  that  stand  by  I  said  it,  that 
they  may  believe  that  thou  hast  sent  me.” 

The  answer  of  His  prayer  was  the  proof  of  His 
mission  from  God,  as  the  answer  to  Elijah’s  prayer 
was  made  to  the  woman  whose  son  he  raised  to 
life.  She  said,  “  Now  by  this  I  know  that  thou 
art  a  man  of  God.”  He  is  highest  in  the  favour 
of  God  who  has  the  readiest  access  and  the  greatest 
number  of  answers  to  prayer  from  Almighty  God. 

Prayer  ascends  to  God  by  an  invariable  law. 


88  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYEB 


even  by  more  than  law,  by  the  will,  the  promise 
and  the  presence  of  a  personal  God.  The  answer 
comes  back  to  earth  by  all  the  promise,  the  truth, 
the  power  and  the  love  of  God. 

Not  to  be  concerned  about  the  answer  to  prayer 
is  not  to  pray.  What  a  world  of  waste  there  is  in 
praying.  What  myriads  of  prayers  have  been  of¬ 
fered  for  which  no  answer  is  returned,  no  answer 
longed  for,  and  no  answer  is  expected!  We  have 
been  nurturing  a  false  faith  and  hiding  the  shame 
of  our  loss  and  inability  to  pray,  by  the  false,  com¬ 
forting  plea  that  God  does  not  answer  directly  or 
objectively,  but  indirectly  and  subjectively.  We 
have  persuaded  ourselves  that  by  some  kind  of 
hocus  pocus  of  which  we  are  wholly  unconscious  in 
its  process  and  its  results,  we  have  been  made 
better.  Conscious  that  God  has  not  answered  us 
directly,  we  have  solaced  ourselves  with  the  de¬ 
lusive  unction  that  God  has  in  some  impalpable 
way,  and  with  unknown  results,  given  us  some¬ 
thing  better.  Or  we  have  comforted  and  nurtured 
our  spiritual  sloth  by  saying  that  it  is  not  God’s 
will  to  give  it  to  us.  Faith  teaches  God’s  praying 
ones  that  it  is  God’s  will  to  answer  prayer.  God 
answers  all  prayers  and  every  prayer  of  His  true 
children  who  truly  pray. 

“  Prayer  makes  the  darkened  cloud  withdraw, 
Prayer  climbs  the  ladder  Jacob  saw; 

Gives  exercise  to  faith  and  love, 

Brings  every  blessing  from  above/* 


ANSWERED  PRAYER 


89 


The  emphasis  in  the  Scriptures  is  always  given 
to  the  answer  to  prayer.  All  things  from  God 
are  given  in  answer  to  prayer.  God  Himself,  His 
presence,  His  gifts  and  His  grace,  one  and  all,  are 
secured  by  prayer.  The  medium  by  which  God 
communicates  with  men  is  prayer.  The  most  real 
thing  in  prayer,  its  very  essential  end,  is  the  answer 
it  secures.  The  mere  repetition  of  words  in  prayer, 
the  counting  of  beads,  the  multiplying  mere  words 
of  prayer,  as  works  of  supererogation,  as  if  there 
was  virtue  in  the  number  of  prayers  to  avail,  is  a 
vain  delusion,  an  empty  thing,  a  useless  service. 
Prayer  looks  directly  to  securing  an  answer.  This 
is  its  design.  It  has  no  other  end  in  view. 

Communion  with  God  of  course  is  in  prayer. 
There  is  sweet  fellowship  there  with  our  God 
through  His  Holy  Spirit.  Enjoyment  of  God 
there  is  in  praying,  sweet,  rich  and  strong.  The 
graces  of  the  Spirit  in  the  inner  soul  are  nurtured 
by  prayer,  kept  alive  and  promoted  in  their  growth 
by  this  spiritual  exercise.  But  not  one  nor  all  of 
these  benefits  of  prayer  have  in  them  the  essential 
end  of  prayer.  The  divinely  appointed  channel 
through  which  all  good  and  all  grace  flows  to  our 
souls  and  bodies  is  prayer. 

“  Prayer  is  appointed  to  convey 
The  blessings  God  designs  to  give.” 

Prayer  is  divinely  ordained  as  the  means  by 
which  all  temporal  and  spiritual  good  are  gained 


90  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


to  us.  Prayer  is  not  an  end  in  itself.  It  is  not 
something  done  to  be  rested  in,  something  we  have 
done,  about  which  we  are  to  congratulate  ourselves. 
It  is  a  means  to  an  end.  It  is  something  we  do 
which  brings  us  something  in  return,  without  which 
the  praying  is  valueless.  Prayer  always  aims  at 
securing  an  answer. 

We  are  rich  and  strong,  good  and  holy,  benef¬ 
icent  and  benignant,  by  answered  prayer.  It  is  not 
the  mere  performance,  the  attitude,  nor  the  words 
of  prayer,  which  bring  benefit  to  us,  but  it  is  the 
answer  sent  direct  from  heaven.  Conscious,  real 
answers  to  prayer  bring  real  good  to  us.  This  is 
not  praying  merely  for  self,  or  simply  for  selfish 
ends.  The  selfish  character  cannot  exist  when  the 
prayer  conditions  are  fulfilled. 

It  is  by  these  answered  prayers  that  human  na¬ 
ture  is  enriched.  The  answered  prayer  brings  us 
into  constant  and  conscious  communion  with  God, 
awakens  and  enlarges  gratitude,  and  excites  the 
melody  and  lofty  inspiration  of  praise.  Answered 
prayer  is  the  mark  of  God  in  our  praying.  It  is 
the  exchange  with  heaven,  and  it  establishes  and 
realizes  a  relationship  with  the  unseen.  We  give 
our  prayers  in  exchange  for  the  Divine  blessing. 
God  accepts  our  prayers  through  the  atoning  blood 
and  gives  Himself,  His  presence  and  His  grace  in 
return. 

All  holy  affections  are  affected  by  answered 
prayers.  By  the  answers  to  prayer  all  holy  prin- 


ANSWERED  PRAYER 


91 


ciples  are  matured,  and  faith,  love  and  hope  have 
their  enrichment  by  answered  prayer.  The  an¬ 
swer  is  found  in  all  true  praying.  The  answer  is 
in  prayer  strongly  as  an  aim,  a  desire  expressed, 
and  its  expectation  and  realization  give  importunity 
and  realization  to  prayer.  It  is  the  fact  of  the 
answer  which  makes  the  prayer,  and  which  enters 
into  its  very  being.  To  seek  no  answer  to  prayer 
takes  the  desire,  the  aim,  and  the  heart  out  of 
prayer.  It  makes  praying  a  dead,  stockish  thing, 
fit  only  for  dumb  idols.  It  is  the  answer  which 
brings  praying  into  Bible  regions,  &nd  makes  it  a 
desire  realized,  a  pursuit,  an  interest,  that  clothes 
it  with  flesh  and  blood,  and  makes  it  a  prayer, 
throbbing  with  all  the  true  life  of  prayer,  affluent 
with  all  the  paternal  relations  of  giving  and  re¬ 
ceiving,  of  asking  and  answering. 

God  holds  all  good  in  His  own  hands.  That 
good  comes  to  us  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
because  of  His  all  atoning  merits,  by  asking  it  in 
His  name.  The  only  and  the  sole  command  in 
which  all  the  others  of  its  class  belong,  is  “  Ask, 
seek,  knock.”  And  the  one  and  sole  promise  is  its 
counterpart,  its  necessary  equivalent  and  results: 
“  It  shall  be  given — ye  shall  find — it  shall  be  opened 
unto  you.” 

God  is  so  much  involved  in  prayer  and  its  hear¬ 
ing  and  answering,  that  all  of  His  attributes  and 
His  whole  being  are  centered  in  that  great  fact. 
It  distinguishes  Him  as  peculiarly  beneficent,  won- 


92  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


derfully  good,  and  powerfully  attractive  in  His 
nature.  “  O  thou  that  hearest  prayer !  To  thee 
shall  all  flesh  come.,, 

“  Faithful,  O  Lord,  Thy  mercies  are 
A  rock  that  cannot  move ; 

A  thousand  promises  declare 
Thy  constancy  of  love." 

Not  only  does  the  Word  of  God  stand  surety  for 
the  answer  to  prayer,  but  all  the  attributes  of  God 
conspire  to  the  same  end.  God's  veracity  is  at 
stake  in  the  engagements  to  answer  prayer.  His 
wisdom,  His  truthfulness  and  His  goodness  are 
involved.  God's  infinite  and  inflexible  rectitude  is 
pledged  to  the  great  end  of  answering  the  prayers 
of  those  who  call  upon  Him  in  time  of  need.  Jus¬ 
tice  and  mercy  blend  into  oneness  to  secure  the  an¬ 
swer  to  prayer.  It  is  significant  that  the  very  jus¬ 
tice  of  God  comes  into  play  and  stands  hard  by 
God's  faithfulness  in  the  strong  promise  God  makes 
of  the  pardon  of  sins  and  of  cleansing  from  sin's 
pollutions: 

“If  we  confess  our  sins,  he  is  faithful  and  just  to 
forgive  us  our  sins  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  un¬ 
righteousness." 

God's  kingly  relation  to  man,  with  all  of  its 
authority,  unites  with  the  fatherly  relation  and  with 
all  of  its  tenderness  to  secure  the  answer  to  prayer. 

Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  most  fully  committed 


ANSWERED  PRAYER 


93 


to  the  answer  of  prayer.  “  Whatsoever  ye  shall 
ask  in  my  name,  that  will  I  do,  that  the  Father  may 
be  glorified  in  the  Son.”  How  well  assured  the 
answer  to  prayer  is,  when  that  answer  is  to  glorify 
God  the  Father!  And  how  eager  Jesus  Christ  is 
to  glorify  His  Father  in  heaven!  So  eager  is  He 
to  answer  prayer  which  always  and  everywhere 
brings  glory  to  the  Father,  that  no  prayer  offered 
in  His  name  is  denied  or  overlooked  by  Him.  Says 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  again,  giving  fresh  assur¬ 
ance  to  our  faith,  “  If  ye  shall  ask  anything  in  my 
name,  I  will  do  it.”  So  says  He  once  more,  “  Ask 
what  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you.” 

“  Come,  my  soul,  thy  suit  prepare, 

Jesus  loves  to  answer  prayer; 

He  Himself  has  bid  thee  pray, 

Therefore  will  not  say  thee  nay.” 


XI 


ANSWERED  PRAYER  ( Continued ) 

Constrained  at  the  darkest  hour  to  confess  humbly 
that  without  God's  help  I  was  helpless ,  I  vowed  a  vow 
in  the  forest  solitude  that  I  would  confess  His  aid 
before  men.  A  silence  as  a  death  was  around  me; 
it  was  midnight ,  I  was  weakened  by  illness ,  prostrated 
with  fatigue  and  worn  with  anxiety  for  my  white  and 
black  companions,  whose  fate  was  a  mystery.  In  this 
physical  and  mental  distress  I  besought  God  to  give 
me  back  my  people.  Nine  hours  later  we  were  ex¬ 
ulting  with  rapturous  joy.  In  full  view  of  all  was 
the  crimson  flag  with  the  crescent  and  beneath  its 
waving  folds  was  the  long-lost  rear  column. — Henry 
M.  Stanley 

GOD  has  committed  Himself  to  us  by  His 
Word  in  our  praying.  The  Word  of  God 
is  the  basis  and  the  inspiration  and  the 
heart  of  prayer.  Jesus  Christ  stands  as  the  illus¬ 
tration  of  God’s  Word,  its  illimitable  good  in  prom¬ 
ise  as  well  as  in  realization.  God  takes  nothing  by 
halves.  He  gives  nothing  by  halves.  We  can  have 
the  whole  of  Him  when  He  has  the  whole  of  us. 
His  words  of  promise  are  so  far-reaching,  and  so 
all-comprehending,  that  they  seem  to  have  deadened 
our  comprehension  and  have  paralyzed  our  pray¬ 
ing.  This  appears  when  we  consider  those  large 

94 


ANSWERED  PRAYER 


95 


words,  when  He  almost  exhausts  human  language 
in  promises,  as  in  “  whatever/’  “  anything/’  and  in 
the  all-inclusive  “  whatsoever,”  and  “  all  things.” 
These  oft-repeated  promises,  so  very  great,  seem 
to  daze  us,  and  instead  of  allowing  them  to  move 
us  to  asking,  testing,  and  receiving,  we  turn  away 
full  of  wonder,  but  empty  handed  and  with  empty 
hearts. 

We  quote  another  passage  from  our  Lord’s 
teaching  about  prayer.  By  the  most  solemn  veri¬ 
fication,  He  declares  as  follows: 

“  And  in  that  day  ye  shall  ask  me  nothing;  Verily, 
Verily,  I  say  unto  you:  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  the 
Father  in  my  name,  he  will  give  it  to  you. 

“  Hitherto  ye  have  asked  nothing  in  my  name.  Ask, 
and  ye  shall  receive,  that  your  joy  may  be  full.” 

Twice  in  this  passage  He  declares  the  answer, 
and  pledging  His  Father,  “  He  will  give  it  to  you,” 
and  declaring  with  impressive  and  most  suggestive 
iteration,  “  Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive.”  So  strong 
and  so  often  did  Jesus  declare  and  repeat  the  an¬ 
swer  as  an  inducement  to  pray,  and  as  an  inevitable 
result  of  prayer,  the  Apostles  held  it  as  so  fully 
and  invincibly  established,  that  prayer  would  be 
answered,  they  held  it  to  be  their  main  duty  to 
urge  and  command  men  to  pray.  So  firmly  were 
they  established  as  to  the  truth  of  the  law  of  prayer 
as  laid  down  by  our  Lord,  that  they  were  led  to  af- 
;  firm  that  the  answer  to  prayer  was  involved  in  and 


96  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRATER 


necessarily  bound  up  with  all  right  praying.  God 
the  Father  and  Jesus  Christ,  His  Son,  are  both 
strongly  committed  by  all  the  truth  of  their  word 
and  by  the  fidelity  of  their  character,  to  answer 
prayer. 

Not  only  do  these  and  all  the  promises  pledge 
Almighty  God  to  answer  prayer,  but  they  assure 
us  that  the  answer  will  be  specific,  and  that  the 
very  thing  for  which  we  pray  will  be  given. 

Our  Lord’s  invariable  teaching  was  that  we  re¬ 
ceive  that  for  which  we  ask,  and  obtain  that  for 
which  we  seek,  and  have  that  door  opened  at  which 
we  knock.  This  is  according  to  our  Heavenly  Fa¬ 
ther’s  direction  to  us,  and  His  giving  to  us  for  our 
asking.  He  will  not  disappoint  us  by  not  answer¬ 
ing,  neither  will  He  deny  us  by  giving  us  some 
other  thing  for  which  we  have  not  asked,  or  by 
letting  us  find  some  other  thing  for  which  we  have 
not  sought,  or  by  opening  to  us  the  wrong  door, 
at  which  we  were  not  knocking.  If  we  ask  bread. 
He  will  give  us  bread.  If  we  ask  an  egg,  He  will 
give  us  an  egg.  If  we  ask  a  fish,  He  will  give  us 
a  fish.  Not  something  like  bread,  but  bread  itself 
will  be  given  unto  us.  Not  something  like  a  fish, 
but  a  fish  will  be  given.  Not  evil  will  be  given  us 
in  answer  to  prayer,  but  good. 

Earthly  parents,  though  evil  in  nature,  give  for 
the  asking,  and  answer  to  the  crying  of  their  chil¬ 
dren.  The  encouragement  to  prayer  is  transferred 
from  our  earthly  father  to  our  Heavenly  Father, 


ANSWERED  PRAYER 


97 


from  the  evil  to  the  good,  to  the  supremely  good ; 
from  the  weak  to  the  omnipotent,  our  Heavenly 
Father,  centering  in  Himself  all  the  highest  con¬ 
ceptions  of  Fatherhood,  abler,  readier,  and  much 
more  than  the  best,  and  much  more  than  the  ablest 
earthly  father.  “  How  much  more,”  who  can  tell? 
Much  more  than  our  earthly  father,  will  He  supply 
all  our  needs,  give  us  all  good  things,  and  enable 
us  to  meet  every  difficult  duty  and  fulfill  every  law, 
though  hard  to  flesh  and  blood,  but  made  easy  un¬ 
der  the  full  supply  of  our  Father’s  beneficent  and 
exhaustless  help. 

Here  we  have  in  symbol  and  as  initial,  more 
than  an  intimation  of  the  necessity,  not  only  of 
perseverance  in  prayer,  but  of  the  progressive 
stages  of  intentness  and  effort  in  the  outlay  of  in¬ 
creasing  spiritual  force.  Asking,  seeking,  and 
knocking.  Here  is  an  ascending  scale  from  the 
mere  words  of  asking,  to  a  settled  attitude  of  seek¬ 
ing,  resulting  in  a  determined,  clamorous  and  vig¬ 
orous  direct  effort  of  praying. 

Just  as  God  has  commanded  us  to  pray  always, 
to  pray  everywhere,  and  to  pray  in  everything,  so 
He  will  answer  always,  everywhere  and  in  every¬ 
thing. 

God  has  plainly  and  with  directness  committed 
Himself  to  answer  prayer.  If  we  fulfill  the  con¬ 
ditions  of  prayer,  the  answer  is  bound  to  come. 
The  laws  of  nature  are  not  so  invariable  and  so 
i  inexorable  as  the  promised  answer  to  pray.  The 


98  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


ordinances  of  nature  might  fail,  but  the  ordinances 
of  grace  can  never  fail.  There  are  no  limitations, 
no  adverse  conditions,  no  weakness,  no  inability, 
which  can  or  will  hinder  the  answer  to  prayer. 
God's  doing  for  us  when  we  pray  has  no  limita¬ 
tions,  is  not  hedged  about,  by  provisos  in  Himself, 
or  in  the  peculiar  circumstances  of  any  particular 
case.  If  we  really  pray,  God  masters  and  defies  all 
things  and  is  above  all  conditions. 

God  explicitly  says,  “  Call  unto  me,  and  I  will 
answer.”  There  are  no  limitations,  no  hedges,  no 
hindrances  in  the  way  of  God  fulfilling  the  prom¬ 
ise.  His  word  is  at  stake.  His  word  is  involved. 
God  solemnly  engages  to  answer  prayer.  Man  is 
to  look  for  the  answer,  be  inspired  by  the  expecta¬ 
tion  of  the  answer,  and  may  with  humble  boldness 
demand  the  answer.  God,  who  cannot  lie,  is  bound 
to  answer.  He  has  voluntarily  placed  Himself  un¬ 
der  obligation  to  answer  the  prayer  of  him  who 
truly  prays. 

“To  God  your  every  want 
In  instant  prayer  display; 

Pray  always;  pray,  and  never  faint; 

Pray,  without  ceasing,  pray. 

“  In  fellowship,  alone, 

To  God  with  faith  draw  near; 

Approach  His  courts,  beseech  His  throne. 
With  all  the  power  of  prayer.” 

The  prophets  and  the  men  of  God  of  Old  Testa- 


ANSWERED  PRAYER 


99 


ment  times  were  unshaken  in  their  faith  in  the 
absolute  certainty  of  God  fulfilling  His  promises 
to  them.  They  rested  in  security  on  the  word  of 
God,  and  had  no  doubt  whatever  either  as  to  the 
fidelity  of  God  in  answering  prayer  or  of  His  will¬ 
ingness  or  ability.  So  that  their  history  is  marked 
by  repeated  asking  and  receiving  at  the  hands  of 
God. 

The  same  is  true  of  the  early  Church.  They  re¬ 
ceived  without  question  the  doctrine  their  Lord  and 
Master  had  so  often  affirmed  that  the  answer  to 
prayer  was  sure.  The  certainty  of  the  answer  to 
prayer  was  as  fixed  as  God’s  Word  was  true.  The 
Holy  Ghost  dispensation  was  ushered  in  by  the 
disciples  carrying  this  faith  into  practice.  When 
Jesus  told  them  to  “  Tarry  at  Jerusalem  till  they 
were  endued  with  power  from  on  high,”  they  re¬ 
ceived  it  as  a  sure  promise  that  if  they  obeyed  the 
command,  they  would  certainly  receive  the  Divine 
power.  So  in  prayer  for  ten  days  they  tarried  in 
the  upper  room,  and  the  promise  was  fulfilled. 
The  answer  came  just  as  Jesus  said. 

So  when  Peter  and  John  were  arrested  for  heal¬ 
ing  the  man  who  sat  at  the  beautiful  gate  of  the 
temple,  after  being  threatened  by  the  rulers  in 
Jerusalem,  they  were  released.  “  And  being  let  go, 
they  went  to  their  own  company,”  they  went  to 
those  with  whom  they  were  in  affinity,  those  of 
like  minds,  and  not  to  men  of  the  world.  Still 
believing  in  prayer  and  its  efficacy,  they  gave  them- 


100  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


selves  to  prayer,  the  prayer  itself  being  recorded 
in  Acts,  chapter  four.  They  recited  some  things  to 
the  Lord,  and  “  when  they  had  prayed,  the  place 
was  shaken  where  they  were  assembled  together, 
and  they  were  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  they 
spake  the  word  of  God  with  boldness.” 

Here  they  were  refilled  for  this  special  occasion 
with  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  answer  to  prayer  re¬ 
sponded  to  their  faith  and  prayer.  The  fullness 
of  the  Spirit  always  brings  boldness.  The  cure  for 
fear  in  the  face  of  threatenings  of  the  enemies  of 
the  Lord  is  being  filled  with  the  Spirit.  This  gives 
power  to  speak  the  word  of  the  Lord  with  bold¬ 
ness.  This  gives  courage  and  drives  away  fear. 


XII 


ANSWERED  PRAYER  ( Continued ) 

A  young  man  had  been  called  to  the  foreign  field. 
He  had  not  been  in  the  habit  of  preaching ,  but  he 
knew  one  thing ,  how  to  prevail  with  God ;  and  going 
one  day  to  a  friend  he  said:  “  1  don't  see  how  God  can 
use  me  on  the  field.  I  have  no  special  talent  ”  His 
friend  said:  “  My  brother ,  God  wants  men  on  the 
field  who  can  pray.  There  are  too  many  preachers 
now  and  too  few  pray-ers .”  He  went.  In  his  own 
room  in  the  early  dawn  a  voice  was  heard  weeping 
and  pleading  for  souls.  All  through  the  day,  the  shut 
door  and  the  hush  that  prevailed  made  you  feel  like 
walking  softly,  for  a  soul  was  wrestling  with  God. 

Yet  to  this  home,  hungry  souls  would  flock,  drawn 
by  some  irresistible  power. 

Ah,  the  mystery  was  unlocked.  In  the  secret 
chamber  lost  souls  were  pleaded  for  and  claimed. 
The  Holy  Ghost  knew  just  where  they  were  and  sent 
them  along. — J.  Hudson  Taylor 

WE  put  it  to  the  front.  We  unfold  it  on  a 
banner  never  to  be  lowered  or  folded, 
that  God  does  hear  and  answer  prayer. 
God  has  always  heard  and  answered  prayer.  God 
will  forever  hear  and  answer  prayer.  He  is  the 
same  yesterday,  to-day  and  forever,  ever  blessed, 
ever  to  be  adored.  Amen.  He  changes  not.  As 
He  has  always  answered  prayer,  so  will  He  ever 
continue  to  do  so. 


IOI 


102  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


To  answer  prayer  is  God's  universal  rule.  It  is 
His  unchangeable  and  irrepealable  law  to  answer 
prayer.  It  is  His  invariable,  specific  and  inviolate 
promise  to  answer  prayer.  The  few  denials  to 
prayer  in  the  Scriptures  are  the  exceptions  to  the 
general  rule,  suggestive  and  startling  by  their  few¬ 
ness,  exception  and  emphasis. 

The  possibilities  of  prayer,  then,  lie  in  the  great 
truth,  illimitable  in  its  broadness,  fathomless  in  its 
depths,  exhaustless  in  its  fullness,  that  God  answers 
every  prayer  from  every  true  soul  who  truly  prays. 

God’s  Word  does  not  say,  “  Call  unto  me,  and 
you  will  thereby  be  trained  into  the  happy  art  of 
knowing  how  to  be  denied.  Ask,  and  you  will 
learn  sweet  patience  by  getting  nothing.”  Far 
from  it.  But  it  is  definite,  clear  and  positive: 
“  Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  unto  you.” 

We  have  this  case  among  many  in  the  Old  Tes¬ 
tament  : 

“  Jabez  called  on  the  God  of  Israel,  saying,  O  that 
thou  wouldst  bless  me  indeed,  and  enlarge  my  coast, 
and  that  thy  hand  might  be  with  me,  and  that  thou 
wouldst  keep  me  from  evil,  that  it  may  not  grieve 

_  y> 

me. 

And  God  readily  granted  him  the  things  which 
he  had  requested. 

Hannah,  distressed  in  soul  because  she  was  child¬ 
less,  and  desiring  a  man  child,  repaired  to  the  house 
of  prayer,  and  prayed,  and  this  is  the  record  she 


ANSWERED  PRAYER 


103 


makes  of  the  direct  answer  she  received:  “  For  this 
child  I  prayed,  and  the  Lord  hath  given  me  the 
petition  which  I  asked  of  him.” 

God’s  promises  and  purposes  go  direct  to  the  fact 
of  giving  for  the  asking.  The  answer  to  our 
prayers  is  the  motive  constantly  presented  in  the 
Scriptures  to  encourage  us  to  pray  and  to  quicken 
us  in  this  spiritual  exercise.  Take  such  strong, 
clear  passages  as  these: 

“  Call  unto  me,  and  I  will  answer  thee.” 

“  He  shall  call  unto  me,  and  I  will  answer.” 

“  Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  you.  Seek,  and  ye 
shall  find.  Knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you.” 

This  is  Jesus  Christ’s  law  of  prayer.  He  does 
not  say,  “  Ask,  and  something  shall  be  given  you.” 
Nor  does  He  say,  “  Ask,  and  you  will  be  trained 
into  piety.”  But  it  is  that  when  you  ask,  the  very 
thing  asked  for  will  be  given.  Jesus  does  not  say, 
“  Knock,  and  some  door  will  be  opened.”  But  the 
very  door  at  which  you  are  knocking  will  be 
opened.  To  make  this  doubly  sure,  Jesus  Christ 
duplicates  and  reiterates  the  promise  of  the  answer: 
“  For  every  one  that  asketh,  receiveth ;  and  he  that 
seeketh,  findeth;  and  to  him  that  knocketh,  it  shall 
be  opened.” 

Answered  prayer  is  the  spring  of  love,  and  is 
the  direct  encouragement  to  pray.  “I  love  the 
Lord  because  he  hath  heard  my  voice  and  my  sup- 
|  plications.  Because  he  hath  inclined  his  ear  unto 


104  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


me,  therefore  will  I  call  upon  him  as  long  as  I 
live.” 

The  certainty  of  the  Father's  giving  is  assured 
by  the  Father's  relation,  and  by  the  ability  and 
goodness  of  the  Father.  Earthly  parents,  frail,  in¬ 
firm,  and  limited  in  goodness  and  ability,  give  when 
the  child  asks  and  seeks.  The  parental  heart  re¬ 
sponds  most  readily  to  the  cry  for  bread.  The 
hunger  of  the  child  touches  and  wins  the  father 
heart.  So  God,  our  Heavenly  Father,  is  as  easily 
and  strongly  moved  by  our  prayers  as  the  earthly 
parent.  “  If  ye  being  evil,  know  how  to  give  good 
gifts  unto  your  children,  how  much  more  shall 
your  father  in  heaven  give  good  gifts  unto  them 
that  ask  him  ?  ”  “  Much  more,”  just  as  much  more 
does  God's  goodness,  tenderness  and  ability  exceed 
that  of  man's. 

Just  as  the  asking  is  specific,  so  also  is  the  an¬ 
swer  specific.  The  child  does  not  ask  for  one 
thing  and  get  another.  He  does  not  cry  for  bread, 
and  get  a  stone.  He  does  not  ask  for  an  egg,  and 
receive  a  scorpion.  He  does  not  ask  for  a  fish, 
and  get  a  serpent.  Christ  demands  specific  asking. 
He  responds  to  specific  praying  by  specific  giving. 

To  give  the  very  thing  prayed  for,  and  not  some¬ 
thing  else,  is  fundamental  to  Christ's  law  of  pray¬ 
ing.  No  prayer  for  the  cure  of  blind  eyes  did  He 
ever  answer  by  curing  deaf  ears.  The  very  thing 
prayed  for  is  the  very  thing  which  He  gives.  The 
exceptions  to  this  are  confirmatory  of  this  great 


ANSWERED  PRAYER 


105 


law  of  prayer.  He  who  asks  for  bread  gets  bread, 
and  not  a  stone.  If  he  asks  for  a  fish,  he  receives 
a  fish,  and  not  a  serpent.  No  cry  is  so  pleading 
and  so  powerful  as  the  child's  cry  for  bread.  The 
cravings  of  hunger,  the  appetite  felt,  and  the  need 
realized,  all  create  and  propel  the  crying  of  the 
child.  Our  prayers  must  be  as  earnest,  as  needy, 
and  as  hungry  as  the  hungry  child’s  cry  for  bread. 
Simple,  artless  and  direct  and  specific  must  be  our 
praying,  according  to  Christ’s  law  of  prayer  and 
His  teaching  of  God’s  Fatherhood. 

The  illustration  and  enforcement  of  the  law  of 
prayer  are  found  in  the  specific  answers  given  to 
prayer.  Gethsemane  is  the  only  seeming  excep¬ 
tion.  The  prayer  of  Jesus  Christ  in  that  awful 
hour  of  darkness  and  hell  was  conditioned  on  these 
words,  “If  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from 
me.”  But  beyond  these  utterances  of  our  Lord  was 
the  soul  and  life  prayer  of  the  willing,  suffering 
Divine  victim,  “  Nevertheless  not  as  I  will,  but  as 
thou  wilt.”  The  prayer  was  answered,  the  angel 
came,  strength  was  imparted,  and  the  meek  suf¬ 
ferer  in  silence  drank  the  bitter  cup, 

Two  cases  of  unanswered  prayer  are  recorded  in 
the  Scriptures  in  addition  to  the  Gethsemane 
prayer  of  our  Lord.  The  first  was  that  of  David 
for  the  life  of  his  baby  child,  but  for  good  reasons 
to  Almighty  God  the  request  was  not  granted. 
The  second  was  that  of  Paul  for  the  removal  of 
^the  thorn  in  the  flesh,  which  was  denied.  But  we 


106  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PKAYEB 


are  constrained  to  believe  these  must  have  been 
notable  as  exceptions  to  God's  rule,  as  illustrated  in 
the  history  of  prophet,  priest,  apostle  and  saint,  as 
recorded  in  the  Divine  Word.  There  must  have 
been  unrevealed  reasons  which  moved  God  to  veer 
from  His  settled  and  fixed  rule  to  answer  prayer 
by  giving  the  specific  thing  prayed  for. 

Our  Lord  did  not  hold  the  Syrophenician  woman 
in  the  school  of  unanswered  prayer  in  order  to  test 
and  mature  her  faith,  neither  did  He  answer  her 
prayer  by  healing  or  saving  her  husband.  She 
asks  for  the  healing  of  her  daughter,  and  Christ 
healed  the  daughter.  She  received  the  very  thing 
for  which  she  asked  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  It 
was  in  the  school  of  answered  prayer  our  Lord  dis¬ 
ciplined  and  perfected  her  faith,  and  it  was  by 
giving  her  a  specific  answer  to  her  prayer.  Her 
prayer  centered  on  her  daughter.  She  prayed  for 
the  one  thing,  the  healing  of  her  child.  And  the  an¬ 
swer  of  our  Lord  centered  likewise  on  the  daughter. 

We  tread  altogether  too  gingerly  upon  the  great 
and  precious  promises  of  God,  and  too  often  we 
ignore  them  wholly.  The  promise  is  the  ground 
on  which  faith  stands  in  asking  of  God.  This  is 
the  one  basis  of  prayer.  We  limit  God’s  ability. 
We  measure  God’s  ability  and  willingness  to  an¬ 
swer  by  prayer  by  the  standard  of  men.  We  limit 
the  Holy  One  of  Israel.  How  full  of  benefaction 
and  remedy  to  suffering  mankind  are  the  promises 
as  given  us  by  James  in  his  Epistle,  fifth  chapter! 


ANSWERED  PRAYER 


107 


How  personal  and  mediate  do  they  make  God  in 
prayer !  They  are  a  direct  challenge  to  our  faith. 
They  are  encouraging  to  large  expectations  in  all 
the  requests  we  make  of  God.  Prayer  affects  God 
in  a  direct  manner,  and  has  its  aim  and  end  in 
affecting  Him.  Prayer  takes  hold  of  God,  and 
induces  Him  to  do  large  things  for  us,  whether 
personal  or  relative,  temporal  or  spiritual,  earthly 
or  heavenly. 

The  great  gap  between  Bible  promises  to  prayer 
and  the  income  from  praying  is  almost  unspeak¬ 
ably  great,  so  much  so  that  it  is  a  prolific  source 
of  infidelity.  It  breeds  unbelief  in  prayer  as  a 
great  moral  force,  and  begets  doubt  really  as  to 
the  efficacy  of  prayer.  Christianity  needs  to-day, 
above  all  things  else,  men  and  women  who  can  in 
prayer  put  God  to  the  test  and  who  can  prove  His 
promises.  When  this  happy  day  for  the  world 
begins,  it  will  be  earth’s  brightest  day,  and  will  be 
heaven’s  dawning  day  on  earth.  These  are  the 
sort  of  men  and  women  needed  in  this  modern  day 
in  the  Church.  It  is  not  educated  men  who  are 
needed  for  the  times.  It  is  not  more  money  that  is 
required.  It  is  not  more  machinery,  more  organi¬ 
zation,  more  ecclesiastical  laws,  but  it  is  men  and 
women  who  know  how  to  pray,  who  can  in  prayer 
lay  hold  upon  God  and  bring  Him  down  to  earth, 
and  move  Him  to  take  hold  of  earth’s  affairs 
mightily  and  put  life  and  power  into  the  Church 
and  into  all  of  its  machinery. 


108  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


The  Church  and  the  world  greatly  need  saints 
who  can  bridge  this  wide  gap  between  the  praying 
done  and  the  small  number  of  answers  received. 
Saints  are  needed  whose  faith  is  bold  enough  and 
sufficiently  far-reaching  to  put  God  to  the  test. 
The  cry  comes  even  now  out  of  heaven  to  the 
people  of  the  present-day  Church,  as  it  sounded 
forth  in  the  days  of  Malachi:  “Prove  me  now 
herewith,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts.”  God  is  wait¬ 
ing  to  be  put  to  the  test  by  His  people  in  prayer. 
He  delights  in  being  put  to  the  test  on  His  prom¬ 
ises.  It  is  His  highest  pleasure  to  answer  prayer 
to  prove  the  reliability  of  His  promises.  Nothing 
worthy  of  God  nor  of  great  value  to  men  will  be 
accomplished  till  this  is  done. 

Our  Gospel  belongs  to  the  miraculous.  It  was 
projected  on  the  miraculous  plane.  It  cannot  be 
maintained  but  by  the  supernatural.  Take  the 
supernatural  out  of  our  holy  religion,  and  its  life 
and  power  are  gone,  and  it  degenerates  into  a 
mere  mode  of  morals.  The  miraculous  is  Divine 
power.  Prayer  has  in  it  this  same  power.  Prayer 
brings  this  Divine  power  into  the  ranks  of  men 
and  puts  it  to  work.  Prayer  brings  into  the  affairs 
of  earth  a  supernatural  element.  Our  Gospel  when 
truly  presented  is  the  power  of  God.  Never  was 
the  Church  more  in  need  of  those  who  can  and  will 
test  Almighty  God.  Never  did  the  Church  need 
more  than  now  those  who  can  raise  up  everywhere 
memorials  of  God’s  supernatural  power,  memorials 


ANSWERED  PKAYER 


109 


of  answers  to  prayer,  memorials  of  promises  ful¬ 
filled.  These  would  do  more  to  silence  the  enemy 
of  souls,  the  foe  of  God  and  the  adversary  of  the 
Church  than  any  modern  scheme  or  present-day 
plan  for  the  success  of  the  Gospel.  Such  memo¬ 
rials  reared  by  praying  people  would  dumbfound 
God’s  foes,  strengthen  weak  saints,  and  would  fill 
strong  saints  with  triumphant  rapture. 

The  most  prolific  source  of  infidelity,  and  that 
which  traduces  and  hinders  praying,  and  that 
which  obscures  the  being  and  glory  of  God  most 
effectually,  is  unanswered  prayer.  Better  not  to 
pray  at  all  than  to  go  through  a  dead  form,  which 
secures  no  answer,  brings  no  glory  to  God,  and 
supplies  no  good  to  man.  Nothing  so  indurates 
the  heart  and  nothing  so  blinds  us  to  the  unseen 
and  the  eternal,  as  this  kind  of  prayerless  praying. 


XIII 


PRAYER  MIRACLES 

George  Ben  field,  a  driver  on  the  Midland  Railway , 
living  at  Derby,  was  standing  on  the  footplate  oiling 
his  engine ,  the  train  being  stationary,  when  his  foot 
slipped ;  he  fell  on  the  space  between  the  lines.  He 
heard  the  express  coming  on,  and  had  only  time 
enough  to  lie  full  length  on  the  six-foot”  when  it 
rushed  by,  and  he  escaped  unhurt.  He  returned  to 
his  home  in  the  middle  of  the  night  and  as  he  was 
going  up-stairs  he  heard  one  of  his  children,  a  girl 
about  eight  years  old,  crying  and  sobbing.  “  Oh, 
father,”  she  said,  “  I  thought  somebody  came  and  told 
me  that  you  were  going  to  be  killed,  and  I  got  out  of 
bed  and  prayed  that  God  would  not  let  you  die.” 
Was  it  only  a  dream,  a  coincidence  f  George  Benfield 
and  others  believed  that  he  owed  his  life  to  that 
prayer.— Dean  Hole 

THE  earthly  career  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  was  no  mere  episode,  a  sort  of  in¬ 
terlude,  in  His  eternal  life.  What  He 
was  and  what  He  did  on  earth  was  neither  ab¬ 
normal  nor  divergent,  but  characteristic.  What 
He  was  and  what  He  did  on  earth  is  but  the  figure 
and  the  illustration  of  what  He  is  and  what  He  is 
doing  in  heaven.  He  is  “  the  same  yesterday  and 
to-day,  and  forever.,,  This  statement  is  the  Di¬ 
vine  summary  of  the  eternal  unity  and  changeless¬ 
ness  of  His  character.  His  earthly  life  was  made 

no 


PRAYER  MIRACLES 


111 


up  largely  of  hearing  and  answering  prayer.  His 
heavenly  life  is  devoted  to  the  same  Divine  busi¬ 
ness.  Really  the  Old  Testament  is  the  record  of 
God  hearing  and  answering  prayer.  The  whole 
Bible  deals  largely  with  this  all  important  subject 

Christ’s  miracles  are  object  lessons.  They  are 
living  pictures.  They  talk  to  us.  They  have 
hands  which  take  hold  of  us.  Many  valuable  les¬ 
sons  do  these  miracles  teach  us.  In  their  diversity, 
they  refresh  us.  They  show  us  the  matchless 
power  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  at  the  same  time  dis¬ 
cover  to  us  His  marvellous  compassion  for  suffer¬ 
ing  humanity.  These  miracles  disclose  to  us  His 
ability  to  endlessly  diversify  His  operations. 
God’s  method  in  working  with  man  is  not  the  same 
in  all  cases.  He  does  not  administer  His  grace  in 
rigid  ruts.  There  is  endless  variety  in  His  move¬ 
ments.  There  is  marvellous  diversity  in  His  opera¬ 
tions.  He  does  not  fashion  His  creations  in  the 
same  mould.  Just  so  our  Lord  is  not  circumscribed 
in  His  working  nor  trammelled  by  models.  He 
works  independently.  He  is  His  own  architect.  He 
furnishes  His  own  patterns  which  have  unlimited 
variety. 

When  we  consider  our  Lord’s  miracles,  we  dis¬ 
cover  that  quite  a  number  were  performed  uncon¬ 
ditionally.  At  least  there  were  no  conditions  ac¬ 
companying  them  so  far  as  the  Divine  record 
shows.  At  His  own  instance,  without  being  so¬ 
licited  to  do  so,  in  order  to  glorify  God  and  to 


112  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PKAYER 


manifest  His  own  glory  and  power,  this  class  of 
miracles  was  wrought.  Many  of  His  mighty 
works  were  performed  at  the  moving  of  His  com¬ 
passion  and  at  the  call  of  suffering  and  need,  as 
well  as  at  the  call  of  His  power.  But  a  number  of 
them  were  performed  by  Him  in  answer  to  prayer. 
Some  were  wrought  in  answer  to  the  personal 
prayers  of  those  who  were  afflicted.  Others  were 
performed  in  answer  to  the  prayers  of  the  friends 
of  those  who  were  afflicted.  Those  miracles  wrought 
in  answer  to  prayer  are  very  instructive  in  the  uses 
of  prayer. 

In  these  conditional  miracles,  faith  holds  the 
primacy  and  prayer  is  faith’s  vicegerent.  We  have 
an  illustration  of  the  importance  of  faith  as  the 
condition  on  which  the  exercise  of  Christ’s  power 
was  based,  or  the  channel  through  which  it  flowed, 
in  the  incident  of  a  visit  He  made  to  Nazareth 
with  its  results,  or  rather  its  lack  of  results.  Here 
is  the  record  of  the  case: 

“  And  he  could  there  do  no  mighty  work,  save  that 
he  laid  his  hands  upon  a  few  sick  folk,  and  healed 
them. 

“  And  he  marvelled  because  of  their  unbelief.,, 

Those  people  at  Nazareth  may  have  prayed  our 
Lord  to  raise  their  dead,  or  open  the  eyes  of  the 
blind,  or  heal  the  lepers,  but  it  was  all  in  vain.  The 
absence  of  faith,  however  much  of  performance 
may  be  seen,  restrains  the  exercise  of  God’s  power, 


PRAYER  MIRACLES 


113 


paralyzes  the  arm  of  Christ,  and  turns  to  death  all 
signs  of  life.  Unbelief  is  the  one  thing  which 
seriously  hinders  Almighty  God  in  doing  mighty 
works.  Matthew’s  record  of  this  visit  to  Nazareth 
says,  “  And  he  did  not  any  mighty  works  there 
because  of  their  unbelief.”  Lack  of  faith  ties  the 
hands  of  Almighty  God  in  His  working  among  the 
children  of  men.  Prayer  to  Christ  must  always  be 
based,  backed  and  impregnated  with  faith. 

The  miracle  of  miracles  in  the  earthly  career  of 
our  Lord,  the  raising  of  Lazarus  from  the  dead, 
was  remarkable  for  its  prayer  accompaniment.  It 
was  really  a  prayer  issue,  something  after  the  issue 
between  the  prophets  of  Baal  and  Elijah.  It  was 
not  a  prayer  for  help.  It  was  one  of  thanksgiving 
and  assured  confidence.  Let  us  read  it: 

“  And  Jesus  lifted  up  his  eyes  and  said,  Father,  I 
thank  thee  that  thou  hast  heard  me. 

“  And  I  know  that  thou  hearest  me  always.  But 
because  of  the  people  that  stand  by,  I  said  it,  that  they 
may  believe  that  thou  hast  sent  me.” 

It  was  a  prayer  mainly  for  the  benefit  of  those 
who  were  present,  that  they  might  know  that  God 
was  with  Him  because  He  had  answered  His 
prayers,  and  that  faith  in  God  might  be  radiated 
in  their  hearts. 

Answered  prayers  are  sometimes  the  most  con¬ 
vincing  and  faith-creating  forces.  Unanswered 
prayers  chill  the  atmosphere  and  freeze  the  soil  of 


114  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


faith.  If  Christians  knew  how  to  pray  so  as  to 
have  answers  to  their  prayers,  evident,  immediate, 
and  demonstrative  answers  from  God,  faith  would 
be  more  widely  diffused,  would  become  more  gen¬ 
eral,  would  be  more  profound,  and  would  be  a 
much  more  mighty  force  in  the  world. 

What  a  valuable  lesson  of  faith  and  intercessory 
prayer  does  the  miracle  of  the  healing  of  the  cen¬ 
turion’s  servant  bring  to  us!  The  simplicity  and 
strength  of  the  faith  of  this  Roman  officer  are  re¬ 
markable,  for  He  believed  that  it  was  not  needful 
for  our  Lord  to  go  directly  to  his  house  in  order 
to  have  his  request  granted,  “  But  speak  the  word 
only,  and  my  servant  shall  be  healed.”  And  our 
Lord  puts  His  mark  upon  this  man’s  faith  by  say¬ 
ing,  “  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  I  have  not  found  so 
great  faith,  no,  not  in  Israel.”  This  man’s  prayer 
was  the  expression  of  his  strong  faith,  and  such 
faith  brought  the  answer  promptly. 

The  same  invaluable  lesson  we  get  from  the 
prayer  miracle  of  the  case  of  the  Syrophenician 
woman  who  went  to  our  Lord  in  behalf  of  her 
stricken  daughter,  making  her  daughter’s  case  her 
own,  by  pleading,  “  Lord,  help  me.”  Here  was 
importunity,  holding  on,  pressing  her  case,  refus¬ 
ing  to  let  go  or  to  be  denied.  A  strong  case  it  was 
of  intercessory  prayer  and  its  benefits.  Our  Lord 
seemingly  held  her  off  for  a  while  but  at  last 
yielded,  and  put  His  seal  upon  her  strong  faith: 
“  O  woman,  great  is  thy  faith !  Be  it  unto  thee 


PKAYER  MIEACLES 


115 


even  as  thou  wilt.”  What  a  lesson  on  praying  for 
others  and  its  large  benefits! 

Individual  cases  could  be  named,  where  the  af¬ 
flicted  persons  interceded  for  themselves,  illustra¬ 
tions  of  wonderful  things  wrought  by  our  Lord  in 
answer  to  the  cries  of  those  who  were  afflicted.  As 
we  read  the  Evangelists’  record,  the  pages  fairly 
glisten  with  records  of  our  Lord’s  miracles 
Wrought  in  answer  to  prayer,  showing  the  won¬ 
derful  things  accomplished  by  the  use  of  this  di¬ 
vinely  appointed  means  of  grace. 

If  we  turn  back  to  Old  Testament  times,  we  have 
no  lack  of  instances  of  prayer  miracles.  The  saints 
of  those  days  were  well  acquainted  with  the  power 
of  prayer  to  move  God  to  do  great  things.  Nat¬ 
ural  laws  did  not  stand  in  the  way  of  Almighty 
God  when  He  was  appealed  to  by  His  praying 
ones.  What  a  marvellous  record  is  that  of  Moses 
as  those  successive  plagues  were  visited  upon 
Egypt  in  the  effort  to  make  Pharaoh  let  the  chil¬ 
dren  of  Israel  go  that  they  might  serve  God!  As 
one  after  another  of  these  plagues  came,  Pharaoh 
would  beseech  Moses,  “  Entreat  the  Lord  your  God 
that  he  may  take  away  this  death.”  And  as  the 
plagues  themselves  were  miracles,  prayer  removed 
them  as  quickly  as  they  were  sent  by  Almighty 
God.  The  same  hand  which  sent  these  destructive 
agencies  upon  Egypt  was  moved  by  the  prayers  of 
His  servant  Moses  to  remove  these  same  plagues. 
And  the  removal  of  the  plagues  in  answer  to  prayer 


116  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


was  as  remarkable  a  display  of  Divine  power  as 
was  the  sending  of  the  plagues  in  the  first  instance. 
The  removal  in  answer  to  prayer  would  do  as  much 
to  show  God's  being  and  His  power  as  would  the 
plagues  themselves.  They  were  miracles  of  prayer. 

All  down  the  line  in  Old  Testament  days  we  see 
these  prayer  miracles.  God's  praying  servants  had 
not  the  least  doubt  that  prayer  would  work  mar¬ 
vellous  results  and  bring  the  supernatural  into  the 
affairs  of  earth.  Miracles  and  prayer  went  hand 
in  hand.  They  were  companions.  The  one  was 
the  cause,  the  other  was  the  effect.  The  one 
brought  the  other  into  existence.  The  miracle  was 
the  proof  that  God  heard  and  answered  prayer. 
The  miracle  was  the  Divine  demonstration  that 
God,  who  was  in  heaven,  interfered  in  earth’s  af¬ 
fairs,  intervened  to  help  men,  and  worked  super- 
naturally  if  need  be  to  accomplish  His  purposes  in 
answer  to  prayer. 

Passing  to  the  days  of  the  early  Church,  we  find 
the  same  Divine  record  of  prayer  miracles.  The 
sad  news  came  to  Peter  that  Dorcas  was  dead  and 
he  was  wanted  at  Joppa.  Promptly  he  made  his 
way  to  that  place.  Peter  put  everybody  out  of 
the  room,  and  then  he  kneeled  down  and  prayed, 
and  with  faith  said,  “  Tabitha,  arise,”  and  she 
opened  her  eyes  and  sat  up.  Knee  work  on  the 
part  of  Peter  did  the  work.  Prayer  brought  things 
to  pass  and  saved  Dorcas  for  further  work  on 
earth. 


PRAYER  MIKACLES 


117 


Paul  was  on  that  noted  journey  to  Rome  under 
guard,  and  had  been  shipwrecked  on  an  island. 
The  chief  man  of  the  island  was  Publius,  and  his 
old  father  was  critically  ill  of  a  bloody  flux.  Paul 
laid  his  hands  on  the  old  man,  and  prayed  for  him, 
and  God  came  to  the  rescue  and  healed  the  sick 
man.  Prayer  brought  the  thing  desired  to  pass. 
God  interfered  with  the  laws  of  nature,  either 
suspending  or  setting  them  aside  for  a  season,  and 
answered  the  prayer  of  this  praying  servant  of  His. 
And  the  answer  to  prayer  among  those  heathen 
people  convinced  them  that  a  supernatural  power 
was  at  work  among  them.  In  fact  so  true  was 
this  that  they  seemed  to  think  a  supernatural  being 
had  come  among  them. 

Peter  was  put  in  prison  by  Herod  after  he  had 
killed  James  with  the  sword.  The  young  Church 
was  greatly  concerned,  but  they  neither  lost  heart 
nor  gave  themselves  over  to  needless  fretting  and 
worrying.  They  had  learned  before  this  from 
whence  their  help  came.  They  had  been  schooled 
in  the  lesson  of  prayer.  God  had  intervened  be¬ 
fore  in  the  behalf  of  His  servants  and  interfered 
when  His  cause  was  at  stake.  “  Prayer  was  made 
without  ceasing  of  the  Church  unto  God  for  him.” 
An  angel  on  swift  wings  comes  to  the  rescue,  and 
in  a  marvellous  and  supernatural  way  releases 
Peter  and  leaves  the  prison  doors  locked.  Locks 
and  prison  doors  and  an  unfriendly  king  cannot 
stand  in  the  way  of  Almighty  God  when  His  peo- 


118  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PEAYEB 

pie  cry  in  prayer  unto  Him.  Miracles  if  need  be 
will  be  wrought  in  their  behalf  to  fulfill  His  prom¬ 
ises  and  to  carry  forward  His  plans.  After  this 
order  does  the  Word  of  God  illustrate  and  enlarge 
and  confirm  the  possibilities  of  prayer  by  what 
may  be  termed  “  Prayer  miracles.” 

How  quickly  to  our  straits  follow  our  enlarge¬ 
ments!  God  wrought  a  wonderful  work  through 
Samson  in  enabling  him  with  a  crude  instrument, 
the  jaw  bone  of  an  ass,  to  slay  a  thousand  men, 
giving  him  a  great  deliverance.  Shortly  after¬ 
ward  he  was  abnormally  thirsty,  and  he  was  un¬ 
able  to  obtain  any  water.  It  seemed  as  if  he  would 
perish  with  thirst.  God  had  saved  him  from  the 
hands  of  the  Philistines.  Could  he  not  as  well 
save  him  from  thirst?  So  Samson  cried  unto  the 
Lord,  and  “  God  clave  a  hollow  place  that  was  in 
the  jaw,  and  there  came  water  thereout,  and  when 
he  had  drunk,  his  spirit  came  again  and  he  re¬ 
vived.”  God  could  bring  water  out  of  the  jaw 
bone  just  as  well  as  He  could  give  victory  by  it  to 
Samson.  God  could  change  that  which  had  been 
death-dealing  to  His  enemies  and  make  it  life-giv¬ 
ing  to  His  servant.  God  can  and  will  work  a 
miracle  in  answer  to  prayer  in  order  to  deliver 
His  friends,  sooner  than  He  will  work  one  to 
destroy  His  enemies.  He  does  both,  however,  in 
answer  to  prayer. 

All  natural  forces  are  under  God’s  control.  He 
did  not  create  the  world  and  put  it  under  law,  and 


PRAYER  MIRACLES 


119 


then  retire  from  it,  to  work  out  its  own  destiny, 
irrespective  of  the  welfare  of  His  intelligent  crea¬ 
tures.  Natural  laws  are  simply  God’s  laws,  by 
which  He  governs  and  regulates  all  things  in  na¬ 
ture.  Nature  is  nothing  but  God’s  servant.  God 
is  above  nature,  God  is  not  the  slave  of  nature. 
This  being  true,  God  can  and  will  suspend  the 
working  of  nature’s  laws,  can  hold  them  in  abey¬ 
ance  by  His  almighty  hand,  can  for  the  time  being 
set  them  aside,  to  fulfill  His  higher  purposes  in 
redemption.  It  is  no  violation  of  nature’s  laws 
when,  in  answer  to  prayer,  He  who  is  above  nature 
makes  nature  His  servant,  and  causes  nature  to 
carry  out  His  plans  and  purposes. 

This  is  the  explanation  of  that  wonderful  prayer 
miracle  of  Old  Testament  times,  when  Joshua,  in 
the  strength  and  power  of  the  Lord  God,  com¬ 
manded  the  sun  and  moon  to  stand  still  in  order 
to  give  time  to  complete  the  victory  over  the4 
enemies  of  Israel.  Why  should  it  be  thought  a 
thing  incredible  that  the  God  of  nature  and  of 
grace  should  interfere  with  His  own  natural  laws 
for  a  short  season  in  answer  to  prayer,  and  for 
the  good  of  His  cause?  Is  God  tied  hand  and 
foot?  Has  He  so  circumscribed  Himself  that  He 
cannot  operate  the  law  of  prayer?  Is  the  law  of 
nature  superior  to  the  law  of  prayer?  Not  by  any 
means.  He  is  the  God  of  prayer  as  well  as  the 
God  of  nature.  Both  prayer  and  nature  have  God 
as  their  Maker,  their  Ruler  and  their  Executor. 


120  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


And  prayer  is  God's  servant,  just  as  nature  is  His 
servant. 

The  prayer  force  in  God's  government  is  as 
Strong  as  any  other  force,  and  all  natural  and 
other  forces  must  give  way  before  the  force  of 
prayer.  Sun,  moon  and  stars  are  under  God’s 
control  in  answer  to  prayer.  Rain,  sunshine  and 
drouth  obey  His  will.  “  Fire  and  hail,  snow  and 
vapour,  stormy  wind  fulfilling  his  word.”  Dis¬ 
ease  and  health  are  governed  by  Him.  All,  all 
things  in  heaven  and  earth,  are  absolutely  under 
the  control  of  Him  who  made  heaven  and  earth, 
and  who  governs  all  things  according  to  His  own 
will. 

Prayer  still  works  miracles  among  men  and 
brings  to  pass  great  things.  It  is  as  true  now  as 
when  James  wrote  his  Epistle,  “  The  fervent,  ef¬ 
fectual  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth  much.” 
And  when  the  records  of  eternity  are  read  out  to 
an  assembled  world,  then  will  it  appear  how  much 
prayer  has  wrought  in  this  world.  Little  is  now 
seen  of  the  fruits  of  prayer  compared  to  all  that 
it  has  accomplished  and  is  accomplishing.  At 
the  judgment  day,  then  will  God  disclose  the  things 
which  were  brought  to  pass  in  this  world  through 
the  prayers  of  the  saints.  Many  occurrences  which 

are  now  taken  as  a  matter  of  course  will  then  be 

# 

seen  to  have  happened  because  of  the  Lord's  pray¬ 
ing  ones. 

The  work  of  George  Muller  in  Bristol,  England, 


PRAYER  MIRACLES 


121 


was  a  miracle  of  the  nineteenth  century.  It  will 
take  the  opening  of  the  books  at  the  great  judg¬ 
ment  day  to  disclose  all  he  wrought  through 
prayer.  His  orphanage,  in  which  hundreds  of  fa¬ 
therless  and  motherless  children  were  cared  for,  to 
sustain  which  this  godly  man  never  asked  any  one 
for  money  with  which  to  pay  its  running  expenses, 
is  a  marvel  of  modern  times.  His  practice  was 
always  to  ask  God  for  just  what  was  needed,  and 
the  answers  which  came  to  him  read  like  a  record 
of  apostolic  times.  He  prayed  for  everything  and 
trusted  implicitly  to  God  to  supply  all  his  needs. 
And  it  is  a  matter  of  record  that  never-  did  he 
and  the  orphans  ever  lack  for  any  good  thing. 

Of  a  holy  man  who  has  done  so  much  for  Christ 
and  suffering  humanity,  it  was  said  at  the  grave 
about  him: 

“  He  prayed  up  the  walls  of  an  hospital,  and  the 
hearts  of  the  nurses.  He  prayed  mission  stations 
into  being,  and  missionaries  into  faith.  He  prayed 
open  the  hearts  of  the  rich,  and  gold  from  the  most 
distant  lands.” 

Luther  is  quoted  as  once  saying:  “  The  Chris¬ 
tian’s  trade  is  praying.”  Certainly,  for  a  great 
reason,  the  preacher’s  trade  should  be  praying.  We 
fear  greatly  that  many  preachers  know  nothing  of 
this  trade  of  praying,  and  hence  they  never  suc¬ 
ceed  at  this  trade.  A  severe  apprenticeship  in  the 
trade  of  praying  must  be  served  in  order  to  be- 


122  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


come  a  journeyman  in  it.  Not  only  is  it  true  that 
there  are  few  journeymen  at  work  at  this  praying 
trade,  but  numbers  have  never  even  been  appren¬ 
tices  at  praying.  No  wonder  so  little  is  accom¬ 
plished  by  them.  God  and  the  supernatural  are 
left  out  of  their  programmes. 

Many  do  not  understand  this  trade  of  praying 
because  they  have  never  learned  it,  and  hence  do 
not  work  at  it.  Many  miracles  ought  to  be  worked 
by  our  praying.  Why  not?  Is  the  arm  of  the 
Lord  shortened  that  He  cannot  save  ?  Is  His  ear 
heavy  that  He  cannot  hear?  Has  prayer  lost  its 
power  because  iniquity  abounds  and  the  love  of 
many  has  grown  cold?  Has  God  changed  from 
what  He  once  was  ?  To  all  these  queries  we  enter 
an  emphatic  negative.  God  can  as  easily  to-day 
work  miracles  by  praying  as  He  did  in  the  days  of 
old.  “  I  am  the  Lord ;  I  change  not.”  “  Is  any¬ 
thing  too  hard  for  the  Lord  ?  ” 

He  who  works  miracles  by  praying  will  first  of 
all  work  the  chief  miracle  on  himself.  Oh,  that  we 
might  fully  understand  well  the  Christian’s  trade  of 
praying,  and  follow  the  trade  day  by  day  and  thus 
make  to  ourselves  great  spiritual  wealth ! 


XIV 

WONDERS  OF  GOD  THROUGH  PRAYER 

Wisdom  and  Revelation  distinguished  by  Experience 
and  Scripture.  By  Experience.  Take  a  weak  un¬ 
derstanding  ( but  one  exceeding  holy)t  having  little 
knowledge  of  God  by  way  of  discursive  wisdom  and 
laying  this  thing  to  that ,  and  so  knowing  God:  such 
poor  soul  is  oftentimes  hardly  able  to  speak  wisely 
and  he  will  know  more  of  God  in  one  prayer  than  a 
great  scholar  ( though  also  very  holy)  hath  known  of 
Him  in  all  his  life;  God  often  deals  thus  with  the  weak 
who  are  very  holy;  for  if  such  were  shut  up  to  know¬ 
ing  God  by  way  of  a  sanctified  reason ,  large  under¬ 
standings  would  have  infinite  advantage  of  them  and 
they  would  grow  little  in  grace  and  holiness;  there¬ 
fore  God  makes  a  supply  by  breaking  in  upon  their 
spirits  by  such  irradiations  as  these. 

— Thos.  Goodwin 

IN  the  fearful  contest  in  this  world  between 
God  and  the  devil,  between  good  and  evil, 
and  between  heaven  and  hell,  prayer  is  the 
mighty  force  for  overcoming  Satan,  giving  domin¬ 
ion  over  sin,  and  defeating  hell.  Only  praying 
leaders  are  to  be  counted  on  in  this  dreadful  con¬ 
flict.  Praying  men  alone  are  to  be  put  to  the  front. 
These  are  the  only  sort  who  are  able  to  successfully 
contend  with  all  the  evil  forces. 

The  “prayers  of  all  saints”  are  a  perpetual 

force  against  all  the  powers  of  darkness.  These 

123 


124  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PKAYER 


prayers  are  a  mighty  energy  in  overcoming  the 
world,  the  flesh  and  the  devil  and  in  shaping  the 
destiny  of  God’s  movements,  to  overcome  evil  and 
get  the  victory  over  the  devil  and  all  his  works. 
The  character  and  energy  of  God’s  movements  lie 
in  prayer.  Victory  is  to  come  at  the  end  of  pray¬ 
ing. 

The  wonders  of  God’s  power  are  to  be  kept 
alive,  made  real  and  present,  and  repeated  only  by 
prayer.  God  is  not  now  so  evident  in  the  world, 
so  almighty  in  manifestation  as  of  old,  not  because 
miracles  have  passed  away,  nor  because  God  has 
ceased  to  work,  but  because  prayer  has  been  shorn 
of  its  simplicity,  its  majesty,  and  its  power.  God 
still  lives,  and  miracles  still  live  while  God  lives 
and  acts,  for  miracles  are  God’s  ways  of  acting. 
Prayer  is  dwarfed,  withered  and  petrified  when 
faith  in  God  is  staggered  by  doubts  of  His  ability, 
or  through  the  shrinking  caused  by  fear.  When 
faith  has  a  telescopic,  far-off  vision  of  God,  prayer 
works  no  miracles,  and  brings  no  marvels  of  de¬ 
liverance.  But  when  God  is  seen  by  faith’s  closest, 
fullest  eye,  prayer  makes  a  history  of  wonders. 

Think  about  God.  Make  much  of  Him,  till  He 
broadens  and  fills  the  horizon  of  faith.  Then 
prayer  will  come  into  its  marvellous  inheritance 
of  wonders.  The  marvels  of  prayer  are  seen  when 
we  remember  that  God’s  purposes  are  changed  by 
prayer,  God’s  vengeance  is  stayed  by  prayer,  and 
God’s  penalty  is  remitted  by  prayer.  The  whole 


"WONDERS  OF  GOD 


125 


range  of  God’s  dealing  with  man  is  affected  by 
prayer.  Here  is  a  force  which  must  be  increasingly 
used,  that  of  prayer,  a  force  to  which  all  the  events 
of  life  ought  to  be  subjected. 

To  “  pray  without  ceasing,”  to  pray  in  every¬ 
thing,  and  to  pray  everywhere— these  commands 
of  continuity  are  expressive  of  the  sleepless  energy 
of  prayer,  of  the  exhaustless  possibilities  of  prayer, 
and  of  its  exacting  necessity.  Prayer  can  do  all 
things.  Prayer  must  do  all  things. 

“  Prayer  is  the  simplest  form  of  speech 
That  infant  lips  can  try; 

Prayer  the  sublimest  strains  that  reach 
The  majesty  on  high.” 

Prayer  is  asking  God  for  something,  and  for 
something  which  He  has  promised.  Prayer  is 
using  the  divinely  appointed  means  for  obtaining 
what  we  need  and  for  accomplishing  what  God 
proposes  to  do  on  earth. 

“  Prayer  is  appointed  to  convey 

The  blessings  God  designs  to  give ; 

Long  as  they  live  should  Christians  pray, 

They  learn  to  pray  when  first  they  live.” 

And  prayer  brings  to  us  blessings  which  we  need, 
and  which  only  God  can  give,  and  which  prayer 
can  alone  convey  to  us. 

In  their  broadest  fullness,  the  possibilities  of 
prayer  are  to  be  found  in  the  very  nature  of  prayer. 


126  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PEAYER 


This  service  of  prayer  is  not  a  mere  rite,  a  cere¬ 
mony  through  which  we  go,  a  sort  of  performance. 
Prayer  is  going  to  God  for  something  needed  and 
desired.  Prayer  is  simply  asking  God  to  do  for  us 
what  He  has  promised  us  He  will  do  if  we  ask 
Him.  The  answer  is  a  part  of  prayer,  and  is  God's 
part  of  it.  God's  doing  the  thing  asked  for  is  as 
much  a  part  of  the  prayer  as  the  asking  of  the 
thing  is  prayer.  Asking  is  man's  part.  Giving  is 
God's  part.  The  praying  belongs  to  us.  The  an¬ 
swer  belongs  to  God. 

Man  makes  the  plea  and  God  makes  the  answer. 
The  plea  and  the  answer  compose  the  prayer.  God 
is  more  ready,  more  willing  and  more  anxious  to 
give  the  answer  than  man  is  to  give  the  asking. 
The  possibilities  of  prayer  lie  in  the  ability  of  man 
to  ask  large  things  and  in  the  ability  of  God  to  give 
large  things. 

God's  only  condition  and  limitation  of  prayer  is 
found  in  the  character  of  the  one  who  prays.  The 
measure  of  our  faith  and  praying  is  the  measure 
of  His  giving.  Like  as  our  Lord  said  to  the  blind 
man,  “According  to  your  faith  be  it  unto  you," 
so  it  is  the  same  in  praying,  “According  to  the 

measure  of  your  asking,  be  it  unto  you."  God 

♦ 

measures  the  answer  according  to  the  prayer.  He 
is  limited  by  the  law  of  prayer  in  the  measure  of 
the  answers  He  gives  to  prayer.  As  is  the  measure 
of  prayer,  so  will  be  the  answer. 

If  the  person  praying  has  the  characteristics 


WONDERS  OF  GOD 


127 


which  warrant  praying,  then  the  possibilities  are 
illimitable.,  They  are  declared  to  be  “all  things 
whatsoever.”  Here  is  no  limitation  in  character 
or  kind,  in  circumference  or  condition.  The  man 
who  prays  can  pray  for  anything  and  for  every¬ 
thing,  and  God  will  give  everything  and  anything. 
If  we  limit  God  in  the  asking.  He  will  be  limited 
in  the  giving. 

Looking  ahead,  God  declares  in  His  Word  that 
the  wonder  of  wonders  will  be  so  great  in  the  last 
days  that  everything  animate  and  inanimate  will  be 
excited  by  His  power: 

“  For  behold,  I  create  new  heavens  and  a  new 
earth;  and  the  former  shall  not  be  remembered  nor 
come  to  mind. 

“  But  be  ye  glad  and  rejoice,  forever,  in  that  which 
I  create;  for  behold  I  create  Jerusalem  a  rejoicing, 
and  her  people  a  joy.” 

But  these  days  of  God’s  mighty  working,  the 
days  of  His  magnificent  and  wonder-creating 
power,  will  be  days  of  magnificent  praying. 

"  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  that  before  they  call,  I 
will  answer,  and  while  they  are  yet  speaking,  I  will 
hear.” 

It  has  ever  been  so.  God’s  marvellous,  miracle- 
working  times  have  been  times  of  marvellous, 
miracle-working  praying.  The  greatest  thing  in 
God’s  worship  by  His  own  estimate  is  praying. 


*  128  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


Its  chief  service  and  its  distinguishing  feature  is 
prayer: 

"  Even  them  will  I  bring  to  my  holy  mountain,  and 
make  them  joyful  in  my  house  of  prayer;  their  burnt 
offering  and  their  sacrifices  shall  be  accepted  upon 
my  altar,  for  my  house  shall  be  called  a  house  of 
prayer  for  all  people.” 

This  was  true  under  all  the  gorgeous  rites  and 
parade  of  ceremonies  under  the  Jewish  worship. 
Sacrifice,  offering  and  the  atoning  blood  were  all 
to  be  impregnated  with  prayer.  The  smoke  of 
burnt  offering  and  perfumed  incense  which  filled 
God's  house  was  to  be  but  the  flame  of  prayer,  and 
all  of  God's  people  were  to  be  anointed  priests  to 
minister  at  His  altar  of  prayer.  So  all  things  were 
to  be  done  with  mighty  prayer,  because  mighty 
prayer  was  the  fruitage  and  inspiration  of  mighty 
faith.  But  much  more  is  it  now  true  every  way 
under  the  more  simple  service  of  the  Gospel. 

The  course  of  nature,  the  movements  of  the 
planets,  and  the  clouds,  have  yielded  to  the  influ¬ 
ence  of  prayer,  and  God  has  changed  and  checked 
the  order  of  the  sun  and  the  seasons  under  the 
mighty  energies  of  prayer.  It  is  only  necessary  to 
note  the  remarkable  incident  when  Joshua,  through 
this  divine  means  of  prayer,  caused  the  sun  and 
the  moon  to  stand  still  in  order  that  a  more  com¬ 
plete  victory  could  be  given  to  the  armies  of  Israel 
In  tile  contest  with  the  armies  of  the  Amorites. 


WONDERS  OF  GOD 


129 


If  we  believe  God’s  word,  we  are  bound  to  be¬ 
lieve  that  prayer  affects  God,  and  affects  Him 
mightily ;  that  prayer  avails,  and  that  prayer  avails 
mightily.  There  are  wonders  in  prayer  because 
there  are  wonders  in  God.  Prayer  has  no  talis- 
manic  influence.  It  is  no  mere  fetish.  It  has  no 
so-called  powers  of  magic.  It  is  simply  making 
known  our  requests  to  God  for  things  agreeable  to 
His  will  in  the  name  of  Christ.  It  is  just  yielding 
our  requests  to  a  Father,  who  knows  all  things, 
who  has  control  of  all  things,  and  who  is  able  to 
do  all  things.  Prayer  is  infinite  ignorance  trust¬ 
ing  to  the  wisdom  of  God.  Prayer  is  the  voice  of 
need  crying  out  to  Him  who  is  inexhaustible  in 
resources.  Prayer  is  helplessness  reposing  with 
childlike  confidence  on  the  word  of  its  Father  in 
heaven.  Prayer  is  but  the  verbal  expression  of  the 
heart  of  perfect  confidence  in  the  infinite  wisdom, 
the  power  and  the  riches  of  Almighty  God,  who 
has  placed  at  our  command  in  prayer  everything 
we  need. 

How  all  the  gracious  results  of  such  gracious 
times  are  to  come  to  the  world  through  prayer,  we 
are  taught  in  God’s  Word.  God’s  heart  seems  to 
overflow  with  delight  at  the  prospect  of  thus  bless¬ 
ing  His  people.  By  the  mouth  of  the  Prophet  Joel, 
God  thus  speaks: 

“  Fear  not,  O  land ;  be  glad  and  rejoice ;  for  the 
Lord  will  do  great  things. 


130  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


“Be  not  afraid,  ye  beasts  of  the  field;  for  the 
pastures  of  the  wilderness  do  spring,  for  the  tree  , 
beareth  her  fruit,  the  fig-tree  and  the  vine  do  yield 
their  strength. 

“  Be  glad  then,  ye  children  of  Zion,  and  rejoice  in 
the  Lord  your  God ;  for  he  hath  given  you  the  former 
rain  moderately,  and  he  will  cause  to  come  down  for 
you  the  rain,  the  former  rain,  and  the  latter  rain  in 
the  first  month. 

“  And  the  floors  shall  be  full  of  wheat,  and  the  fats 
shall  overflow  with  wine  and  oil. 

“  And  I  will  restore  to  you  the  years  that  the  locust 
hath  eaten,  the  canker  worm  and  the  caterpillar,  and 
the  palmer  worm,  my  great  army  which  I  sent  among 
you. 

“  And  ye  shall  eat  in  plenty,  and  be  satisfied,  and 
praise  the  name  of  the  Lord  your  God,  that  hath 
dealt  wondrously  with  you ;  and  my  people  shall  never 
be  ashamed. 

“  And  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  in  the  midst  of 
Israel,  and  that  I  am  the  Lord  your  God,  and  none 
else ;  and  my  people  shall  never  be  ashamed.” 

What  wonderful  material  things  are  these  which 
God  proposes  to  bestow  upon  His  people!  They 
are  marvellous  temporal  blessings  He  promises  to 
bestow  on  them.  They  almost  astonish  the  mind 
when  they  are  studied.  But*  God  does  not  restrict 
His  large  blessings  to  temporal  things.  Looking 
down  the  ages,  He  foresees  Pentecost,  and  makes 
these  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises  con¬ 
cerning  the  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  these 


WONDERS  OF  GOD 


131 


very  words  being  quoted  by  Peter  on  that  glad 
day  of  Pentecost: 

“  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  afterward,  that  I  will 
pour  out  my  Spirit  upon  all  flesh ;  and  your  sons  shall 
prophesy,  your  old  men  shall  dream  dreams,  your 
young  men  shall  see  visions ; 

“  And  also  upon  the  servants  and  upon  the  hand¬ 
maidens  in  those  days  will  I  pour  out  my  Spirit. 

“  And  I  will  show  wonders  in  the  heavens  and  in 
the  earth,  blood,  and  fire,  and  pillars  of  smoke ; 

“The  sun  shall  be  turned  into  darkness,  and  the 
moon  into  blood,  before  the  great  and  the  terrible  day 
of  the  Lord  shall  come. 

“And  it  shall  come  to  pass  that  whosoever  shall 
call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  delivered;  for 
in  Mount  Zion  and  in  Jerusalem  shall  be  deliverance, 
as  the  Lord  hath  said,  and  in  the  remnant  whom  the 
Lord  shall  call.” 

But  these  marvellous  blessings  will  not  be  be¬ 
stowed  upon  the  people  by  sovereign  power,  nor  be 
given  unconditionally.  God's  people  must  do 
something  precedent  to  such  glorious  results. 
Fasting  and  prayer  must  play  an  important  part 
as  conditions  of  receiving  such  large  blessings.  By 
the  mouth  of  the  same  prophet,  God  thus  speaks: 

“Therefore  also  now,  saith  the  Lord,  turn  ye  to 
me  with  all  your  heart,  and  with  fasting,  and  with 
weeping,  and  with  mourning ; 

“  And  rend  your  heart,  and  not  your  garments ;  and 
turn  unto  the  Lord  your  God ;  for  he  is  gracious  and 


132  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 

merciful,  slow  to  anger,  and  of  great  kindness,  and 
repenteth  him  of  the  evil. 

“  Who  knoweth  if  he  will  turn  and  repent,  and 
leave  a  blessing  behind  him,  even  a  meat  offering, 
and  a  drink  offering,  unto  the  Lord  your  God  ? 

“  Blow  the  trumpet  in  Zion ;  sanctify  a  fast,  call  a 
solemn  assembly. 

“  Gather  the  people ;  sanctify  the  congregation ; 
assemble  the  elders;  gather  the  children;  and  those 
that  suck  the  breasts;  let  the  bridegroom  go  forth 
of  his  chamber,  and  the  bride  out  of  her  closet. 

“  Let  the  priests,  the  ministers  of  the  Lord,  weep 
between  the  porch  and  the  altar,  and  let  them  say, 
Spare  thy  people,  O  Lord,  and  give  not  thine  heritage 
to  reproach,  that  the  heathen  should  rule  over  them; 
Wherefore  should  they  say  among  the  people,  Where 
is  their  God? 

“  Then  will  the  Lord  be  jealous  for  his  land,  and 
pity  his  people. 

“  Yea,  the  Lord  will  answer  and  say  unto  his  peo¬ 
ple,  Behold  I  will  send  you  corn,  and  wine,  and  oil, 
and  ye  shall  be  satisfied  therewith ;  and  I  will  no  more 
make  you  a  reproach  among  the  heathen.” 

Prayer  reaches  even  as  far  as  does  the  presence 
of  God  go.  It  reaches  everywhere  because  God  is 

everywhere.  Let  us  read  from  Psalm  139:  1; 

* 

“  If  I  ascend  up  into  heaven,  thou  art  there ;  if  I 
make  my  bed  in  hell,  behold  thou  art  there. 

“  If  I  take  the  wings  of  the  morning  and  dwell  in 
the  uttermost  part  of  the  sea ; 


WONDEKS  OF  GOD 


133 


"  Even  there  shall  thy  hand  lead  me,  and  thy  right 
hand  shall  hold  me.” 

This  may  be  said  as  truly  of  prayer  as  it  is  said 
of  the  God  of  prayer.  The  mysteries  of  death 
have  been  fathomed  by  prayer,  and  its  victims 
have  been  brought  back  to  life  by  the  power  of 
prayer,  because  God  holds  dominion  over  death, 
and  prayer  reaches  where  God  reigns.  Elisha  and 
Elijah  both  invaded  the  realms  of  death  by  their 
prayers,  and  asserted  and  established  the  power  of 
God  as  the  power  of  prayer.  Peter  by  prayer 
brings  back  to  life  the  saintly  Dorcas  to  the  early 
Church.  Paul  doubtless  exercised  the  power  of 
prayer  as  he  fell  upon  and  embraced  Eutychus  who 
fell  out  of  the  window  when  Paul  preached  at 
night. 

Our  Lord  several  times  explicitly  declared  the 
far-reaching  possibilities  and  the  illimitable  nature 
of  prayer  as  covering  “  all  things  whatsoever.” 
The  conditions  of  prayer  are  exalted  into  a  per¬ 
sonal  union  with  Himself.  That  successful  pray¬ 
ing  glorified  God  was  the  condition  upon  which 
labourers  of  first  quality  and  sufficient  in  numbers 
were  to  be  secured  in  order  to  press  forward  God's 
work  in  the  world.  The  giving  of  all  good  things 
is  conditioned  upon  asking  for  them.  The  giving 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  God's  children  is  based  upon 
the  asking  of  the  children  of  God.  God’s  will  on 
earth  can  only  be  secured  by  prayer.  Daily  bread 


134  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 

is  obtained  and  sanctified  by  prayer.  Reverence, 
forgiveness  of  sins,  and  deliverance  from  the  evil 
one,  and  salvation  from  temptation,  are  in  the 
hands  of  prayer. 

The  first  jewelled  foundation  Christ  lays  as  the 
basic  principle  of  His  religion  in  the  Sermon  on 
the  Mount  reads  on  this  wise:  “  Blessed  are  the 
poor  in  spirit,  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven.” 
As  prayer  follows  from  the  inner  sense  of  need, 
and  prayer  is  the  utterance  of  a  deep  poverty- 
stricken  spirit,  so  it  is  evident  he  who  is  “  poor  in 
spirit  ”  is  where  he  can  pray  and  where  he  does 
pray. 

Prayer  is  a  tremendous  force  in  the  world. 
Take  this  picture  of  prayer  and  its  wonderful  pos¬ 
sibilities.  God’s  cause  is  quiet  and  motionless  on 
the  earth.  An  angel,  strong  and  impatient  to  be 
of  service,  waits  round  about  the  throne  of  God  in 
heaven,  and  in  order  to  move  things  on  earth  and 
give  impetus  to  the  movements  of  God’s  cause  in 
this  world,  he  gathers  all  the  prayers  of  all  God’s 
saints  in  all  ages,  and  puts  them  before  God  just 
like  Aaron  used  to  cloud,  flavour  and  sweeten  him¬ 
self  with  the  delicious  incense  when  he  entered  the 
holy  sanctuary,  made  awful  by  the  immediate  pres¬ 
ence  of  God.  The  angel  impregnates  all  the  air 
with  that  holy  offering  of  prayers,  and  then  takes 
its  fiery  body  and  casts  it  on  the  earth. 

Note  the  remarkable  result.  “  There  were  voices 
and  thunderings  and  lightnings  and  an  earth- 


WONDERS  OF  GOD 


135 


quake.”  What  tremendous  force  is  this  which  has 
thus  convulsed  the  earth  ?  The  answer  is  that  it  is 
the  “  prayers  of  the  saints,”  turned  loose  by  the 
angel  round  about  the  throne,  who  has  charge  of 
those  prayers.  This  mighty  force  is  prayer,  like 
the  power  of  earth’s  mightiest  dynamite. 

Take  another  fact  showing  the  wonders  of 
prayer  wrought  by  Almighty  God  in  answer  to  the 
praying  of  His  true  prophet.  The  nation  of  God’s 
people  was  fearfully  apostate  in  head  and  heart  and 
life.  A  man  of  God  went  to  the  apostate  king  with 
the  fearful  message  which  meant  so  much  to  the 
land,  “  There  shall  not  be  rain  nor  dew  these  years 
but  according  to  my  word.”  Whence  this  mighty 
force  which  can  stay  the  clouds,  seal  up  the  rain, 
and  hold  back  the  dew?  Who  is  this  who  speaks 
with  such  authority?  Is  there  any  force  which 
can  do  this  on  earth  ?  Only  one,  and  that  force  is 
prayer,  wielded  in  the  hands  of  a  praying  prophet 
of  God.  It  is  he  who  has  influence  with  God  and 
over  God  in  prayer,  who  thus  dares  to  assume  such 
authority  over  the  forces  of  nature.  This  man 
Elijah  is  skilled  in  the  use  of  that  tremendous 
force.  “And  Elijah  prayed  earnestly,  and  it 
rained  not  on  the  earth  for  three  years  and  six 
months.” 

But  this  is  not  all  the  story.  He  who  could  by 
prayer  lock  up  the  clouds  and  seal  up  the  rain, 
could  also  unlock  the  clouds  and  unseal  the  rain 
by  the  same  mighty  power  of  prayer.  “And  he 


136  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


prayed  again,  and  the  heaven  gave  rain,  and  the 
earth  gave  forth  her  fruit.” 

Mighty  is  the  power  of  prayer.  Wonderful  are 
its  fruits.  Remarkable  things  are  brought  to  pass 
by  men  of  prayer.  Many  are  the  wonders  of 
prayer  wrought  by  an  Almighty  hand.  The  evi¬ 
dences  of  prayer’s  accomplishments  almost  stagger 
us.  They  challenge  our  faith.  They  encourage 
our  expectations  when  we  pray. 

From  a  cursory  compend  like  this,  we  get  a 
bird’s-eye  view  of  the  large  possibilities  of  prayer 
and  the  urgent  necessity  of  prayer.  We  see  how 
God  commits  Himself  into  the  hands  of  those  who 
truly  pray.  Great  are  the  wonders  of  prayer  be¬ 
cause  great  is  the  God  who  hears  and  answers 
prayer.  Great  are  these  wonders  because  great 
are  the  rich  promises  made  by  a  great  God  to 
those  who  pray. 

We  have  seen  prayer’s  far-reaching  possibilities 
and  its  absolute,  unquestioned  necessity,  and  we 
have  also  seen  that  the  foregoing  particulars  and 
elaboration  were  requisite  in  order  to  bring  the 
subject  more  clearly,  truly  and  strongly  before  our 
minds.  The  Church  more  than  ever  needs  pro¬ 
found  convictions  of  the  vast  importance  of  prayer 
in  prosecuting  the  work  committed  to  it.  More 
praying  must  be  done  and  better  praying  if  the 
Church  shall  be  able  to  perform  the  difficult,  deli¬ 
cate  and  responsible  task  given  to  it  by  her  Lord 
and  Master.  Defeat  awaits  a  non-praying  Church. 


WONDERS  OF  GOD 


137 


Success  is  sure  to  follow  a  Church  given  to  much 
prayer.  The  supernatural  element  in  the  Church, 
without  which  it  must  fail,  comes  only  through 
praying.  More  time,  in  this  busy  bustling  age, 
must  be  given  to  prayer  by  a  God-called  Church. 
More  thought  must  be  given  to  prayer  in  this 
thoughtless,  silly  age  of  superficial  religion.  More 
heart  and  soul  must  be  in  the  praying  that  is  done 
if  the  Church  would  go  forth  in  the  strength  of 
her  Lord  and  perform  the  wonders  which  is  her 
heritage  by  Divine  promise. 

"  O  Spirit  of  the  Living  God, 

In  all  thy  plenitude  of  grace, 

Where’er  the  foot  of  man  hath  trod. 
Descend  on  our  apostate  race. 

“  Give  tongues  of  fire  and  hearts  of  love, 

To  preach  the  reconciling  word, 

Give  power  and  unction  from  above, 
Where’er  the  joyful  sound  is  heard/' 

It  might  be  in  order  to  give  an  instance  or  two 
in  the  life  of  Rev.  John  Wesley,  showing  some  re¬ 
markable  displays  of  spiritual  power.  Many  times 
it  is  stated  this  noted  man  gathered  his  company 
together,  and  prayed  all  night,  or  till  the  mighty 
power  of  God  came  upon  them.  It  was  at  a  Watch 
Night  service,  at  Fetter  Lane,  December  31,  1738, 
when  Charles  and  John  Wesley,  with  Whitfield,  sat 
up  till  after  midnight  singing  and  praying.  This 
is  the  account: 


138  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PKAYER 


“  About  three  o’clock  in  the  morning,  as  we  were 
continuing  instant  in  prayer,  the  power  of  God  came 
mightily  upon  us,  so  that  many  cried  out  for  ex¬ 
ceeding  joy,  and  many  fell  to  the  ground.  As  soon 
as  we  had  recovered  a  little  from  that  awe  and  amaze¬ 
ment  at  the  presence  of  His  Majesty,  we  broke  out 
with  one  voice,  *  We  praise  thee,  O  God !  We 
acknowledge  thee  to  be  the  Lord ! '  ” 

On  another  occasion,  Mr.  Wesley  gives  us  this 
account: 

"  After  midnight,  about  a  hundred  of  us  walked 
home  together,  singing,  rejoicing  and  praising  God.” 

Often  does  this  godly  man  make  the  record  to 
this  effect,  “  We  continued  in  ministering  the 
Word  and  in  prayer  and  praise  till  morning.” 

One  of  his  all-night  wrestlings  in  prayer  alone 
with  God  is  said  to  have  greatly  affected  a  Catholic 
priest,  who  was  really  awakened  by  the  occurrence 
to  a  realization  of  his  spiritual  condition. 

As  often  as  God  manifested  His  power  in  Scrip¬ 
tural  times  in  working  wonders  through  prayer. 
He  has  not  left  Himself  without  witness  in  modem 
times.  Prayer  brings  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  men 
to-day  in  answer  to  importunate,  continued  prayer 
just  as  it  did  before  Pentecost.  The  wonders  of 
prayer  have  not  ceased. 


XV 

PRAYER  AND  DIVINE  PROVIDENCE 


Again  a  poor  soul  is  tempted  to  doubt  the  being  of 
a  God;  arguments  by  way  of  reason  and  wisdom  may 
convince  him  he  may  get  a  little  light  from  them;  but 
sometimes  God  will  come  into  his  soul  with  an  im¬ 
mediate  beam  and  scatter  all  his  doubts ,  more  than  a 
thousand  arguments  can  do;  the  way  of  wisdom  thus 
of  knowing  there  is  a  God,  that  unties  the  knot;  but 
the  other  cuts  it  in  pieces  presently;  so  it  is  in  all 
temptations  else  a  man  goes  the  way  of  wisdom  and 
sanctified  reason ,  and  looks  into  his  own  heart  and 
there  sees  the  work  of  grace  and  argues  from  all 
God's  dealings  with  him;  yet  all  these  satisfy  not  a 
man:  but  God  comes  with  a  light  in  his  spirit  and  all 
his  bolts  and  shackles  are  knocked  off  in  a  moment; 
here  we  see  the  way  of  Wisdom  and  the  way  of 
Revelation. — Thos.  Goodwin 

PRAYER  and  the  Divine  providence  are 
closely  related.  They  stand  in  close  com¬ 
panionship.  They  cannot  possibly  be  sepa¬ 
rated.  So  closely  connected  are  they  that  to  deny 
one  is  to  abolish  the  other.  Prayer  supposes  a 
providence,  while  providence  is  the  result  of  and 
belongs  to  prayer.  All  answers  to  prayer  are  but 
the  intervention  of  the  providence  of  God  in  the 
affairs  of  men.  Providence  has  to  do  specially  with 

i39 


140  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 

praying  people.  Prayer,  providence  and  the  Holy 
Spirit  are  a  trinity,  which  cooperate  with  each 
other  and  are  in  perfect  harmony  with  one  another. 
Prayer  is  but  the  request  of  man  for  God  through 
the  Holy  Spirit  to  interfere  in  behalf  of  him  who 
prays. 

What  is  termed  providence  is  the  Divine  super¬ 
intendence  over  earth  and  its  affairs.  It  implies 
gracious  provisions  which  Almighty  God  makes 
for  all  His  creatures,  animate  and  inanimate,  in¬ 
telligent  or  otherwise.  Once  admit  that  God  is 
the  Creator  and  Preserver  of  all  men,  and  concede 
that  He  is  wise  and  intelligent,  and  logically  we 
are  driven  to  the  conclusion  that  Almighty  God 
has  a  direct  superintendence  of  those  whom  He 
has  created  and  whom  He  preserves  in  being.  In 
fact  creation  and  preservation  suppose  a  superin¬ 
tending  providence.  What  is  called  Divine  provi¬ 
dence  is  simply  Almighty  God  governing  the  world 
for  its  best  interests,  and  overseeing  everything  for 
the  good  of  mankind. 

Men  talk  about  a  “  general  providence  ”  as  sepa¬ 
rate  from  a  “  special  providence.”  There  is  no 
general  providence  but  what  is  made  up  of  special 
providences.  A  general  supervision  on  the  part  of 
God  supposes  a  special  and  individual  supervision 
of  each  person,  yea,  even  every  creature,  animal 
and  all  alike. 

God  is  everywhere,  watching,  superintending, 
overseeing,  governing  everything  in  the  highest  in- 


DIVINE  PEOVIDENCE 


141 

terest  of  man,  and  carrying  forward  His  plans  and 
executing  His  purposes  in  creation  and  redemption. 
He  is  not  an  absentee  God.  He  did  not  make  the 
world  with  all  that  is  in  it,  and  turn  it  over  to  so- 
called  natural  laws,  and  then  retire  into  the  secret 
places  of  the  universe  having  no  regard  for  it  or 
for  the  working  of  His  laws.  His  hand  is  on  the 
throttle.  The  work  is  not  beyond  His  control. 
Earth's  inhabitants  and  its  affairs  are  not  running 
independent  of  Almighty  God. 

Any  and  all  providences  are  special  providences, 
and  prayer  and  this  sort  of  providences  work 
hand  in  hand.  God's  hand  is  in  everything.  None 
are  beyond  Him  nor  beneath  His  notice.  Not  that 
God  orders  everything  which  comes  to  pass.  Man 
is  still  a  free  agent,  but  the  wisdom  of  Almighty 
God  comes  out  when  we  remember  that  while  man 
is  free,  and  the  devil  is  abroad  in  the  land,  God  can 
superintend  and  overrule  earth’s  affairs  for  the 
good  of  man  and  for  His  glory,  and  cause  even  the 
wrath  of  man  to  praise  Him. 

Nothing  occurs  by  accident  under  the  superin¬ 
tendence  of  an  all-wise  and  perfectly  just  God. 
Nothing  happens  by  chance  in  God’s  moral  or  natu¬ 
ral  government.  God  is  a  God  of  order,  a  God  of 
law,  but  none  the  less  a  superintendent  in  the  inter¬ 
est  of  His  intelligent  and  redeemed  creatures. 
Nothing  can  take  place  without  the  knowledge  of 
God. 


142  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 

“  His  all  surrounding  sight  surveys 
Our  rising  and  our  rest ; 

Our  public  walks,  our  private  ways, 

The  secrets  of  our  breasts.” 

Jesus  Christ  sets  this  matter  at  rest  when  He 
says,  “Are  not  two  sparrows  sold  for  a  farthing? 
and  one  of  them  shall  not  fall  on  the  ground  with¬ 
out  your  Father.  But  the  very  hairs  of  your  head 
are  all  numbered.  Fear  ye  not,  therefore,  ye  are  of 
more  value  than  many  sparrows.” 

God  cannot  be  ruled  out  of  the  world.  The  doc¬ 
trine  of  prayer  brings  Him  directly  into  the  world, 
and  moves  Him  to  a  direct  interference  with  all  of 
this  world’s  affairs. 

To  rule  Almighty  God  out  of  the  providences  of 
life  is  to  strike  a  direct  blow  at  prayer  and  its  effi¬ 
cacy.  Nothing  takes  place  in  the  world  without 
God’s  consent,  yet  not  in  a  sense  that  He  either 
approves  everything  or  is  responsible  for  all  things 
which  happen.  God  is  not  the  author  of  sin. 

The  question  is  sometimes  asked,  “  Is  God  in 
everything?  ”  as  if  there  are  some  things  which  are 
outside  of  the  government  of  God,  beyond  His  at¬ 
tention,  with  which  He  is  not  concerned.  If  God  is 
not  in  everything,  what  is  the  Christian  doing  pray¬ 
ing  according  to  Paul’s  directions  to  the  Philip- 
pians  ? 

“  Be  careful  for  nothing,  but  in  everything,  by 


DIVINE  PROVIDENCE 


143 


prayer  and  supplication,  with  thanksgiving,  let  your 
requests  be  made  known  unto  God.” 

Are  we  to  pray  for  some  things  and  about  things 
with  which  God  has  nothing  to  do  ?  According  to 
the  doctrine  that  God  is  not  in  everything,  then  we 
are  outside  the  realm  of  God  when  “  in  everything 
we  make  our  requests  unto  God.” 

Then  what  will  we  do  with  that  large  promise  so 
comforting  to  all  of  God's  saints  in  all  ages  and  in 
all  climes,  a  promise  which  belongs  to  prayer  and 
which  is  embraced  in  a  special  providence:  “And 
we  know  that  all  things  work  together  for  good  to 
them  that  love  God  ”  ? 

If  God  is  not  in  everything,  then  what  are  the 
things  we  are  to  expect  from  the  “all  things” 
which  “  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love 
God  ”  ?  And  if  God  is  not  in  everything  in  His 
providence  what  are  the  things  which  are  to  be  left 
out  of  our  praying?  We  can  lay  it  down  as  a 
proposition,  borne  out  by  Scripture,  which  has  a 
sure  foundation,  that  nothing  ever  comes  into  the 
life  of  God's  saints  without  His  consent.  God  is 
always  there  when  it  occurs.  He  is  not  far  away. 
He  whose  eye  is  on  the  sparrow  is  also  upon  His 
saints.  His  presence  which  fills  immensity  is  al¬ 
ways  where  His  saints  are.  “  Certainly  I  will  be 
with  thee,”  is  the  word  of  God  to  every  child  of 
His. 

“  The  angel  of  the  Lord  encampeth  round  about 


144  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PKAYER 


them  that  fear  him  and  delivereth  them.”  And 
nothing  can  touch  those  who  fear  God  only  with 
the  permission  of  the  angel  of  the  Lord.  Nothing 
can  break  through  the  encampment  without  the  per¬ 
mission  of  the  captain  of  the  Lord’s  hosts.  Sor¬ 
rows,  afflictions,  want,  trouble,  or  even  death,  can¬ 
not  enter  this  Divine  encampment  without  the  con¬ 
sent  of  Almighty  God,  and  even  then  it  is  to  be 
used  by  God  in  His  plans  for  the  good  of  His 
saints  and  for  carrying  out  His  plans  and  pur¬ 
poses: 

“  For  I  am  persuaded  that  neither  death,  nor  life, 
nor  angels,  nor  principalities,  nor  powers,  nor  things 
present,  nor  things  to  come, 

“  Nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any  other  creature, 
shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God 
which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.” 

These  evil  things,  unpleasant  and  afflictive,  may 
come  with  Divine  permission,  but  God  is  on  the 
spot,  His  hand  is  in  all  of  them,  and  He  sees  to  it 
that  they  are  woven  into  His  plans.  He  causes 
them  to  be  overruled  for  the  good  of  His  people, 
and  eternal  good  is  brought  out  of  them.  These 
things,  with  hundreds  of  others,  belong  to  the  dis¬ 
ciplinary  processes  of  Almighty  God  in  administer¬ 
ing  His  government  for  the  children  of  men. 

The  providence  of  God  reaches  as  far  as  the 
realm  of  prayer.  It  has  to  do  with  everything  for 
which  we  pray.  Nothing  is  too  small  for  the  eye 


DIVINE  PROVIDENCE 


145 


of  God,  nothing  too  insignificant  for  His  notice 
and  His  care.  God's  providence  has  to  do  with 
even  the  stumbling  of  the  feet  of  His  saints: 

“For  he  shall  give  his  angels  charge  concerning 
thee,  to  keep  thee  in  all  thy  ways. 

“  They  shall  bear  thee  up  in  their  hands,  lest  thou 
dash  thy  foot  against  a  stone.” 

Read  again  our  Lord's  words  about  the  sparrow, 
for  He  says,  “  Five  sparrows  are  sold  for  two 
farthings,  and  not  one  of  them  is  forgotten  before 
God.''  Paul  asks  the  pointed  question,  “  Doth 
God  care  for  oxen?”  His  care  reaches  to  the 
smallest  things  and  has  to  do  with  the  most  insig¬ 
nificant  matters  which  concern  men.  He  who  be¬ 
lieves  in  the  God  of  providence  is  prepared  to  see 
His  hand  in  all  things  which  come  to  him,  and  can 
pray  over  everything. 

Not  that  the  saint  who  trusts  the  God  of  provi¬ 
dence,  and  who  takes  all  things  to  God  in  prayer, 
can  explain  the  mysteries  of  Divine  providence,  but 
the  praying  ones  recognize  God  in  everything,  see 
Him  in  all  that  comes  to  them,  and  are  ready  to  say 
as  John  said  to  Peter  at  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  “  It  is 
the  Lord.” 

Praying  saints  do  not  presume  to  interpret  God’s 
dealings  with  them  nor  undertake  to  explain  God’s 
providences,  but  they  have  learned  to  trust  God  in 
the  dark  as  well  as  in  the  light,  to  have  faith  in  God 


146  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


even  when  “  cares  like  a  wild  deluge  come,  and 
storms  of  sorrow  fall.” 

“  Though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  him.” 
Praying  saints  rest  themselves  upon  the  words  of 
Jesus  to  Peter,  “  What  I  do  thou  knowest  not  now, 
but  thou  shalt  know  hereafter.”  None  but  the 
praying  ones  can  see  God’s  hands  in  the  provi¬ 
dences  of  life.  “  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart, 
for  they  shall  see  God,”  shall  see  God  here  in  His 
providences,  in  His  Word,  in  His  Church.  These 
are  they  who  do  not  rule  God  out  of  earth’s  affairs, 
and  who  believe  God  interferes  with  matters  of 
earth  for  them. 

While  God’s  providence  is  over  all  men,  yet  His 
supervision  and  administration  of  His  government 
are  peculiarly  in  the  interest  of  His  people. 

Prayer  brings  God’s  providence  into  action. 
Prayer  puts  God  to  work  in  overseeing  and  direct¬ 
ing  earth’s  affairs  for  the  good  of  men.  Prayer 
opens  the  way  when  it  is  shut  up  or  straitened. 

Providence  deals  more  especially  with  temporali¬ 
ties.  It  is  in  this  realm  that  the  providence  of  God 
shines  brightest  and  is  most  apparent.  It  has  to  do 
with  food  and  raiment,  with  business  difficulties, 
with  strangely  interposing  and  saving  from  danger, 
and  with  helping  in  emergencies  at  very  opportune 
and  critical  times. 

The  feeding  of  the  Israelites  during  the  wilder¬ 
ness  journey  is  a  striking  illustration  of  the  provi¬ 
dence  of  God  in  taking  care  of  the  temporal  wants 


DIVINE  PROVIDENCE 


147 


of  His  people.  His  dealings  with  those  people 
show  how  He  provided  for  them  in  that  long  pil¬ 
grimage. 

“  Day  by  day  the  manna  fell, 

O  to  learn  this  lesson  well ! 

Still  by  constant  mercy  fed, 

Give  me.  Lord,  my  daily  bread. 

“  Day  by  day  the  promise  reads. 

Daily  strength  for  daily  needs; 

Cast  foreboding  fears  away. 

Take  the  manna  of  to-day.” 

Our  Lord  teaches  this  same  lesson  of  a  provi¬ 
dence  which  clothes  and  feeds  His  people,  in  the 
Sermon  on  the  Mount,  when  He  says,  “  Take  no 
thought  what  ye  shall  eat,  or  what  ye  shall  drink, 
nor  yet  for  your  body,  what  ye  shall  put  on.” 
Then  He  directs  attention  to  the  fact  that  it  is 
God's  providence  which  feeds  the  fowls  of  the  air, 
clothes  the  lilies  of  the  field,  and  asks  if  God  does 
all  this  for  birds  and  flowers,  will  He  not  care  for 
them? 

All  of  this  teaching  leads  up  to  the  need  of  a 
childlike,  implicit  trust  in  an  overruling  providence, 
which  looks  after  the  temporal  wants  of  the  chil¬ 
dren  of  men.  And  let  it  be  noted  specially  that  all 
this  teaching  stands  closely  connected  in  the  utter¬ 
ances  of  our  Lord  with  what  He  says  about  prayer, 
thus  closely  connecting  a  Divine  oversight  with 
prayer  and  its  promises. 

We  have  an  impressive  lesson  on  Divine  provi- 


148  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRATER 

dence  in  the  case  of  Elijah  when  he  was  sent  to  the 
brook  Cherith,  where  God  actually  employed  the 
ravens  to  feed  His  prophet.  Here  was  an  inter¬ 
position  so  plain  that  God  cannot  be  ruled  out  of 
life’s  temporalities.  Before  God  will  allow  His 
servant  to  want  bread,  He  moves  the  birds  of  the 
air  to  do  His  bidding  and  take  care  of  His  prophet. 

Nor  was  this  all.  When  the  brook  ran  dry,  God 
sent  him  to  a  poor  widow,  who  had  just  enough 
meal  and  oil  for  the  urgent  needs  of  the  good 
woman  and  her  son.  Yet  she  divided  with  him  her 
last  morsel  of  bread.  What  was  the  result  ?  The 
providence  of  God  interposed,  and  as  long  as  the 
drouth  lasted,  the  cruse  of  oil  never  failed  nor  did 
tne  meal  in  the  barrel  give  out. 

The  Old  Testament  sparkles  with  illustrations  of 
the  provisions  of  Almighty  God  for  His  people, 
and  show  clearly  God’s  overruling  providence.  In 
fact  the  Old  Testament  is  largely  the  account  of  a 
providence  which  dealt  with  a  peculiar  people,  an¬ 
ticipating  their  every  temporal  want,  which  minis¬ 
tered  to  them  when  in  emergencies,  and  which 
sanctified  to  them  their  troubles. 

It  is  worth  while  to  read  that  old  hymn  of  New¬ 
ton’s,  which  has  in  it  so  much  of  the  providence  of 
God: 

“  Though  troubles  assail,  and  dangers  affright, 
Though  friends  should  all  fail,  and  foes  all  unite, 
Yet  one  thing  secures  me,  whatever  betide, 

The  promise  assures  us,  the  Lord  will  provide. 


DIVINE  PROVIDENCE 


149 


“  The  birds  without  bams,  or  storehouse  are  fed. 

From  them  let  us  learn,  to  trust  for  our  bread  ; 

His  saints  what  is  fitting,  shall  ne'er  be  denied. 

So  long  as  it’s  written,  the  Lord  will  provide.” 

In  fact  many  of  our  old  hymns  are  filled  with 
sentiments  in  song  about  a  Divine  providence, 
which  are  worth  while  to  be  read  and  sung  even  in 
this  day. 

God  is  in  the  most  afflictive  and  sorrowing  events 
of  life.  All  such  events  are  subjects  of  prayer, 
and  this  is  so  for  the  reason  that  everything  which 
comes  into  the  life  of  the  praying  one  is  in  the 
providence  of  God,  and  takes  place  under  His  su¬ 
perintending  hand.  Some  would  rule  God  out  of 
the  sad  and  hard  things  of  life.  They  tell  us  that 
God  has  nothing  to  do  with  certain  events  which 
bring  such  grief  to  us.  They  say  that  God  is  not 
in  the  death  of  children,  that  they  die  from  natural 
causes,  and  that  it  is  but  the  working  of  natural 
laws. 

Let  us  ask  what  are  nature’s  laws  but  the  laws  of 
God,  the  laws  by  which  God  rules  the  world  ?  And 
what  is  nature  anyway?  And  who  made  nature? 
How  great  the  need  to  know  that  God  is  above  na¬ 
ture,  is  in  control  of  nature,  and  is  in  nature?  We 
need  to  know  that  nature  or  natural  laws  are 
but  the  servants  of  Almighty  God  who  made  these 
laws,  and  that  He  is  directly  in  them,  and  they  are 
but  the  Divine  servants  to  carry  out  God’s  gracious 
designs,  and  are  made  to  execute  His  gracious  pur- 


150  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PKAYER 

poses.  The  God  of  providence,  the  God  to  whom 
the  Christians  pray,  and  the  God  who  interposes  in 
behalf  of  the  children  of  men  for  their  good,  is 
above  nature,  in  perfect  and  absolute  control  of  all 
that  belongs  to  nature.  And  no  law  of  nature 
can  crush  the  life  out  of  even  a  child  without  God 
giving  His  consent,  and  without  such  a  sad  event 
occurring  directly  under  His  all-seeing  eye,  and 
without  His  being  immediately  present. 

David  believed  this  doctrine  when  he  fasted  and 
prayed  for  the  life  of  his  child,  for  why  pray  and 
fast  for  a  baby  to  be  spared,  if  God  has  nothing 
to  do  with  its  death  should  it  die  ? 

Moreover,  “  does  care  for  oxen,”  and  have  a 
direct  oversight  of  the  sparrows  which  fall  to  the 
ground,  and  yet  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  going 
out  of  this  world  of  an  immortal  child?  Still 
further,  the  death  of  a  child,  no  matter  if  it  should 
come  alone  as  some  people  claim  by  the  operation 
of  the  laws  of  nature,  let  it  be  kept  in  mind  that  it 
is  a  great  affliction  to  the  parents  of  the  child. 
Where  do  these  innocent  parents  come  in  under 
any  such  doctrine?  It  becomes  a  great  sorrow  to 
mother  and  father.  Are  they  not  to  recognize  the 
hand  of  God  in  the  death  of  the  child?  And  is 
there  no  providence  or  Divine  oversight  in  the 
taking  away  of  their  child  to  them  ?  David  recog¬ 
nized  the  facts  clearly  that  God  had  to  do  with 
keeping  his  child  in  life;  that  prayer  might  avail 
in  saving  his  child  from  death,  and  that  when  the 


DIVINE  PROVIDENCE 


151 


child  died  it  was  because  God  had  ordered  it. 
Prayer  and  providence  in  all  this  affair  worked  in 
harmonious  cooperation,  and  David  thoroughly 
understood  it.  No  child  ever  dies  without  the 
direct  permission  of  Almighty  God,  and  such  an 
event  takes  place  in  His  providence  for  wise  and 
beneficent  ends.  God  works  it  into  His  plans  con¬ 
cerning  the  child  himself  and  the  parents  and  all 
concerned.  Moreover,  it  is  a  subject  of  prayer 
whether  the  child  lives  or  dies. 

“  In  each  event  of  life  how  clear. 

Thy  ruling  hand  I  see ; 

Each  blessing  to  my  soul  most  dear. 
Because  conferred  by  Thee.,, 


XVI 


PRAYER  AND  DIVINE  PROVIDENCE 

{Continued) 

A  proper  idea  of  prayer  is  the  pouring  out  of  the 
soul  before  God,  with  the  hand  of  faith  placed  on  the 
head  of  the  Sacrificial  Offering,  imploring  mercy,  and 
presenting  itself  a  free-will  offering  of  itself  unto 
God,  giving  up  body,  soul  and  spirit,  to  be  guided  and 
governed  as  may  seem  good  to  His  heavenly  wisdom, 
desiring  only  perfectly  to  love  Him,  and  to  serve  Him 
with  all  its  powers,  at  all  times,  while  He  has.  a 
being. — Adam  Clarke 

TWO  kinds  of  providences  are  seen  in 
God's  dealings  with  men,  direct  provi¬ 
dences  and  permissive  providences.  God 
orders  some  things,  others  He  permits.  But  when 
He  permits  an  afflictive  dispensation  to  come  into 
the  life  of  His  saint,  even  though  it  originate  in  a 
wicked  mind,  and  it  be  the  act  of  a  sinner,  yet 
before  it  strikes  His  saint  and  touches  him,  it  be¬ 
comes  God's  providence  to  the  saint.  In  other 
words,  God  consents  to  some  things  in  this  world, 
without  in  the  least  being  responsible  for  them,  or 
in  the  least  excusing  him  who  originates  them,  many 
of  them  very  painful  and  afflictive,  but  such  events 
or  things  always  become  to  the  saint  of  God  the 
providence  of  God  to  him.  So  that  the  saint  can 

*5* 


DIVINE  PKOVIDENCE 


153 


say  in  each  and  all  of  these  sad  and  distressing 
experiences,  “It  is  the  Lord;  let  him  do  what 
seemeth  him  good.”  Or  with  the  Psalmist,  he 
may  say,  “  I  was  dumb ;  I  opened  not  my  mouth, 
because  thou  didst  it.” 

This  was  the  explanation  of  all  of  Job’s  severe 
afflictions.  They  came  to  him  in  the  providence 
of  God,  even  though  they  had  their  origin  in  the 
mind  of  Satan,  who  devised  them  and  put  them 
into  execution.  God  gave  Satan  permission  to 
afflict  Job,  to  take  away  his  property,  and  to  rob 
him  of  his  children.  But  Job  did  not  attribute 
these  things  to  blind  chance,  nor  to  accident, 
neither  did  he  charge  them  to  Satanic  agency,  but 
said,  “  The  Lord  hath  given,  and  the  Lord  hath 
taken  away;  blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord.” 
He  took  these  things  as  coming  from  his  God, 
whom  he  feared  and  served  and  trusted. 

And  to  the  same  effect  are  Job’s  words  to  his 
wife  when  she  left  God  out  of  the  question,  and 
wickedly  told  her  husband,  “  Curse  God  and  die.” 
Job  replied,  “  Thou  speakest  as  one  of  the  foolish 
women  speaketh.  What!  Shall  we  receive  good 
at  the  hand  of  God,  and  shall  we  not  receive  evil  ?  ” 

It  is  no  surprise  under  such  a  view  of  God’s 
dealings  with  Job  that  it  should  be  recorded  of  this 
man  of  faith,  “  In  all  this  did  not  Job  sin  with  his 
lips,”  and  in  another  place  was  it  said,  “  In  all  this 
Job  sinned  not,  nor  charged  God  foolishly.”  In 
nothing  concerning  God  and  the  events  of  life 


154  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 


do  men  talk  more  foolishly  and  even  wickedly 
than  in  ignorantly  making  up  their  judgments 
on  the  providences  of  God  in  this  world.  O  that 
we  had  men  after  the  type  of  Job,  who  though 
afflictions  and  privations  are  severe  in  the  extreme, 
yet  they  see  the  hand  of  God  in  providence  and 
openly  recognize  God  in  it. 

The  sequel  to  all  these  painful  experiences  are 
but  illustrations  of  that  familiar  text  of  Paul,  “And 
we  know  that  all  things  work  together  for  good 
to  them  that  love  God.”  Job  received  back  more 
in  the  end  than  was  ever  taken  away  from  him. 
He  emerged  from  under  these  tremendous  troubles 
with  victory,  and  became  till  this  day  the  exponent 
and  example  of  great  patience  and  strong  faith  in 
God’s  providences.  “  Ye  have  heard  of  the  pa¬ 
tience  of  Job,”  rings  down  the  line  of  Divine  reve¬ 
lation.  God  took  hold  of  the  evil  acts  of  Satan, 
and  worked  them  into  His  plans  and  brought  great 
good  out  of  them.  He  made  evil  work  out  for 
good  without  in  the  least  endorsing  the  evil  or 
conniving  at  it. 

We  have  the  same  gracious  truth  of  Divine 
providence  evidenced  in  the  story  of  Joseph  and  his 
brethren,  who  sold  him  wickedly  into  Egypt  and 
forsook  him  and  deceived  their  old  father.  All 
this  had  its  origin  in  their  evil  minds.  And  yet 
when  it  reached  God’s  plans  and  purposes,  it  be¬ 
came  God’s  providence  both  to  Joseph  and  to  the 
future  of  Jacob’s  descendants.  Hear  Joseph  as  he 


DIVINE  PROVIDENCE 


155 


spoke  to  his  brethren  after  he  had  discovered  him¬ 
self  to  them  down  in  Egypt, — in  which  he  traces  all 
the  painful  events  back  to  the  mind  of  God  and 
made  them  have  to  do  with  fulfilling  God's  pur¬ 
poses  concerning  Jacob  and  his  posterity: 

“Now  therefore  be  not  grieved  nor  angry  with 
yourselves  that  ye  sold  me  hither;  for  God  did  send 
me  before  you  to  preserve  life.  And  God  sent  me 
before  you  to  preserve  you  a  posterity  on  the  earth, 
and  to  save  your  lives  by  a  great  deliverance. 

“  So  that  it  was  not  you  that  sent  me  hither,  but 
God.” 

Cowper's  well-known  hymn  might  well  be  read 
in  this  connection,  one  verse  of  which  is  sufficient 
just  now: 

“  God  moves  in  a  mysterious  way. 

His  wonders  to  perform; 

He  plants  His  footsteps  in  the  sea, 

And  rides  upon  the  storm.” 

The  very  same  line  of  argument  appears  in  the 
betrayal  of  our  Lord  by  Judas.  Of  course  it  was 
the  wicked  act  of  an  evil  man,  but  it  never  touched 
our  Lord  till  the  Father  gave  His  consent,  and 
God  took  the  evil  design  of  Judas  and  worked  it 
into  His  own  plans  for  the  redemption  of  the 
world.  It  did  not  excuse  Judas  in  the  least  that 
good  came  out  of  his  wicked  act,  but  it  does 
magnify  the  wisdom  and  greatness  of  God  in  so 
overruling  it  as  that  man's  redemption  was  se- 


156  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 

cured.  It  is  so  always  in  God's  dealings  with  man. 
Things  which  come  to  us  from  second  causes  are 
no  surprise  to  God,  nor  are  they  beyond  His  con¬ 
trol.  His  hand  can  take  hold  of  them  in  answer 
to  prayer  and  He  can  make  afflictions,  from  what¬ 
ever  quarter  they  may  come,  “  work  for  us  a  far 
more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory.” 

The  providence  of  God  goes  before  His  saints, 
opens  the  way,  removes  difficulties,  solves  problems 
and  brings  deliverances  when  escape  seems  hope¬ 
less.  God  brought  Israel  out  of  Egypt  by  the  hand 
of  Moses,  His  chosen  leader  of  that  people.  They 
came  to  the  Red  Sea.  But  there  were  the  waters 
in  front,  with  no  crossing  nor  bridges.  On  one 
side  were  high  mountains,  and  behind  came  the 
hosts  of  Pharaoh.  Every  avenue  of  escape  was 
closed.  There  seemed  no  hope.  Despair  almost 
reigned.  But  there  was  one  way  open  which  men 
overlooked,  and  that  was  the  upward  way.  A  man 
of  prayer,  Moses,  the  man  of  faith  in  God,  was  on 
the  ground.  This  man  of  prayer,  who  recognized 
God  in  providence,  with  commanding  force,  spoke 
to  the  people  on  this  wise: 

“  Fear  ye  not;  stand  still  and  see  the  salvation 
of  the  Lord.” 

With  this  he  lifted  up  his  rod,  and  according  to 
Divine  command,  he  stretched  his  hand  over  the 
sea.  The  waters  divided,  and  the  command  issued 
forth,  “  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel  that 
they  go  forward.”  And  Israel  went  over  the  sea 


DIVINE  PROVIDENCE 


157 


dry  shod.  God  had  opened  a  way,  and  what  seemed 
an  impossible  emergency  was  remarkably  turned 
into  a  wonderful  deliverance.  Nor  is  this  the  only 
time  that  God  has  interposed  in  behalf  of  His  peo¬ 
ple  when  their  way  was  shut  up. 

The  whole  history  of  the  Jews  is  the  story  of 
God’s  providence.  The  Old  Testament  cannot  be 
accepted  as  true  without  receiving  the  doctrine  of  a 
Divine,  overruling  providence.  The  Bible  is  pre¬ 
eminently  a  Divine  revelation.  It  reveals  things. 
It  discovers,  uncovers,  brings  to  light  things  con¬ 
cerning  God,  His  character  and  His  manner  of 
governing  this  world,  and  its  inhabitants,  not  dis¬ 
coverable  by  human  reason,  by  science  or  by  philos¬ 
ophy.  The  Bible  is  a  book  in  which  God  reveals 
Himself  to  men.  And  this  is  particularly  true 
when  we  consider  God’s  care  of  His  creatures  and 
His  oversight  of  the  world,  His  superintendence  of 
its  affairs.  And  to  dispute  the  doctrine  of  provi¬ 
dence  is  to  discredit  the  entire  revelation  of  God’s 
Word.  Everywhere  this  Word  discovers  God’s 
hand  in  man’s  affairs. 

The  Old  Testament  especially,  but  also  the  New 
Testament,  is  the  story  of  prayer  and  providence. 
It  is  the  tale  of  God’s  dealings  with  men  of  prayer, 
men  of  faith  in  His  direct  interference  in  earth’s 
affairs,  and  with  God’s  manner  of  superintending 
the  world  in  the  interest  of  His  people  and  in 
carrying  forward  His  work  in  His  plans  and  pur¬ 
poses  in  creation  and  redemption. 


158  THE  POSSIBILITIES  OF  PRAYER 

Praying  men  and  God's  providence  go  together. 
This  was  thoroughly  understood  by  the  praying 
ones  of  the  Scripture.  They  prayed  over  every¬ 
thing  because  God  had  to  do  with  everything.  They 
took  all  things  to  God  in  prayer  because  they  be¬ 
lieved  in  a  Divine  providence  which  had  to  do 
with  all  things.  They  believed  in  an  ever  present 
God,  who  had  not  retired  into  the  secret  recesses  of 
space,  leaving  His  saints  and  His  creatures  to  the 
mercy  of  a  tyrant,  called  nature,  and  its  laws, 
blind,  unyielding,  with  no  regard  for  any  one  who 
stood  in  its  way.  If  that  be  the  correct  conception 
of  God,  why  pray  to  Him?  He  is  too  far  away 
to  hear  them  when  they  pray,  and  too  unconcerned 
to  trouble  Himself  about  those  on  earth. 

These  men  of  prayer  had  an  implicit  faith  in  a 
God  of  special  providence,  who  would  gladly, 
promptly  and  readily  respond  to  their  cries  for  help 
in  times  of  need  and  in  seasons  of  distress. 

The  so-called  “  laws  of  nature  ”  did  not  trouble 
them  in  the  least.  God  was  above  nature,  in  con¬ 
trol  of  nature,  while  nature  was  but  the  servant  of 
Almighty  God.  Nature's  laws  were  but  His  own 
laws,  since  nature  was  but  the  offspring  of  the 
Divine  hand.  Laws  of  nature  might  be  suspended 
and  no  evil  would  result.  Every  intelligent  person  is 
conversant  every  day  when  he  sees  man  overruling 
and  overcoming  the  law  of  gravitation,  and  no  one 
is  surprised  or  raises  his  hand  or  voice  in  horror 
at  the  thought  of  nature's  laws  being  violated. 


DIVINE  PROVIDENCE 


159 


God  is  a  God  of  law  and  order,  and  all  His  laws 
in  nature,  in  providence  and  in  grace  work  together 
in  perfect  accord,  with  no  clash  nor  disharmony. 

God  suspends  or  overcomes  the  laws  of  disease 
and  rain  often  without  or  independent  of  prayer. 
But  quite  often  He  does  this  in  answer  to  prayer. 
Prayer  for  rain  or  for  dry  weather  is  not  outside 
the  moral  government  of  God,  nor  is  it  asking  God 
to  violate  any  law  which  He  has  made,  but  only 
asking  Him  to  give  rain  in  His  own  way,  according 
to  His  own  laws.  So  also  the  prayer  for  the  re¬ 
buking  of  disease  is  not  a  request  at  war  with  law 
either  natural  or  otherwise,  but  is  a  prayer  in 
accordance  with  law,  even  the  law  of  prayer,  a 
law  set  in  operation  by  Almighty  God  as  the  so- 
called  natural  law  which  governs  rain  or  which 
controls  disease. 

The  believer  in  the  law  of  prayer  has  strong 
ground  on  which  to  base  his  plea.  And  the  be¬ 
liever  in  a  Divine  providence,  the  companion  of 
prayer,  stands  equally  on  strong  granite  founda¬ 
tions,  from  which  he  need  not  be  shaken.  These 
twin  doctrines  stand  fast  and  will  abide  forever. 

“  In  every  condition,  in  sickness,  in  health, 

In  poverty’s  vale  or  abounding  in  wealth ; 

At  home  or  abroad,  on  the  land  or  the  sea, 

As  thy  days  may  demand  shall  thy  strength 
ever  be.” 


$2A5 

0757-7 


THE  POSSIBILITIES 
OF  PRAYER 

E.M.  BOUNDS 

The  place  and  significance  prayer  has  in  the  life 
of  the  true  believer  is  discussed  in  this  helpful 
book.  Bounds  emphasizes  the  privilege  and  duty 
of  every  Christian  to  pray  continually  for  clear,  def¬ 
inite  guidance. 

Guidelines  for  establishing  and  maintaining  a  vital 
prayer  life  are  developed  in  seven  chapters:  The 
Ministry  of  Prayer,  Prayer  and  the  Promises,  Prayer 
—  Its  Possibilities,  Answered  Prayer,  Prayer  Miracles, 
Wonders  of  God  Through  Prayer,  Prayer  and  Divine 
Providence. 

Edward  M.  Bounds  practiced  law  until  he  was 
called  to  preach  the  gospel.  While  serving  as  chaplain 
during  the  Civil  War,  he  was  captured  and  held 
prisoner  in  Nashville.  He  held  several  pastorates 
after  his  release.  His  articles  and  books  were  read 
by  thousands  of  people  and  his  books  on  prayer  have 
become  classics. 


22 


01/24/2017  4:38-3 

r-«  W*ll  «•••«■•  •  Will!  WH%WM  I  (  J  •  » ■  *•  •  f  ITIVIWWI  IIW 

New  Zealand:  G.  W.  Moore  Ltd.,  Auckland 


