The People’s Bible; 

DISCOURSES UPOJSr HOLY SCRIPTURE. 


BY 

JOSEPH PARKER, D.D. 

Minister of the City Temple^ Holborn Viadtiet^ London, 

F “ ECCB DEUS,” “tI!E PARACLETE,” THE PRIESTHOOP OF CHRJST,” I I c 


THE INNER LIFE OF CHRIST, 

AS REVEALED IN THE GOSPEL OF MATTHEW. 

Volume III. 

“ THINGS CONCERNING HIMSELF 


NEW YORK : 

FUNK & WAGNALLS, Publishers 

iS AND 20 ASTOR I'LACE. 

1887. 

. L 




Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1883, 

By FUNK & WAGNALLS, 

the Office of the Librarian of Congress at Washington, D. C. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS, 


VOL. III. 


PAGE 

LXVIII. Matthew xvi. 13-23. Christ’s Personality Defined, 2 
The Vital Question — Unsatisfactory Answers — Transfiguring 
Thoughts— Inspiration and the Keys — Forecasting Difficulties — 
Losing the Keys — Subtle Temptations. 

LXIX. Matthew xvi. 24-28. The I^AW of Christ-Following, . 10 
Christ’s Estimate of the Soul— Divine Completeness — The Se> 
cret of Outward Peace — The Motive of Life — Right View o 
Death — Applying the Truth — Alternative Crucifixions, 

LXX. Matthew xvii. 1-13- The Transfiguration and Reve- 
lation 20 

Trinal Manhood — Elevation Physical and Spiritual — Days of 
Revelation — Our Celestial Ancestry — Return from the Moun- 
tain — Secret Experiences — Challenged by Great Problems. 

LXXI. Matthew svii. 14-27. Transfiguration Completed by 

■ Beneficence 30 

Descending from the Mount — AfSictions in every Multitude- 
Malediction not SufScient — The Spirit of Unbelief — Enfeebled 
Faith — Earnest Inquiries — Bad Listening — Principle of Conduct. 

t 

LXXII. Matthew jKviii. 1-14. Greatness in the Kingdom... 40 
True Greatness — The Illustrative Child — True Childhkeness— 

The Beginning of Belief — The Child-heart. 

LXXIII. Matthew xviii. 15-35. Brotherhood and Forgive- 
ness 51 

Christ’s Portraiture of Sin — True Theory of Human Nature — 
Knowledge of Human Nature — Social Difficulties — ^Christ’s Uni- 
versal Presence— Christ compared with Others — Forgiveness from 
the Heart. 


IV 


CONTENTS. 


LXXIV- Matthew sis. Fundamental Answers 63 

Christ on Divorce — The Law of Moses — Original Meanings — 
Bring the Children to Christ — The Value of Life — Law and Char- 
acter — Christ’s View of Children— Fulness of Christ’s Promises. 

LXXV. Matthew XX. 1-16 . The Larger Justice .... 75 

The Reward for All — No Arithmetical Reckoning — A Wider 
Revelation— Disproportions — Administration of Mercy — Work 
its own Reward. 

LXXVI. Matthew XX, 17-34. The Plan of Life 84 


Life a Divine Plan — Christ’s Prevision — Human Unreasonable- 
ness— Christ’s Impersonal Allusion — Crying to Christ — The Con- 
troversy about Prayer. 

LXXVII. Matthew xxi. 1-16 . The Entry into the City... 93 
Christ’s detailed Knowledge — Fulfilling Scripture— Sacrifice 
better than Subscription— Weeping over the City — Excitement 
caused by Christ — Praising God in Song — Misreading the Law. 

LXXVIII. Matthew xxi. 17-22. The Condemnation of U.se- 

LESSNESS 102 

The Home at Bethany — The Effect of Christ’s Intensity — The 
Law of Judgment— Withering Power — Believing Prayer. 

LXXIX. Matthew xxi. 23-46. The AriM.iCATiON of Paraijles. 113 
Always Working — The Enemy’s Question — Change in Christ’s 
Tone— God’s Rational Justice— The Use and Abuse of Author- 
ity — Rough and Real Men — The Murderous Husbandmen. 

LXXX. Matthew xxii. 1-14. God’s Welcome.s and Man’s Re- 
fusals t25 

Refusing the King — The Consistency of the Parables — Gospel 
Hospitality— Human Frivolity— The Wedding Garment—The 
Many and the Few. 

LX}<fel. Matthew xxii. 15-46 . Tempting Questions and 

Divine Answers 137 

Prepared Attacks— Going to the Bible— The Answers of 
Christ— Old Truths in a New Light— “ What think ye of the 
Christ ?” 

LXXXII. Matthew xxiii. A Fourfold Aspect of Christ... 148 
Not a mere Destructionist — Popular Sophisms — Christ's Re 
lation to Truth — Completeness in Professing— Christ’s Insight 
into Truth— The Eloquent Maledictions— A God-Inspired Min- 
istry. 



COxVTENTS. 



i 


LXXXIII. Matthew sxiv. 1-41. The Exciting Element in 

Christ’s Ministry . i6l 

Natural Comparisons — The Spirit of Judgment — Called to 
watch — Seeming Contradictions — No Unforeseen Events — Hope 
amidst Trouble. 

LXXXIV. Matthew ssiv, 42-51. The Two Futures 173 

Christ will come — Christ’s Relation to the Future — The Poetry 
of Fact— The Highest Logic — Living in Heaven — The Varied 
Advent— Christ’s Religion Practical. 

LXXXV. Matthew xstv. The Paraiile of Judgment ...184 

Only Two Classes — Faithful Stewardship — Benevolent Exer- 
tions Fruitful — Protest against Sloth — Variety of Appeal — The 
Road to Heaven — Unconscious Service — God’s Forgiveness. 

LXXXVI. Matthew xxvi. 1-5. Completeness of Divine 


Teaching. 195 

Finished Work— Christ’s Final Words— Spiritual Criticism — 
Human Exercises — The Uplifted Feast — Mercy the highest Jus- 
tice. 

LXXXVII. Matthew xxvi. 6-13. No Waste in Love 204 


Rapid Alternations — Christ as Guest and Host — Lordship in 
Thought — True Conception of Poverty — No Life without Senti- 
ment — The Multitudinous Poor — Untruthful Epitaphs. 

LXXXVIIL Matthew xxvi. 14-30. Sanctified Symbols ..214 

True Meanings of Old Terms — The Passover Celebrated — 
Christ’s continued Identity — Jesus the Master— Continued Com- 
passion— The Character of Judas — Sanctification of Incidents — 

The Lord’s Supper — To Gethsemane. 

LXXXIX. Matthew xxvi. 31-46. The Culmin.vitng Sorrow.. 226 
Written Answers — Threefold Sins — Christ our Peace— No 
Companionship — Prayer in Sorrow — Our Father and My Father- 
God’s Will supreme — The Universe is One. ^ 

XC. Matthew xxvi. 47-75. The Arrest of Christ 237 

The Principle of Submission — The Highest Force — The Script- 
ures fulfilled — The Possible and the Impossible — Christ silent 
and speaking — Peter’s Denial — The Weakness of Violence. 

XCI. Matthew xxvii. 1-19. Christ before Pilate 249 

The Chance to sin— Christ and Conscience— The Revelation of 
Judas Iscariot — Christ’s Development of Men— The Word for 
Wickedness — Pilate’s Wife’s Dream — The Mysterious Christ. 



CONTENTS. 


vl 

XCIL Matthew xxvii. 20-54. The Crucifixion 360 

The True Standard of Character— Barabbas or Christ— Uncon- 
scious Meanings—Ingenious Cruelty— Temporary Victory of 
Hell— The World’s Sacrifice. 

XCIII. Matthew xKvii. 65-66. The Sayings on the Cross, . . 273 
On the Cross — Moral Sublimity — The Flarnanity of Christ — 
Forsaken of God— Unexpected Help — The Enemy defeated. 

XCIV. Matthew xstviii. 1-10. Re-union. 281 

The continual Dawn— The Women at the Sepulchre— Mem- 
ory cultivated — No wasted History — The Young Man’s Work- 
Energy and Power wanted — The Parting Command. 

XCV. Matthew xxviii. 11 - 20 . The Final Commission 291 

The Two Programmes— The Truth uncompromising — The 
Folly of Christ’s Enemies — The Beneficence of Christianity — 
Truth and Falsehood — Inspii*ed Service — Christian Eloquence in 
Beneficence. 

XCVI. Matthew i.-3acviii. REVrisw of the Whot.e 302 

The Name of Jesus — No literal Consi.stency* Christ’s Royal 
Kingdom— The Royal Element Lost — A Grand Man— The End- 
Hallelujah ! 

Matthew iv. 8 - 9 . Two Mountain Scenes. 309 

Christ's Speech— The Moralist’s Explanations — High Prices 
. for High Blessings— Worship above Empire — The Ultimate 
Conquest of Good — Correct Principles of Life and Living. 

John viii. 42 . Jesus Christ’s Claim for Himself ... 316 

The Inner Life of Jesus — Possible Deception — 1 1 caring Christ — 

■The Place of the Miracles — One with the Failier- - Clirist’s Domi- 
nant Feeling —The .Real and the Artificial — An almost Rev- 
elation— Christ’s Claim from Men— The Teaching reveals the 
Teacher— -The Incarnation of Doctrine—Thc Living Christ. 

John vi. 35. Bread and W.ater 332 

The Continuance of Necessaries — Social Frauds — Things Es- 
sential— What Rational Criticism leaves — Miscalled Culture. 

1 Peter i. 19 . The Precious Blood of Christ. 341 

Life Love, and Blood— Inner Meanings — A Realizing Faith — 
Conscious of Sin — Practical Effects — The Ever-tiowing Blood. 



34g 


iTudas Iscariot. A Study of Character. 

A Correct Understanding — The Sovereignty of Choice — The 
Law of Judgment — Healthy Pain of Contrition — The Judge will 
do right — The Acceptance of Intention— After Explanations— 
Spiritual Penetration — The Suicide of Judas — To his own 
Place — Practical Lessons. 


Epilogue. Larger Definitions. 


367 




THINGS CONCERNING HIMSELF; 


LXVIII. 

PRAYER. 

Almighty God, tliou art light, and in thee is no darkness at all. May 
we walk in the light as thy children, as children of the day, called to thy 
glory and called to thy service, and capable of rendering thee continual 
praise. May we know the high meaning of our being, may none of its 
lower aspects tempt us downward, may every impulse of the soul be 
toward thyself, and our daily yearning be for the opening of the temple 
gate. We are at rest in the sanctuary, we are quiet in God’s house ; this 
is God’s acre for the living, not for the dead — may we be here planted as 
living trees and as blooming flowers, made glad by every vernal glance 
and breeze of Heaven, and in the time to come do thou satisfy thyself 
with our fruits, and transplant us into the upper garden. Here may we 
see the inner beauty ; in this place may we hear the inney music ; whilst 
we tarry in our Father’s house, may our Father’s blessin^ifill to overflow 
our desirous hearts. 

We have come with our weekly song ; it is of mercy and not of judg- 
ment, for wherein there has been judgment it has been swallowed up of 
love — therefore shall our song be of love and mercy, pity and care, 
heavenly patience and almighty protection, and high above all other 
notes shall be heard our acclaim because of thy tender mercy. We have 
walked in and out safely because thine hand has been laid upon us. No 
lion has been in our way, nor any ravenous beast gone up thereon, be- 
cause thou hast redeemed us from all fear. We have seen the cross, and 
that has made us glad ; we have beheld the Lamb of God that taketh 
away the sin of the world, and in his sight all other sights have perished. 
After this we can look at nothing that is little ; we are transfigured by its 
power, we are emancipated by its grace. 

We have come with our weekly confession, but thou dost meet us with 
eternal forgiveness, because we come to the cross and speak the all-pre- 
vailing Name. Do thou come to us acdording to the necessity of each 
heart, and rule over us with the sweet sovereignty of love ; draw us by 
the tender compulsion of grace, give our souls a heavenly setting, and by 



g 


sMATTHEW XVL 13-23. 

mighty yet tender stress may they be drawn upwards in every aspiration 
and every thought. 

Thou hast surrounded us with temptation, thou has poured down thy 
tloods upon the roof of our life, and thou hast caused many things harm- 
ful to us to test the strength and security of our foundation. Thou hast 
not spared the whirlwind, a great raging storm has sought out every weak 
place in our life-house — yet hast thou preserved us, thou hast given unto 
us deliverance, and in our mouth this day is a noble psalm of noble 
praise. It is of the Lord’s mercies that we are not consumed, it is be- 
cause his compassions fail not that we are now in his house, and that our 
hearts are now in Heaven. This is the Lord’s doing, and it is marvel- 
lous in our eyes. 

We ask thee to comfort us when our distress is keenest, put into our 
hands the keys of gates for which there is no other opening, We ask 
thee to accompany us up the hill, that in thy society we may forget its 
weariness. We put our whole life into thine hand ; we look back upon 
it and we have filled it with shame, but thou hast filled it with grace : we 
look forward to its years yet unborn, and we meet every one of them in 
the strength and love of Christ. We are well when Christ is with us, the 
soul is glad in the Saviour’s keeping— there is no night in the soul in 
which he shines in all the tenderness of his veiled glory, nor is there any 
fear in the heart that is pervaded and penetrated by his holy love. This 
is our desire that so it may be — we thus speak to thee in words which, do 
not express all our meaning, but thou hearest the* sighing of the heart and 
thou knowest the desire for which there is no speech. Receive our utter- 
ances of praise for mercies given, for protection vouchsafed, for travelling 
mercies, for home comforts, for family delights, for commercial success, 
for trials well borne, and for afflictions sanctified. 

Put around us all thy strength, and may we feel its gentle pressure, 
and rejoice that our security is not human but divine. Amen, 

Matthew xvi. 13-23. 

13. When Jesus came into the coasts of Caesarea Philippi (the ancient 
Leshem), he asked his disciples, saying, Whom do men say that I the 
Son of man am? 

14. And they said, Some say that thou art John the Baptist ; some, 
Elias : and others, Jeremias, or one of the prophets. 

15. He saith unto them. But (the decisive moment !) whom say ye that 

Tarn ? : ■ 

16. And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the Christ, the Son 
of the living God. 

17. And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon 
(obedient hearer) Bar-jona (soodof oppression) : for flesh and blood hath 
not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven. 

t8. And I say unto thee, That thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will 



THE VITAL QUESTION. 


3 


build my church ; and the gates of hell (Hades, or kingdom of death) 
shall not prevail against it. 

19. And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven : and 
whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven : and what- 
soever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. 

20. Then charged he his disciples that they should tell no man that he 
was Jesus the Christ. 

21. From that time forth began Jesus to shew unto his disciples, how 
that he must go unto Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the elders and 
chief priests and scribes (a general conspiracy), and be killed, and be 
raised again the third day. 

22. Then Peter took him (seized him from behind) and began to rebuke 
him, saying, Be it far from thee, Lord : this shall not be unto thee. 

23. But he turned, and said unto Peter, Get thee behind me, Satan ; 
thou art an offence (a trap) unto me ; for thou savourest not the things 
that be of God, but those that be of men. 

CHRIST’S PERSONALITY DEFINED. 

C HRISTIAN history takes a new departure from this point. 

We now come more closely than ever upon the spirit and 
purpose of Christ’s life and work. We have passed through the 
porch, and now we are about to enter the inner sanctuary. 

Jesus Christ here puts a direct question to his disciples. The 
time had come for putting it, and it was his place to propose the 
vital inquiry. He seems to say to his disciples, “You have seen 
much work, now tell me what is thought of the worker. The 
doctrine and the miracle ought to have had some effect upon 
the minds of the people ; what is that effect ? I have left the 
public very much to form their own opinion — to what conclusion 
concerning me have they come .? I have treated you and the 
community in general as I treated John the Baptist when he sent 
two of his disciples to ask me if I was the Christ, or %vhether they 
were to look for another. You remember my reply : I said to 
them, ' Go and show John again those things which ye do hear and 
see and then I pointed out to them the miracles which I had done, 
and the supreme, sublime miracle that the poor have the Gospel 
preached unto them ; and I left the imprisoned herald to form his 
own opinion regarding my authority and my qualifications. It is 
in this way that T have treated you ; I have delivered to you no 
lectures concerning my deity, divinity, personality ; I have gone in 
and out amongst you, speaking the word and doing the mighty 



4 


MATTHEW XVI. 13-23. 

deed, and now the time has come when I may fitly ask j'ou what 
is the result of it all — Who am IP” 

The answer of the disciples, when the question related to the 
public, was prompt, and not wholly satisfactory. The public had 
come to respectful conclusions regarding Jesus Christ. “Some 
say thou art John the Baptist, some Elias, and others Jeremias, or 
one of the prophets. " There is no mention of Beelzebub in that 
report of the public imprc.ssion. It was a rcsi)ectful rei)ly, 
because the public had formed a respectful oi)inion. It was also 
historical ; John the Baptist, Elias, Jeremias-— this man is con- 
nected with the historical and heroical past, he is a grand man : 
this is no common claim. Behind this fine porcelain there burns 
a maivellous fire ; if we have to name him we will acconi him an 
appellation that has about it the saintliness of devotion or the no- 
bility of heroism. The opinion was conflicting yet unanimous. 
The people were not certain whether it was the Baptist or Elias or 
Jeremias or one of the prophets, but it was certainly some great man. 

Jesus Christ having heard how he was regarded by the general 
public, brought the question nearer home, I:Ie liad a subtle 
method of advancing upon the heart. Really his concern was not 
so much about the public impression as about the effect whicli 
had been produced upon the minds anti hearts' of tliosc who had 
been nearest to him all the time. Said he, “But whom do ye 
say that I am T’ The original is emphatic : “ But yc — whom say 
ye that lam?" The Church should always have a more distinct 
opinion than the world. If there are two voices about Christ, the 
inner voice should be louder, clearer, nobler than the outer voice. 
There should be no difficulty whatever in distinguishing between 
the man wEo has been a long time intimate with Christ, and any 
man who is simply looking upon his history from an outside 
standpoint. Unction should be in the voice of the one, manifold 
music should be involved in the one utterance and should pro- 
nounce itself in many a happy and suggestive tone. Judgment 
begins at the house of God, not the judgment of denunciation 
alone, but the judgment of true-hearted criticism. If we are un- 
certain about Christ, what wonder that we make an uncertain im- 
pression upon the public mind ? The fire at the centre of the 
earth is hotter than any other fire. So in the. church of ' Christ 
there should be an- all-solving, all-fusing ardour of conviction. 



TRANSFIGURING THOUGHTS. S 

That conviction was sublimely represented in the answer given 
by Simon Peter. Instantly, Svith the suddenness of lightning, and 
yet with the graciousness of light, he said, “ Thou art the Christ, 
the Son of the living God. ” He was never so great a man before, 
nor has he ever been a greater man since he returned that infinite 
reply. Simon Peter was transfigured by his own answer , he was 
no longer a meanly-clad fisherman —the fire burned through his 
clothes : he was the tabernacle of the indwelling God. Never 
man spake like this man at that moment of his utterance. We 
know what it is to have a thought in us which transfigures the face 
and makes the countenance shine with unearthly lustre. The 
great speaker is always surprised by his own utterances, and sud- 
denly there falls upon him an all-transfiguring fire from Heaven 
—the very flesh is a new flesh, and every pore of it an outlet for 
the inner light. Could we have seeri Peter then, we should have 
seen him at his best — ^he has never been the same since. Some 
moments in life can never be repeated. There are some firsts 
which have no seconds, there are voices which seem to have, no 
echoes — once for all their ineffable music rolls itself over the wel- 
coming spaces, and it can never be repeated. 

Yet in that very hour Simon Peter was not only transfigured, he 
was httmbled. Beyond a certain line we cannot be allowed to go. 
Jesus Christ said to him, “ Blessed art thou, Simon, son of Jona," 
— why } Because of wit, genius, cleverness, superiority of mental 
energy ? Nothing of the kind. But blessed art thou because this 
is not an answer of thine own suggestion, nor art thou repeating 
what any book has taught thee, nor art thou saying in thine own 
words what flesh and blood hath thought or conceived. This is 
nothing but the voice of the divine in the human : this is a revela- 
tion of God, this is an announcement from the skies — thou hast 
this treasure in earthen vessels, the excellency of the power is of 
God and not of thee. So lest the little trumpet should be proud 
of its own blast, Christ took it and held it up and said, “ It was 
God’s breath that startled thee into the energy of that grand 
music.” Thus gently are we chided, rebuked in the midst of 
blessing, kept right in the very hour of our inspiration, and 
brought down from the mountain to be told that we should never 
have ascended so high but for the directing eye and the protecting 
hand of God. 



g MATTHEW XVI. iz-n. 

mighty yet tender stress may they be drawn upwards in every aspiration 
and every thought. 

Thou hast surrounded us with temptation, thou has poured down thy 
Hoods upon the roof of our life, and thou hast caused many things harm- 
ful to us to test the strength and security of our foundation. Thou hast 
not spared the whirlwind, a great raging storm has sought out every weak 
place in our life-house — yet hast thou preserved us, thou hast given unto 
us deliverance, and in our mouth this day is a noble psalm of noble 
praise. It is of the Lord’s mercies that we are not consumed, it is be- 
cause his compassions fail not that we are now in his house, and that our 
hearts are now in Heaven, This is the Lord’s doing, and it is marvel- 
lous in our eyes. 

We ask thee to comfort us when our distress is keenest, put into our 
hands the keys of gates for which there is no other opening. We ask 
thee to accompany us up the hill, that in thy society we may forget its 
weariness. We put our whole life into thine hand ; we look back upon 
it and we have filled it with shame, but thou hast filled it with grace : we 
look forward to its years yet unborn, and we meet every one of them in 
the strength and love of Christ. We are well when Christ is with us, the 
soul is glad in the Saviour’s keeping^ — there is no night in the soul in 
which he shines in all the tenderness of his veiled glory, nor is there any 
fear in the heart that is pervaded and penetrated by his holy love. This 
is our desire that so it may be— -we thus speak to thee in words which do 
not express all our meaning, but thou hearest the* sighing of the heart and 
thou knowest the desire for which there is no speech. Receive our utter- 
ances of praise for mercies given, for protection vouchsafed, for travelling 
mercies, for home comforts, for family delights, for commercial success, 
for trials well borne, and for afllictions sanctified. 

Put around us all thy strength, and may we feel its gentle pressure, 
and rejoice that our security is not human but divine. Amen. 

Matthew xvi. 13-23. 

13. When Jesus came into the coasts of Caesarea Philippi (the ancient 
Leshem), he asked his disciples, saying, Whom do men say that I the 
Son of man am ? 

14. And they said, Some say that thou art John the Baptist ; some, 
Elias ; and others, Jeremias, or one of the prophets. 

15. He saith unto them. But (the decisive moment !) whom say ye that 
I am ? 

16. And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the Christ, the Son 
of the living God. 

17. And Jesus answered and said unto him. Blessed art thou, Simon 
(obedient hearer) Bar-jona (sorviof oppression) ; for flesh and blood hath 
not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven. 

18. And I say unto thee, That thou art Peter, and upon this rock Twill 



TJIE VITAL QUESTION. 


3 


build my church ; and the gates of hell (Hades, or kingdom of death) 
shall not prevail against it. 

19. And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven ; and 
whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven : and what- 
soever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. 

20. Then charged he his disciples that they should tell no man that he 
was Jesus the Christ. 

21. From that time forth began Jesus to shew unto his disciples, how 
that he must go unto Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the elders and 
chief priests and scribes (a general conspiracy), and be killed, and be 
raised again the third day. 

22. Then Peter took him (seized him from behind) and began to rebuke 
him, saying, Be it far from thee. Lord : this shall not be unto thee. 

23. But he turned, and said unto Peter, Get thee behind me, Satan ; 
thou art an offence (a trap) unto me ; for thou savourest not the things 
that be of God, but those that be of men. 

CHRIST’S PERSONALITY DEPINEB. 

C HRISTIAN history takes a new departure from this point. 

We now come more closely than ever upon the spirit and 
purpose of Christ’s life and work. We have passed through the 
porch, and now we are about to enter the inner sanctuary. 

Jesus Christ here puts a direct question to his disciples, The 
time had come for putting it, and it was his place to propose the 
vital inquiry. He seems to say to his disciples, “ You have seen 
much work, now tell me what is thought of the worker. The 
doctrine and the miracle ought to have had some effect upon 
the minds of the people ; what is that effect ? I have left the 
public very much to form their own opinion — to what conclusion 
concerning me have they come I have treated you and the 
community in general as I treated John the Baptist when he sent 
two of his disciples to ask me if I was the Christ, or whether they 
were to look for another. You remember my reply : I said to 
them, ‘ Go and show John again those things which ye do hear and 
see and then I pointed out to them the miracles wdiich I had done, 
and the supreme, sublime miracle that the poor have the Gospe 
preached unto them ; and I left the imprisoned herald to form hi: 
own opinion regarding my authority and my qualifications. It i: 
in this way that I have treated you ; I have delivered to you nc 
lectures concerning my deity, divinity, personality ; I have gone ii 
and out amongst you, speaking the word and doing the rnightj 



6 


MATTHEW XVL 13-23. 

Not only was Simon Peter transfigured by the indwelling pres- 
ence, and humbled by the divinely granted and not humanly con- 
ceived revelation, but he was exalted as no man before him was 
ever lifted up. Humanly speaking, he surprised Christ into a new 
revelation. Jesus instantly handed Peter the keys. There is no 
difficulty in understanding the handing the keys to such a man in 
such a moment. Inspiration always carries the keys. No need 
of angry controversy or grammatical wordiness or critical inquiry 
into the exact meaning of the term, “ the keys.” This kind can 
only be understood by such minds as have almost realized the ful- 
ness and the elevation of inspiration itself. When you are inspired 
you have the keys. In your sublimest moods, when earth fades 
into a fleck hardly to be seen, and heaven crowds itself in noble 
fellowship upon your soul, the whole man is lifted up in an ecstasy 
divine. In that hour the church holds the keys. You do not 
hold the keys because of hereditary descent, or ecclesiastical rela- 
tionship, or mechanical contrivance, or superior patronage— you 
hold the keys only so long as you realize the inspiration. And 
no man can take those keys from you ; everywhere the inspired 
man keeps the keys — in merchandise, in statesmanship, in phi- 
losophy, in adventure, in religious thinking, in Christian civiliza- 
tion, you cannot keep down the inspired man. It is as if Christ 
had said : ” Thou art filled with the Holy Ghost ; this is oneness 
with God, this is pre-resurrection and pre-glorification — this is the 
very wisdom of heaven, and therefore I say unto thee, the keys are 
thine.” 

How Christ ennobled the occasion, and how Peter evoked the 
new revelation of Christ himself ! Christ never spake in this tone 
before. We sometimes surprise ourselves into new conditions, so 
that, we become in a degree new selves and are a surprise to our 
own consciousness. Jesus Christ never made any occasion 
little. He always saw the best of every man, and never did 
he withhold from any human soul the meed of commendation 
which seemed to be due. He was all grace. Said he, “Ye 
are the light of the world, ye are the _ salt of the earth, ye are 
a city^ set on a hill. Blessed art thou, for flesh and blood hath 
not revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven. ” 
If we have fallen below the occasion, the fault is in us and not in 



FORECASTING DIFFICUL TIES. 


7 


the Master. He now waits to see the proofs of our inspiration, 
and then he will not withhold the keys. We are not now inspir- 
ed. We are clever, we are learned, we are respectable, we are 
orthodox, we are correct, we are negatively blameless ; but Inspi- 
ration, Enthusiasm, Ecstasy — these angels we have succeeded in 
strangling 

From this point a new and closer fellowship is set up between 
Jesus Christ and His disciples. They were now bound together 
by a new secret ; one glimpse of the true light had been vouch- 
safed to the followers — the spiritual Christ had been revealed, and 
their nature was sanctified by a new inspiration ; a great expecta- 
tion was created in them, and that great expectation was con- 
founded by temporary shame. Mark the compression of the 
twenty-first verse ; “ From that time began Jesus to show unto 
his disciples how that he must go unto Jerusalem and suffer many i 
things of the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be killed, ; 
and be raised again the third day.” The whole tragedy is crush- 1 
ed into that one inch of space. There is nothing more to be said. 
The cross is there, the bloody sweat, the mortal agony, the last ; 
gasp, the resurrection glory. He must go — not that he would go, : 
but something more— he must go. The pressure of eternity was 
upon him, destiny beckoned him, supreme purposes gather them- 
selves up into one grand appeal and claimed him. 

He must suffer. We have regarded suffering as an accident, 
w'e have debased it into an affliction ; the heroic aspects of suffer- 
ing and sacrificial outcomes of endurance and discipline we have 
forgotten or allowed to fall into disesteem. Jesus Christ saw that 
to get to any crown worth wearing, he must go through suffering, 
he must be killed. He talked to himself in plain language: 
every man who is going to undertake any solemn business in life 
ought to set it down before himself in the tongue in which he was 
born, in the plainest tenns which that tongue can supply. Do 
not shut your e)'-es and then run into anything that may happen 
to turn up; be master of the situation by forecasting it. Why 
should we be living a life of continual surprise as to trial and 
danger and affliction and pressure of t'arious kinds ? Why not 
put it all down in cold ink, in plain words, and look at it 
as a fact, then live it, syllable by syllable, till the last tone 



MATTHEW EFT 13-23. 


lias died upon the air which has listened to the whole frightful 
tragedy ? 

Herein have we been blessed by the Almighty with sufficient 
knowledge of the future. We can tell that every one of us whose 
life is set in the right direction must go to Jerusalem, must suffer, 
and must be killed. Better for us to say all that to ourselves 
than be shutting our ears and closing our eyes and leaving the 
world to announce it in harsh and destructive tones. Commune 
with the tragedies that are about to befall you, charm from them 
their solemn secret ; by long, faithful, honest communion with 
tlie suffering which must befall life, you may be enabled to say in 
the long run, when the great encounter transpires, “ O death, 
where is thy sting ?” 

But Jesus not only spoke of his going to Jerusalem, of his 
suffering and his killing, but of his resurrection. We break off the 
story too soon, we have a long tale of complaint and reproach and 
pining and sadness, and too frequently is the sob too thick and 
strong in our throat to allow us to utter the word which would 
dissolve the cloud and make us men again. We talk too much 
of our discipline arid suffering and slaughter, and say too little 
about the promised and inevitable resurrection. He who speaks 
the word “death” in the same sentence with the word “resur- 
rection” will forget the overthrow in the exaltation. 

Now we return to inquire ho\v things stand with Peter, and we 
read this statement, ‘ ‘ Then Peter took him and began to rebuke 
him, saying, Be it far from thee, Lord : this shall not be unto 
thee. But Christ turned and said, Get thee behind me, Satan, for 
thou art an offence unto me,” and Peter- lost the keys — his bind- 
ing and loosing pow'er was taken from him in that instant ! He 
who was the blessed one a short hour since was ordered behind 
like a dog. The church lives on its own good behaviour ; you 
cannot live upon yesterday’s inspiration to-day. Every morning 
brings its own dew; every morning must bring its own inspira- 
tion. To tell me that as a church you were inspired seven years 
ago, and therefore you are inspired to-day, is to speak irrationally 
if not wickedly. There is no inspiration seven years old or seven 
days old. God will depose the mightiest prince amongst us when 
that prince loses his inspiration. You cannot live upon the bread 



9 


SUBTLE TEMPTATIONS. 

you ate twelve months ago— your prayer is, ‘ ‘ Give us this day our 
daily bread.” As with the body, so with the soul. The grace 
that ennobled your youth must be renewed day by day, or it will 
never mellow your old age. 

So Peter fell. Christ names us just as swiftly as we do our 
deed. “Blessed art thou,” and Peter seemed to stand in the 
sun, ‘ ‘ Get thee behind me, Satan, thou art an offence unto me, 
for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be 
of men. ’ ’ He had kllen back again to the human point ; he who 
had touched the divine glory fell into the dust trodden by the feet 
of men, and he was no longer either blessed with a benediction 
or entrusted with an authority. 

Christ himself never fell below the divine. In no instance can 
you lay your finger upon a single line which contains the an- 
nouncement that for one moment the great life faltered. Every 
other life hesitated, had its spasms of virtue, its sunshiny hours, 
its unfaithful actions, but I cannot find a line in all the Book in 
which Jesus Christ falls below the purpose W'ith which he began 
his life. In such a consistency there ought to be some force of 
logic. 

How subtle was this temptation. It came from a friend, from 
the first friend, the senior disciple — surely there could be no 
poison in such a suggestion ; it sprang from the heart, it was the 
utterance of tender compassion and protective sympathy. It came 
from a friend just honoured, from a man to whom the Lord had 
just granted the sublimest revelation. It was a generous thought 
—the intention was to spare suffering ; it was the voice of nature. 
Peter could not endure that his Lord should be so treated. A^et 
such a temptation fell impotently upon Jesus Christ, because Jesus 
Christ’s fundamental principle was this ; thsii whaiirver was not 
sacrificial was Satanic. A philosophy in a sentence, an inspiration 
in a breath ! Written in his heart, inscribed in his mind, higher 
than Pilate’s superscription engraven on his cross, was the pro- 
found philosophy 

Whatever is not sacrificial is Satanic. 


LXIX. 


PRAYER. 

Almighty God, when the anthem is sung in Heaven, may we all be 
there, no wanderer lost in all the great wilderness — the old man and the 
young child, may we all be where age is no more infirmity, where we 
shall spend an. eternal summer in the smile of thy love. We bless thee 
for all uplifting ministries, for voices that penetrate the soul, for lights 
that make the darkness flee away as if in pain, for all comforts that give 
rest and hope to those that are ill at ease. We thank thee that thou art 
mindful of us every day— thou hast a gospel for every morning, and thy 
stars are eloquent with new voices every night. There is no .searching 
of thy understanding t thou art able to do exceeding abundantly above 
all that we ask or think. Our little thought cannot reach to thy great sky 
—when we have climbed the upmost height thou dost lilt the arch above 
us by the measure of the infinity, not to mock our strengtii, but to excite 
and inspire our prayer. 

Thou hast set before us continually the cross of salvation because the 
cross of sacrifice. We see the uplifted Son of God, we behold him slain, 
we know that he was slain for our offences — we see his shame, his humili- 
ation. They spat upon him. they took a reed and smote him in the face, 
they plaited a crown of thorns and crushed it into his temples. Me was 
delivered for our offences ; we see the nails, we sec the spear-thrust, we 
see the falling blood, we hear the panting weakness, we see the languid 
eye, we hear the “ It is finished ” of expiring love. He was wonnded for 
our transgressions. We tarry awhile and behold the tiescending angel 
and the stone rolled away and the dead One rising in all the triumph of 
his indestructible power. We see him ascending and a cloud i-eceiving 
him out of our sight. We listen, and down through the shuttered air 
there rolls the music of the, infinite cry, “Worthy the Lamb that was 
slain to receive power and riches and honour and strength and blessing.” 
May we take part in that great thunder, for he was wounded for our trans- 
gressions. Amen. 

Matthew xvi. 24-28. 

24. Then said Jesus unto his disciples. If any tnan will (This “will ” is 
more than a mere auxiliary) come after me, let him deny (empty) himself, 
and take up bis cross, and follow me. 



CHJilSrS ESTIMATE OF THE SOUL. 


il 


25. For whosoever will save his life (the same as soul in the next verse) 
shall lose it : and vrhosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it. 

26. For what is^a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and 
lose his own soul ? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul ? 

27. For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his 
angels ; and then he shall reward every man according to his works. 

28. Verily I say unto you, There be some standing here, which shall 
not taste of death (an idiomatic expression, death being represented as a 
goblet full of bitterness) till they see the Son of man coming in his king- 
dom, 

THE LAW OF OHRIST-POLLOWING. 

H OW differently this passage reads when taken in connection 
with all that has gone before, from what it is often made 
to appear when taken out of its setting and made the basis of a 
discourse upon the value of the soul. Jesus Christ did not deliver 
these words as a sermon to the people, or as his abstract statement 
of the souFs worth. He was not speaking about immortality, he 
did not probably bring within his purview the term soul as it is 
often theologically and evangelically construed. He himself was 
the Man spoken of, his own soul was the soul which he set against 
the whole world’s value. Peter had just said to him, when he had 
spoken of going to Jerusalem to suffer and to be killed, “ This l^e 
far from thee. Lord. ’ ’ Peter could not bear that his Lord should 
expose himself voluntarily to all the indignity and suffering which 
Jesus Christ detailed. The reply of the Saviour was based on the 
suggestion of Peter : ‘ ‘ Peter bids me turn aside and escape the 
destiny which I came to fulfil. Taking .short and narrow view.s, 
Peter tells me in effect to save myself — but I came into the world 
expressly to do this very work and no other. This is my soul, 
my life, this is the very reason of my incarnation. What then 
should I be profited if I gained the whole world and insulted the 
very genius of my being and perverted the destiny which I was 
born to realize ?” 

Jesus Christ thus enters the sanctuary of great principles, and 
builds his life-house upon a rock. He looked to duty, and did 
not exercise his inventiveness in finding escapes from it. Pie 
kept his eyes steadily upon the beckoning Destiny, and whither it 
beckoned he went, and whosoever sought to hinder his advance- 
ment was Satan, and was ordered behind. To this end was Jesus 



12 ■ MATTHEW XVI 2^-2Z. 

born, for this purpose he came into the world, and knowing this 
he hardened his face that' he might go unto Jerusalem, There is 
a beautiful artistic completeness about the statement well worthy 
of note, Jesus said unto his disciples how that he must GO— -so 
we read in verse twenty-one — in the twenty fourth verse we read, 
“ Then said Jesu.s unto his disciples, If any man will COME” — 
that is completeness. First, he himself must go, and in the second 
instance, if any man come. 

This is the setting of the divine grace, in all the solemn order 
of providence and in all the outgoing of the divine decree. Sov- 
ereignty and spontaneity, lordship and liberty, destiny and volun- 
tary acceptance or rejection of the great challenge. There is no 
asking, “ Shall w’e go — will it not be well to go — ought we not to 
consider whether we should go ?’ ’ The first tone shatters the air, 
“I MUST;” the next falls upon the air like a pleading gospel, 
like a gracious appeal, “ If any man will coxatH Would he then 
have gone, if no man had answered, “Lord, I will come?” 
Certainly. All this will come up again in the great audit : he is 
laying the basis and the foundation of judgment as well as the 
basis and foundation of redemption; the cross would be setup, 
the sorrow, the suffering would be endured if no answering heart 
called him Lord and Saviour, Sin must be encountered, a divine 
answer must be given to a Satanic challenge and a human apos- 
tasy, and that divine answer could be given only through the 
medium of the tragic cross. What an if is this — “ If any will 
come”! — and yet in another mood he says, “ And I, if I be lifted 
up, will draw all men unto me. ” Still, even in that bold declara- 
tion of sovereignty, it is drawing, not driving — alluring by the 
sweet compulsion of infinite love, and not scourging with iron rods 
or stinging scorpions. 

Here is a great gospel invitation, the tender thing we call the 
love of God, Standing before us in figured image, it says, “ If 
any man wall come.” And yet the artistic completeness does not 
terminate there. Jesus said how he must go unto Jerusalem and 
suffer and be killed. “If any man will come after me let him 
take up his cross. ” Here is the balance of the picture, this is the 
symmetry of the grand delineation —Jesus at the head yonder 
with a great cross crushing him, and the next man at an infinite 



13 


THE SECRET OF OUTWARD PEACE. 

distance with his lesser cross, and then the crowd, and then the 
great innumerable throng which no man can number, but every 
man with his own cross, every man going to be killed, but going 
to be killed Christ, and therefore not to be killed at all ! 

The sublime reply of Jesus Christ to his generous but mistaken 
disciple contains a whole philosophy of life. Jesus Christ tells 
Peter that self-protection on Jiarrow lines is self-destruction, lie 
startled Peter by his parado.x, “ Whosoever shall save his life will 
lose it, and whosoever shall lose his life for my sake shall find it," 
A shrewd Peasant, a marvellous thing fora carpenter's Son, and 
nothing more, to have said ! Why, it turns upside down all ordi- 
nary human thinking. It reads like a contradiction and a self- 
collision of statement. Read it again. ‘ ‘ Whosoever will save his 
life shall lose it, and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall 
find it ” Can this be e.vplained in words and defended by narrow 
logic ? It can only be understood by our most sanctified feeling, 
and realized and endorsed by actual personal experience. 

Jesus Christ teaches that inward peace must never be sacrificed 
to outward ease. A lie might help us oftentimes to momentary 
rest, a great black falsehood might be the softest pillow sometimes 
on which for the time being to rest an aching head. Of what ac- 
count is it if there be great outward peace, w’hilst the heart is at 
war with itself, whilst there is a scorpion in the inner nature, sting- 
ing the conscience and inflicting mortal pain } Your plaudits can- 
not reach me with any measure of satisfactioir if there be not an 
inward voice which attests that they are righteously bestowed — they' 
fall upon me as foam flecks the rock it cannot penetrate. You 
might gather around your friend, pour upon him the billows of 
your approbation and applause, yet if his heart said to him, “ You 
have no right to. this,” all those billows would chase one another 
to their destruction, and never enter the soul they were intentied 
to bless. Contrariwise, you ha\'e also a profound truth — if there 
is really peace in your heart, any outside storm can have no effect 
upon you. Jesus Christ adds by suggestion that no motive is to 
be relied upon that is not drawn from a divine centre. Hereiir 
we fail so much — our motive has not reach enough. A man may 
be strong, and the stone which he may be attempting to remove 
out of his way be a real stumbling-block and ought to be removed 



14 


MATTHEW XVL 24-28. 


but if he have not leverage enough his .strength is wasted in vain 
endeavour. What we want in life is more leverage, and that need- 
ful leverage can be realized only when it has a heavenly purchase. 
Every motive that is not profoundly expires ere it accom- 

plishes any work that is worth doing. No heroism can sustain it- 
self up tp the point of conquest that is not inspired by an adequate 
motive. What is the adequate motive of human life.? God’s 
sovereignt}'’, God’s love, human stewardship, a profound and 
gracious sense of responsibility, and an appreciation of those op- 
portunities for fulfilling that responsibility which constitutes the 
very glory and dignity of our human life. You are, it may be, 
operating with too small a motive, your weapons are unequal to 
the war — there are 1: o weapons equal to this contest that are not 
provided by the Almighty Captain of the fight. 

Having heard Jesus Christ speak so, I say this is abstractly 
splendid ; if it be fanaticism it is of a royal type. I speak of Jesus 
Christ, therefore, in view of these answers, in no measured terms 
of applause ; but, say I, it is the coward’s trick ; say I, this is 
very fine in the abstract, but you cannot live upon these principles. 
No doubt the principles are very noble, and there is about them a 
tender grace and something affectingly pathetic and pensive ; no 
doubt the Man’s words are of a very high quality, but, I fear, 
words only. Now, Jesus Christ preached the sermon himself, and 
immediately stepped down out of the pulpit to give them practical 
application in his own life. He lived Ms sermon. Whilst we called 
it abstract, bordering on the fanatical, very noble in theory but 
impracticable in execution, he went out and did xi. He is the 
same in every verse • he never lowers his dignity, he never tampers 
with his purpose, he never makes the devil a bid that he may 
escape one pang of agony. 

It is worth our while, therefore, as followers of Jesus Christ, tc.) 
enquire somewhat into this philosophy of his. How did it come 
that Jesus Christ could treat his own death in this way ? Read the 
passage in its wholeness and you will have the musical and effective 
answer. Your inquiry is about death, but Jesus Christ's speech 
was not about death only. You pause at an intermediate word ; 
you do not take in the whole heroism of the case. The verv first 
point of darkness arrests yon, and beyond it you see no outlook, 



RIGHT VIEW OF HEATH 


15 


How did Jesus Christ treat the fact of his own death ? He recog- 
nised it, he set it down as a /acl; it never occurred to him to view 
it as a mere possibility or a high probability, or something that 
could be coloured, mitigated, or affected in his interest. Solemn- 
ly, clearly, unflinchingly he recognised the fact that he must go 
and be killed, but beside grim Death he set bright Resurrection, 
for he added, “ and be raised again the third day.” Weeping 
may endure for a night ; joy cometh in the morning. ’ ’ Death is 
temporary, Resurrection is eternal. Our light affliction is but for 
a moment, whilst ave look at things not seen. Stop at death only, 
and the strongest man’s knees may well knock against each other 
in mortal terror. It is not easy to die : it cannot be pleasant to 
have the last interview, to put out a thin, wasted, trembling hand, 
and to say, in a hoarse whisper, “ Good-bye. ” It cannot be one 
of life’s luxuries. The Christian is called upon not to look at 
death only, but at resurrection ; then in the “ Farewell” is a sub- 
tle hint of reunion ; in the tremulous ” Good-bye” is an under- 
tone that signifies “ for a moment — at the other end of the valley 
we meet and part no more.” 

To resurrection he added Glory : “ The Son of man shall come 
in the glory of his father with his angels. ” To glory he added 
kingdom : “ Till they see the Son of man coming in his king- 
dom.” Nm, how does death look? A frightened coward! 
Now the foe falls back into proper perspective : a shadow fleeing 
away in the chasing light of Resurrection, Glory, Kingdom, and 
all heaven ringing with acclaim of welcome and “Well done!” 
Death .should never be looked at You will frighten your- 
self if you look at death only; death is \\^ surroundings 

Surround it with farewell, lamentation, upbreaking of purpose, 
failure — surround it with grim, ghastly, heart-distressing attend- 
ants, and death will have its sting and the grave its victory ; but 
surround it with Resurrection, Glory, Kingdom, Reunion, Felkmv- 
ship, a land in which there is no night, no pain, no sea, no sick- 
ness, no sin, no enemy, and the soul .sa3's, “ I have a desire to 
encounter the foe, that by overcoming him in God’s strength I 
may enter the inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth 
not away.”. ■ 

Pixt death in all its perspective^ do not admit it to the front 



MA TTHEW XVI . 24-28. 


16 

line at all : put resurrection, glory, kingdom, heaven, triumph, in 
the front, and then you will see death fleeing away like a shadow 
chased by shafts of light. Then cometh the time when death 
shall be swallowed up in victory, and a tone of triumph and of 
mockery, of gracious delight and keen taunt, shall be heard : 
“ O death, where is thy sting.? O grave, where is thy victory? 
Spoiled are both of ye, and your short reign comes to an inglori- 
ous end. ” 

Whilst all this applies to Jesus Christ, and was, in my opinion, 
in the first instance applied to himself, yet there is no reason why 
we should not accommodate it to our own life and to our own 
spiritual condition. What shall it profit a man if he gain the 
whole world and lose his sight? How would you view that prop- 
osition ? You shall have estates, lines of houses, mines of gold, 
and in exchange you must pay your sight. Will you conclude 
the bargian ? What shall it profit a man if he gain the whole 
world and lose his hearing? You shall have diamonds in multi- 
,, tudes that cannot be numbered, horses, chariots, men-servants and 
women-servants, and all the delights of the sons of men, but you 
shall pay your hearing in exchange for the bounty; you shall 
never hear the human voice again, its eloquence, its song, its 
friendly word, its kind salute — what say you ? Does any man 
offer the price ? Would it be too much to pay ? What wonder, 
then, if Jesus Christ, reasoning a fortiori, should say, “ if you will 
not pay your sight, if you will not pay your hearing, in exchange 
for what the world has and can give, what shall it profit a man if 
he gain it all, and pay for it his Soul ? A soul paid for a month’s 
comfort, eternity ruined at the price of a day’s release from pain. 
Heaven paid in exchange for hell.” These are the ironies of life ! 

Such things are done every day by men who lay claim to some 
measure of intelligence. Within us there is a power against which 
our best impluses and noblest purposes contend in vain — they go 
down before its savage strength in utter helplessness, and arc 
crushed by its iron heel with all the delight of satisfied malevo- 
lence. A wondrous battlefield is the human heart ! if a battle that 
may be called where the slaughter, is all on one side and the prey 
falls into one hand. What is the remedy ? Crucifixion we must 
have. Our opportunity lies in the grand choice between being 
crucified by others and crucifying ourselves, Jesus Christ said, ‘ ‘ I 



AL TERNA TIVE CR UCIFIXIONS. 


17 


lay down my life ; no man taketh it from me,” except in a very 
secondary and temporar)^ sense. There was his peace. ‘ ' I lay 
down my life for the sheep. I have pow'er to lay it down and to 
take it again.” Crucifixion there must be in human life, as it is 
now debased and corrupted. The question is whether the cruci- 
fixion shall come from the outside and thus be mere murder, or 
whether it shall come out of the being done by the man him- 
self, and thus be a great sacrifice. Such is the election now open 
to us— Murder or Sacrifice— to be slain by the enemy, or slay our- 
selves in Christ’s society and on Christ's own cross. Suffering you 
cannot escape — the question is whether you will suffer from the 
outside or w'hether you will suffer sympathetically with the Son of 
God, and, knowing the fellow^ship of his sufferings, afterwards 
enter into the power of his resurrection. 


SELECTED NOTES. 

Verse ig. — To have the keys, is the sign of administrative authority ; 
to bind and to loose, are figures for the exercise of such authority. The 
Apostles expected to be rulers in an earthly kingdom, and to have their 
acts sanctioned and supported by an earthly king. They were assured of 
a higher dignity than this. Not that the will of God would change to 
agree with their will ; but that their will would be brought to agree with 
his, and their agency be employed in teaching and governing. 

Verse 20. — The verbal declaration would now only promote popular 
excitement. 

Verse 22. — Peter supposed that his Lord was unduly discouraged, and 
elated by the commendation just received, he presumed to speak as if he 
were wiser ; thinking the predictions of the Old Testament made the 
death of Christ impossible. He had been named a stone for building, he 
now became a stone of hindrance. What was appointed and approved of 
.God, was different from what was expected and desired by men, and it 
was much better. Christ spoke first of his own sufferings, and then of 
those of his disciples. He would not call them to death, till he could bid 
them in this also follow him. 



LXX. 


PRAYER. 

Almighty Gon, We hasten unto thee as men who are chased by a 
great fear or driven by the necessity of pain. There is no rest but in 
thyself, nor is there any healing for the sore heart but in the grace that is 
all sufficient. We fly unto thee ; yea, our hearts long with much yearn- 
ing and pining of love to be for ever with the Lord. Place us where thou 
wilt, but be thou with us, and the place is heaven. We would never be 
without thee, we would have thee within us and without us, a crown upon 
the head, a fire in the heart, a voice filling the sanctuary of the whole life. 
Thau hast thyself given unto us this desire ; and, behold, whilst we cher- 
ish it, it purifies the soul and lifts up the whole nature towards the shin- 
ing and holy heavens. 

Jesus Christ thy Son is our Saviour, mighty to save, able to save unto 
the uttermost ; his mercy endureth for ever. He saved others, himself 
he did not save. He was delivered for our offences, and raised again for 
our justification, and he is now in heaven, turning our poor prayer into 
his all-inclusive and all-prevalent intercession. Whilst we look upon 
Jesus Christ, there is no pain in the heart because of sin : the blood of 
Jesus Christ thy Son cleanseth from all sin. Keep our hearts steadily 
fixed upon the cross, then shall the power of sin be broken within us, and 
out, of our hearts there shall go one fervent desire to be like the Saviour 
himself. That we should have such thoughts as these is of the Lord’s 
‘ doing — no creations of our own are these. This also cometh forth from 
the Lord of Hosts : vve see his hand herein, and herein do we hear his 
voice. 

Continue to establish us in the love of truth ; may our desire be for the 
light that shineth from heaven, may our one purpose be to know thy ivill, 
and to do it with both hands earnestly, as men who have but one master 
to please and one will to consult. 

For all thy mercy how shall we praise thee in song sweet and loud 
enough ? We fail in our praise as we fail in all other duty and service ; 
we cannot reach the height of our own gladness, it lies beyond all our 
power of speech ; we pray thee, therefore, to look into our hearts and to 
read there the songs that cannot be uttered. We have nothing that we 
have not received : thy name is upon all that we have enjoyed, yea thou 
hast spread our table, thou hast anointed our head with oil, thou hast 
caused our cup to run over, and what we have to fear, the valley of the 



PRAYER. 


ig 


shadow of death, thou hast lighted up into a way leading homeward unto 
the Fatherland. Thou dost give us good desires ; thou knowest how 
these are besieged by the enemy as citadels that must be overthro%vn. 
Thou hast again and again given unto us the spirit of prayer, and yet 
have we been called to sore contest and fierce wrestling in the wilderness 
because the enemy would not allow our whole prayer to rise up unto 
heaven and bring down the answer from thence. 

We are filled with a sense of our own mysteriousness : surely thou hast 
made us, and not we ourselves : we are the creatures of thine hand, and 
though we cannot understand ourselves, yet dost thou give us occasional 
light : not altogether hast thou withheld the illuminating beam. We have 
seen somewhat of ourselves, of our greatness and littleness, of our possi- 
bilities of union with thyself, and of the certainty of our disunion from 
thee. Show us thy truth, lead us into the mystery of thy grace, and 
wherever we are may the cross be the centre of our circle, and may all the 
light we work by stream from its head. 

Thou seest us through and through, and there is nothing hidden from 
thee. How many days we have to spend upon the earth thou knowest ; 
our pulses have been numbered in heaven, the time of the lengthening of 
the shadow is set down in thy book ; we know nothing, for we are but of 
yesterday, and to-morrow is our great hope and our great fear. Help us 
to stand steadfastly in the confidence that God will do all things well. 

Thou hast taken away from us the delight of our eyes, as if thou didst 
delight in our pain and find satisfaction in the greatness of our grief ; 
thou hast dug many graves under our hearthstone, thou hast caused the 
foundations of the house to tremble, and the roof has not kept out the 
storm — yet hast thou been merciful withal. Full of tenderness, thy 
.solaces have followed the visitations of thy rod, and thy grace has been 
greater than our sin. Whilst we have been speaking of death thou hast 
been speaking of resurrection, and in the time of our sorest grief thou 
hast been preparing for us our gladdest surprises. Kindly look upon us 
all ; let thy glance have nothing in it of the fire of judgment, but all the 
warmth and beauty of a tender smile. 

Direct those who arc perplexed and sore driven and often ill at ease, to 
whom night brings no rest and the day brings double care ; show men 
that prosperity ilself is an opportunity for humility and lowliness before 
God, Teach the rich man that his riches are but for a moment, and may 
at any time fall out of his hand and leave him poor indeed. Teach the 
poor man that his poverty may become a means of grace, and may lead 
him to the deepest considerations which can move and elevate human 
thought. Speak to the young comfortably and inspiringly, chastening 
their enthusiasm, sanctifying the passion of their fire, and make them 
servants of the altar. 

Send out thy messages in all directions to-day. Give thine angels 
strength to carry them everywhere. .Put into the tones of thy servants 
music that shall .find and bless the heart, May the gospel of God our 



20 


MATTHEW XVIL 1-13. 


Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ, the Victim, and the Priest, go forth, bless- 
ing all hearts, all homes, all lands. Be with those who are in trouble on 
the sea, with those who must travel that they may earn an honourable 
livelihood, with members of our families in far-away colonies and foreign 
lands — unite us all by the bonds of tender sympathy, and in all our hearts 
may there be the sure and confident hope of reunion in the land on high. 

Oh that our prayer might be mighty, — that it might prevail in heaven, 
— that after its Amen there might come a great peace into the heart. 
Amen. 

Matthew xvii. 1-13. 

1. And after six days Jesus taketh Peter, James, and John his brother, 
and bringeth them up into an high mountain apart, 

2. And was transfigured before them : and his face did shine as the 
sun, and his raiment was white as the light. 

3. And, behold (introducing a greater marvel than even the metamor- 
phobis) there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talking with him. 

4. Then answered Peter, and said unto Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to 
be here : if thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles (arbours, forest- 
tents, hermitages), one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias. 

5. While he yet spake, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them (as 
the Sheckinah overshadowed the Virgin), and behold a voice out of the 
cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son, In whom I am well pleased ; 
hear ye him. 

6 . And when the disciples heard it, they fell on their face, and were sore 
afraid. 

7. And Jesus came and touched them, and said, Arise, and be not afraid. 

S. And when they had lifted up their eyes they saw no man, save Jesus 

only. 

g. And as they came down from the mountain, Jesus chaifged them, 
^ saying, Tell the vision (Greek ; what they had seen) to no man, until the 
Son of man be risen again from the dead. 

10. And his disciples asked him, saying, Why then say the scribes that 
Ellas must first come ? 

11. And Jesus answered and .said unto them, Elias truly shall first come 
(cometh) and restore (re-establish) all things. 

12. But I say unto you, That Elias is come already, and they knew 
him not, but have done unto him whatsoever they listed. Likewise shall 
also the Son of man suffer of them. 

13. Then the disciples understood that he spake unto them of John the 
Baptist, 



miNAL MANHO QD. 2 1 


THE TRANSFIGURATION AND REVEIiATION. 

T here are three accounts of the transfiguration of Jesus 
Christ. One in the chapter we have read. Another in the 
ninth chapter of Mark- — ^in the tenth verse of Mark's account we 
read, “And they kept that saying with themselves, questioning 
with one another what the rising from the dead should mean.” 
Luke has a somewhat different account, but substantially the same. 
He tells us that Moses and Elias spake of his decease which he 
should accomplish at Jerusalem. 

“And after six days.” Does not everything truly religious 
happen after six days } Is there a measure or a subtle poetry in 
time ? And the Lord rested the seventh day — and the Lord was 
metamorphosed on the seventh day. Let us take note of time and 
of the succession of events ; whilst men in other sections of life are 
noting laws of averages, singular points of recurrence and coin- 
cidence, let us who live in the Temple also have our eyes open 
towards the methods and periods of revelation, that we may be well 
read in the time-bill of Heaven. O fools and slow of heart, to 
read all the literature of the si .k days and understand it, and all the 
signs of the weather and comprehend them, and yet to leave 
unread and unpenetrated the secret which is the glory of all things ! 
Luke has “ after eight days.” It is the same thing — the two days 
are counted which began and ended. The three evangelists con- 
cur in statSg that is was after six days the Lord was metamorphosed 
before three of his chosen ones. After six days w'e need some- 
thing ; after six days’ toil and weariness, exhausted in strength, 
cast down in spirit, struck by a thousand crossing darts, we require 
protection, security, revelation, uplifting, an experience and glad ■ 
ness of better worlds. 

“Jesus taketh Peter, and James, and John.” He was always 
taking those men somewhere. He always had his three mighties 
— as for the rest of us, it is said, “ 'Fhey did not attain unto the 
first three. ’ ' We cannot understand these divine and human 
trinities : things duplicate one another, and are full of subtle and 
bewildering typologies. Similitudes that are round about us, the 


32 MATTHEW XVIL i~n, 

unwritten yet ever vivid parables, do but distress our poor weak 
thinking and make fools of us. Yet is there music in the mystery 
as there are stars hidden in the darkness, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob 
— Peter, James, John — the Old Testament and the New Testa- 
ment each has its trinity of manhood. Let those who are curious 
about such matters — and the curiosity is permissible and instructive 
— consider the different characteristics and temperaments of these 
incn, and see how the three are one and the one three, on earth 
as in heaven, and on earth as certainly as in heaven. God made 
man in his own image and hkeness, and it takes three of us to 
make up the whole man. Why be little, separated, isolated creat- 
ures, having no connection with counterparts and complements ? 
Why not answer the hunger of the heart, which says, “ I am not 
self-complete,” and go out in the direction of fellowship, union, 
and integrity ? 

“ Jesus taketh Peter, James, and John, and bringeth them up 
into a. high mountain apart.” High places should bring high 
thoughts ; matter should help spirit ; no man should be vulgar on 
the top of a mountain. Our pulses should' “ be throbbing with 
the fulness of the spring.” This is the purpose of having con- 
secrated houses, churches set apart for one object, whose very air 
is full of blessing. A man ought to lose all his lower nature in tlie 
face of a sunset. It should make him religious, if not Christian. 
At such a farewell he should tremble with the desire to ascend 
himself to a purer clime. So in the church he should be alone, 
though urged by the crowd ; he should give himself**^up to the 
genius of the place and be a child at home. 

We are mountain-born, if we did but know it ; we are all hill- 
men. There be those who take us to the high mountains to show 
us our littleness, and they do well. They say, “ Look up, there 
are three thousand feet of rock above you ; do you not feel small 
— a grasshopper in the presence of such hugeness T' Partly I do, 
yet not wholly. Watch me as, with staff in hand, I climb, and as 
I climb I grow, and by-and-by I stand above the rock, and ask it 
if it be not a pedestal for a monument. Were ! rooted in the 
ground and could only look at the huge elevation, I might faint 
in heart and say, “Plow little lam;” but, knowing that I can 
put the loftiest mountain of the earth under my feet, stand upon it 



23 


DAVS OF REVELATION. 

and lift my hand to a height it never climbed, I am greater than 
the mountain. We should all betake ourselves to high places and 
secret temples ; we should often meet God on the top of the 
mountain, and especially early in the morning, the time when 
Moses went to see the Lord, Then .should we come back with the 
dew of heaven upon our lives, baptized anew', refreshed, and 
jewelled, and blessed ; and the day, how thick soever should be 
its trials, and fierce soever its fights, should give way before us, 
recognising the shining of our face and the sanctity of our w'hole 
mien. ' 

“ And was transfigured before them,’' metamorphosed, changed 
into another being. He was three in one, he was one in three. 
Before this they had not seen their Lord, they had but' seen their 
ieachcr; one ray of his glory fell upon them and startled them with 
a wondrous surprise. There are occasional moments wdien a 
man sees hinmlf, when he is, so to say, metamorphosed to his own 
vision. Usually we live dull, gray, languid, commonplace lives ; 
W’'e are not often roused to our fullest strength — ’jet now and again 
things occur in life which reveal us to ourselves. So also with 
others. We do not see one another, except it may be on a seventh 
day now and then, a Sabbath, a jubilee, a funeral day, w'hen fear 
seizes the life and makes us show our true resources and the very 
roots of our strength, which are often but the roots of our w'eakness, 
a joy-day, whose air vibrates with clanging bells, a wedding day, a 
birthday, an emancipation day, and then from our very faces there 
radiates S light which never shone there in the vision of man be- 
fore. We are all conscious of wnking-up times, w'hen w'e lay hold 
upon our whole strength and realize every fibre and element and 
force ol our manhood. That is ahvays after six days of troubled 
w'ondcr, bewildering study, distracted, often shattered, often disap- 
pointed exercise of love. 

Some persons we never have seen but once, though w'e have 
as.sociated with them for years. You must keep your eye always 
on the face of your friend if you would really know him. When 
you are not looking, he may be himself — it was when you did not 
see him that he gave the revealing look, it was when you did not 
hear him that the revealing tone entered into his voice — a word, 
a cry, a glance, a touch, and the vision is past, for ever. 



24 MATTHEW XVIL \~\z. 

Jesus talked to Moses and Elias, and they spake to him of the 
decease which he should accomplish at Jerusalem, The English 
word decease does not hold all the meaning of that profound, most 
mysterious interview. They talked of the decessus, the exodus of 
Moses, the exodus which Moses left unaccomplished, the outgoing 
which seemed to have no corresponding incoming. . The}- spoke 
of the decessus, the exodus of the nobler Moses, who would bring 
to perfectness of accomplishment the outgoing and the home- 
coming, for he .should accomplish the decesms at Jerusalem, may- 
hap not the death only, coming back into resurrection, but the 
other part of the daessus, the outgoing, the uprising, the ascension, 
the whole tragedy — a subject worthy of such speakers. 

Why do we detach ourselves from our ancestry above } We be- 
long to the grand heroic days. We never meet in God’s house 
without coming to an innumerable company of angels, and the 
spirits of the just made perfect. We also are compassed about 
with a great cloud of witnesses ; why let our eyes plunge themselves 
in the cold walls as terminal lines We are not come to the 
mount that might be touched, but to Mount Zion, more a life than 
a mountain, the church of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem. 
When these reflections seiae the mind and fill it with all their 
poetry and stir it with all their ineffable passion, we too are meta- 
morphosed, our hymn is not sung by ourselves alone ; or, if we 
have a hymn of our own, they have a hymn of theirs, and the 
hymns melt and blend, and being transfused, strength to strength, 
passion to passion, “ They sing the Lamb in hymns alJbve, And 
we in hymns below,” We are limited and humbled by our weak- 
ness, they are conscious of immortality and imperishable strength. 
They in the kingdom of his light, we in the kingdom of his trial 
— the kingdoms are but one. Why do we detach ourselves from 
the grand unity of humanity," why do we set up ourselves in petty 
self-completeness } Thus we lose everything : we are scattered 
pebbles, not a massive and sacred temple. Adam and Moses, 
Elias and Isaiah, Peter and Paul-r-these are my ancestors. Thus 
“the dead loom upon us large and solemn, not to dwarf our 
stature, but to show to what bigne.ss we may grow.” And when 
I sec to what company I belong, the blood of a thousand genera- 



RETURN JROM THE MOUNTAJN. 


lions quickens within me, and I say, “ They that arc with me arc 
more than they that are against me. ’ ' 

Realize the unity of history, far outstretching lines that begin 
appai’ently in the cross and that do really begin there, if we make 
the cross the first of figures, set up before the foundation of the 
world, and then see how in Christ all things are united that are in 
heaven above or on earth beneath, in the far-away twilight of his- 
tory, in its present sinning and fighting, and in its last developments 
and completions. He is Alpha and Omega, the First, the Last, 
the Beginning and the End, the Root and the Of{s|>ring of David, 
the bright and Morning Star. The Root and the Offspring — 
always contradicting himself in words ; always putting the world’s 
pedantry to vexation ; and yet always, in a large reconciliation of 
thought, finding a nobler eloquence than in the smooth nothings 
of men who would rather perish than be literally inconsistent. 
He himself a contradiction, the contradiction of ah histoiy, the 
puzzle of all life — wdiat wonder therefore that in words he should 
oftentimes appear to bo a paradox and a self-contradiction, at once 
a root and an offspring? 

This metamorphosis probably happened at night. Probably, 
because Luke says, “ And the next day,” and probably, also, be- 
cause of the overwhelming sleep which the disciples felt. Perhaps 
it was not what we call now sleep, perhaps it was a clair\’oyant 
state. It was no slothful sleep, otherwise the purpose of the Lord 
had been frustrated in taking them up the mountain to behold the 
metamorphosis. It was a singular stupefaction a bewilderment, 
an almost insanity and incoherence, a strange shaking and inspira- 
tion of the inner nature, in which the men saw and heard and lived 
as they never saw and heard and lived before. How the light 
shone upon the background of the dark firmament, the great arch 
one gleam, and on it a shining figure, white as the light, and tlie 
raiment streaming with rays. “ I am the light of the world” — 
all light concentred in that shining Figure, coming out of it and 
returning to it. That was the true light that lighted every man 
that cometh into the world. Do not blame the disciples as if they 
had fallen into a slothful sleep : there are times when we cannot 



26 


MATTHEW XVII 1-13. 


give a correct account of ourselves or an account that is socially 
satisfactory — we know not what we say or what we do. Unless a 
man has been in some such high moods as these he cannot read 
the New Testament : he does but babble its alphabet, he does not 
articulate tunefully and in all the pathos of its music the inner 
eloquence of heaven. 

They came down from the mountain : they were not made to 
live iiigh up in the air or to pine in solitary places. We must not 
always be in the formal church. One day in seven, then down 
again ! But, in going down, always take the mountain with you. 
It is possible to take the mountain home— for what other purpose 
have Nve our vacations, holiday's, times of change and rest ? Do 
we leave the Alps out yonder, or do we bring them to the towns 
and live upon them all the year, till the ne.vt time comes for the 
seventh day of metamorphosis and revelation and up-looking ? If 
persons can go to Alpine lands and traverse Alpine heights and 
come back without bringing the Alps with them, what wonder if 
they can read the New Testament through without its touching 
their hearts ? Bring the sea home with you, and the great moun- 
tain and the cooling snow, and the bracing air and the blue heaven, 
and the singing birds and the summers of various lands, and these 
will be the very roots and sources of sustenance during the whole 
period of service and suffering and divers ministries. Take the 
church home with you, carry Sunday all through the week, and 
you will find how wondrously adapted it is to measure the whole 
span of the intervening time betw'een itself and itself. Never leave 
the church, take it — take it home ! 

They were to tell no man what they had seen. We cannot tell 
all we know : we have secrets that make the heart throb double 
life, and rvc should be poor if we parted with them. We have all 
had experiences of Christ which we could not tell, for no w'ords 
have been invented for such experiences. Such looks he has thrown 
upon us, such warmth he has communicated to us, such promises 
he has vdiispcred to the heart — we have laid our head upon his 
shoulder and cried like little children, and we have been stronger 
for the sweet sorrow. When we have told all we have to tell, we 
have not begun the tale : we have secret faiths, secret hopes, secret 



CHALLENGED BY GREAT PROBLEMS. 


27 


delights all in keeping with the central truth, but each with an 
accent unintelligible to the general ear. 

Hard lesson — “ Tell no man,” Who does not like to speak 
when he has seen great sights or heard sounds of unusual music ? 
Christ has here given the disciples one of their first lessons in the 
cross. He has just told us, “ If any man will follow Me, he must 
take up his cross daily.” In this injunction, Jesus causes the dis- 
ciples to feel the first pressure of what will become a great weight, 
namely, the cross of crucifixion. Learn the lesson of sdf-.mppres- 
sion, learn the mystery of silence ; the wild-talking man never 
comes to any rich maturity of life. We must always hmv more 
than we have qyqx fold : every author must be greater than his 
books, every singer greater than his song, every preacher more 
than his sermon. Do not babble : think. Keep all these things 
and ponder them in your heart — the u.s'es of all will be seen 
presently. Does Jesus Christ ever tune the instrument for the 
purpose of hanging it up on the wall } What musician would do 
so.? He tunes it that he may discourse eloquent music upon it. 
So when he grants us white and shining revelations of himself and 
his purpose, it is that we may go down the mountain and heal 
the lunatic that is raving at its base. 

‘ ‘ They questioned with one another what the rising from the 
dead should mean, ’ ' The Lord always gives us a problem to save 
us from intellectual stagnation. Read the life of Jesus Christ, and 
find how oftentimes he challenges the understanding, the geniins, 
the intellectual penetration and sagacity of man. “ What think 
ye of ChrLst?” “What is a man profited, if he gain the whole 
world and lose his own soul And here the disciples w-onder 
what the rising from the dead should mean. Death had not en- 
tered into their calculations, death was an element which they had 
excluded fi'om all their reckoning and thinking. We do exclude 
from our narrow sums the figures -which would first contract and 
afterwards expand and glorify them. Wc are still wondering what 
the rising of the dead shall mean. We are still wondering what 
our departetl ones are doing — they are never sick, they are never 
in pain, they arc never weary— thanks for knowledge so much, but 
I want to know more are they ever here.^ how much do they see? 
what do they do they think about us, pray for us, pluck 



MATnmW XVIL 1-13. 


fruit for us from the up[)er trees, and convey it to the heart by 
secret messages ? Here we are left with a great wonder, walking 
up the mountain, walking down, wonder follows wonder, and still 
we live a life of wild or chastened sorrow. 

When he came down,, from the mountain how did he use his ex- 
alted and ennobled passion ? Did Jesus Christ contemn the peo- 
ple, or did he neglect them? Nay, he rebuked unbelief and he 
healed affliction. That is to be our work. After our mountain 
meetings and high festivals of rapture, our supreme hours of joy, 
let us go down the mountain to reaffirm and to heal. 



LXXI. 


PRAYER. 

Almighty God, we do this day join the Church of all times and all 
lands, and praise thy name because of thy grace and thy truth. We are 
part of a great Church, the whole of which thou alone canst see. We 
have come to the spirits of the just made perfect, to the general assembly 
and Church of the first-born, whose names are written in heaven, and to 
this great host we add our voice that the hymn of praise which goes up to 
thee may thereby be strengthened because of our personal thankfulness. 
Thou hast done great things for us, whereof we are glad. If sometimes 
wc sit down to reckon up the darkness, that do thou charge to our faith- 
lessness and our meanness of soul. We ought the rather to count the 
stars thou hast set in the darkness and to number the mercies wherewith 
thou hast surrounded our life ; then should there be no end to the long 
reckoning, for thy tender mercies are more in number than the sands 
upon the sea-shore. Give us the loving heart that seeks the blessings 
that they may be added up and set out in order, and take away from us 
the disloyal and despairing spirit that counts the afflictions and reckons 
thee hard in visitation and in judgment. 

Thy tender mercies are over all thy works : thou dost give music to 
the wind and thou dost give fragrance to the flower, and thou givest light 
unto every star. Thou art always adding to that which is good, so that 
there is no measure to its beauty and its delightfulness. Our cup runneth 
over ; for our right hand thou hast a rod, for our left hand a staff, and in 
the valley of the shadow of death thou dost find for us light and song. 

All this thou hast done for us and in us by Jesus Christ, the firstborn of 
every creature, the Alpha and the Omega, the First and the Last, the 
Beginning and the End, who being in the form of God, thought it not 
robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of no reputation and took 
upon him the form of a servant, and became obedient unto death, even 
the death of the cross. He is highly exalted to-day, his name absorbs all 
other names, and he alone reigns in infinite and indestructible glory. In 
all things he hath the pre-eminence : having submitted to the lowest 
humiliation, he sits now upon the highest throne, and if we suffer with 
him, we shall also reign with him. May we be in the Saviour, cleansed 
by his blood, sanctified by his spirit, transfigured into his image, and 
animated evermore by his noble purpose. Thus may we reveal Christ 
day by day, showing men what he is, and s ipwing the world that we 
have bread to eat which was never provided f-* ■ 



30 


MATTHEW XVII. u~ 27 . 


Thou hast promised us great things. Beyond all our prayer thine an- 
swer rises like a firmament filled with lights : ours the poor prayer, thine 
the infinite reply. Thou hast promised to search the earth through and 
through to find that which was lost of thine image and likeness, and all 
that sleep in Christ shall be brought with him at the last, and thou wilt 
leave no grave unopened ; thou wilt find for us our lost ones, and set 
them up again, a multitude that no man can number, and thy heaven 
shall be filled and thy guests shall go out no more for ever. By such 
visions dost thou draw us forward through the wilderness, by the music of 
such promises dost thou stir us, and yet soothe us, in all the way of our 
life. 

Deliver us from the fascination cast upon us by unworthy objects, 
save us from the torment of slavery to things that are mean and ■worth- 
less, and enable us to set our whole love upon things that are above, 
where Christ sitteth at the right hand of God. May our heart be in 
Heaven, may our fellowship be with the Father and with the Son, through 
the eternal Spirit. May a light above the brightness of the sun make our 
way glad, and voices spoken to the heart charm away their fear and 
gloom. 

Mercifully help every good man to bear his burden steadily; In thy 
great love do thou nourish the hearts that are given over to sore trial, 
heal with balm from heaven the wmunded spirit, with thine own gentle 
hand dry the tears of sorrow, and by frequent shining from behind the 
cloud do thou grant unto us release from the fear which its darkness in- 
spires. We are all known to thee in every thought and motive, in every 
purpose and act, and thou wilt deal mercifully with us, for though we be 
rebels and aliens, yet are •we still thine own children ; thou didst make us 
and not we ourselves, and though we are self-torn and self-destroyed, yet 
amid all the ruin, the shame, thou dost see the traces of thine own image. 

Our liope is in Christ, our trust is in the cross, our cry is towards our 
Father, and it will not be returned to us in mockery, but irt great answers 
of pardon, assurance, and peace. Amen. 

Matthew srvii. 14-27. 

14. And when they were come to the multitude, there came to him a 
certain man, kneeling down to him, and saying, 

15. Lord, have mercy on my son ; for he is lunatic, and sore vexed ; 
for ofttimes he falleth into the fire, and oft into the water. 

16. And I brought him to thy disciples, and they could not cure him. 

17. Then Jesus answered and said, O faithless and perverse (seduced 
or led astray) generation, how long shall I be -with you ? how long shall I 
suffer you ? bring him hither to me. 

iS. And Jesus rebuked the devil ; and he departed out of him ; and the 
child was cured from that very hour. 



DIFFERENCES OF NARRATION. 


3 T 


ig. Then came the disciples to Jesus apart, and said, Why could not 
we cast him out ? 

20. And Jesus said unto them. Because of your unbelief : for verily I 
say unto you, If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say 
unto this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place ; and it shall remove ; 
and nothing shall be impossible unto you. 

21. Howbeit this kind goeth not out but by prayer and fasting. 

22. And while they abode in (went to and fro) Galilee, Jesus said unto 
them. The Son of man shall be betrayed into the hands of men : 

23. And they shall kill him, and the third day he shall be raised again. 
And they were exceeding sorry. 

24. And when they were come to Capernaum, they that received tribute 
money came to Peter, and saith. Doth not your master pay tribute ? 

25. He saith, Yes. And when he was come into the house, Jesus pre- 
vented him, saying, What thinkest thou, Simon ? of whom do the kings 
of the earth take custom (duties ongopds) or tribute (poll-tax, Acts v. 37)? 
of their own children, or of strangers ? (To the Jews direct taxation was 
hateful, as a sign of subjugation.) 

26. Peter saith unto him, Of strangers. Jesus saith unto him, Then 
are the children free. 

27. Notwithstanding, lest we should offend them, go thou £0 the sea, 
and cast an hook, and take up the fish that first cometh up ; and when 
thou hast opened his mouth, thou shalt find a piece of money (a stater) : 
that take, and give unto them for me and thee. 

TRAHSPIGURATION COMPLETED BY BENE- 
FICENCE. 

W E have read the story of the lunatic son in the three 
Gospels. The differences of narration are notable. It 
would seem impossible for any three men to tell the same story in 
the same way, even where the facts are so striking and tragical as 
in the instance now before us. Mark is the most observant of the 
writers: always in Mark’s statements there is most of indication, 
colour, and record of movement ; Mark takes notice of attitudes, 
looks, tones of the voice, and in this instance he has recorded for 
us some of the most pathetic and touching incidents in the whole 
case. It was Mark who saw the tears in the man’ s eyes : it was 
Mark who overheard the great prayer, “ Lord, I believe, Iielp 
thou mine unbelief and it was Mark who observed all the con- 
tortions and paroxysms of the young man immediately before the 
devil was ordered to quit him. It was Mark who saw two miracles 
in one — the man from whom the spirit had been cast out was as 



32 MATTHEW XVIL \&r^. 

one dead, insonnich that many said, “He is dead,” but Jesus 
took him by the hand and lifted him, and he arose', and thus per- 
formed two miracles upon the sufferer. Let us look at the inci- 
dent as related by Matthew. 

‘ ‘ And when they were come to the multitude, there came to 
him a certain man, kneeling down to him.” They had come 
from the Mount of Transfiguration : one would have thought that 
after that metamorphosis and that marvellous interview with Moses 
and Elias, that nothing of an ordinary or commonplace kind 
would ever have taken place in the lives of Jesus Christ or the 
three disciples who accompanied him to the great and solemn 
height. Yet you cannot escape commonplace: Monday will 
thrust itself sharply upon the heels of Sunday — already on the 
Sabbath eventide you may hear the throb of the machine getting 
ready for the week’s work ; and, strange as it may appear, this cure 
of afflicted persons, this long succession of miracles, had become 
almost a commonplace in the Saviour’s life. We have been so 
accustomed to his healing, releasing or expelling devils, straighten- 
ing those who were burdened, and lifting up those who were cast 
down, that we. seem as if out of our element if not reading an ac- 
count of a miracle or beholding some marvellous token of power. 
When Jesus came down from the mountain, one would have 
thought that the whole subject would have been what had been 
seen on the great height ; yet, as he came down the hill, he spe- 
cially covenanted with his disciples that they should say nothing 
about it. The vision was not to be told to any man ; all four of 
them were to come back again to their work as if nothing had 
happened. The heart has a secret history ; man lives a double 
life. There are dreams we cannot tell, visions and flamings in the 
night-darkness about which we can say nothing that is coherent — 
which we cannot put into public language, for it would not be 
understood, when called upon to relate such strange experience. 
So they come back to the multitude to take up the thread where 
they dropped it. 

You cannot approach a multitude without finding afflictions. 
A solemn and instructive circumstance is that. When did any 
multitude gather that was not afflicted in some of its members or 



afflictions IN EVERY MULTITUDE. “ 33 

afflicted as a whole ? Wherever we go we carry affliction with us ; 
sometimes it is borne silently ; most of us have some secret or 
unspeakable pain — every heart knows the bite of its own hunger. 
The heart knoweth its own bitterness, and a stranger intcrmed- 
dleth not w'ith its joy. But for such circumstances Jesus Christ 
need not have come to the multitude. He never went to the 
multitude to join its mere feasting or hilarity, to unite his voice 
in its rude song of momentary delight. Whenever Jesus Christ 
approached a multitude it was to do the very thing which he did 
in this instance — to heal its lunacy, to soothe its pain, to comfort 
its unutterable distress. He had no other mission on earth, 
l ake away the sin and the consequent sorrow of mankind and 
Jesus Christ would have no place in human history. He was 
born to save, he came to heal. When our sins and our sorrov's 
are removed from our history, then Jesus Christ as an incarnate 
Son of God w-ill sustain no further relation to it. The end will 
come, when he will deliver up the kingdom to God and his 
Father, and God shall be all in all. 

The man had a peculiar speech to make to Jesus : his earnest- 
ness made him frank. He did not seek to flatter the disciples or 
to excuse them, but plainly he says, ‘ ‘ I brought him to thy dis- 
ciples and they could not cure him.” A charge which is brought 
against the church to-day. May I add that it is a charge which is 
often but too just ? The world is a lunatic at the door of the 
church to-day, and the church seems to care next to nothing for 
the sufferer and to have no power over the deadly affliction. The 
church has its incantations, its old outworn forms of e.xpression, 
its decayed machinery, and its effete institutionalism, but the 
miracle-working power, the divine inspiration, the sovereignty over 
all hindrances and stumbling-blocks, alas ! where have these fled ? 
What is the church worth if it cannot cure the lunacy of the 
world.? The church, like its Master, has nothing to do in the 
world unless it be to heal and to bless and to save mankind. The 
church was not instituted to amuse the world, but to savs it, 
not to mock the world, by speaking to it a pointless and 
useless speech, but ta redemi the world through Jesus Christ the 
Lord. 

Discipleship is not enough; for it may be merely nominal. 
Outward ceremonies and institutional relationships are not enough 


34 


MATTHEW XVI L 14-27. 


— these may be but external and momentary and factitious. Dis- 
cipleship of the heart alone can do any good. The inflamed and 
inspired heart cannot speak words of weakness ; let that heart 
utter itself, and in its tone there will be the music of a subtle sym- 
pathy, and the world will be the better for its illumining and com- 
forting speech. How is it with our hearts } Our heads are clever 
enough and clear enough, and may be sufficiently stored with a 
certain kind of information, but what about the heart, its sym- 
pathy, its insight, its moral intuition, its redeeming desires, its 
unity, almost identity, with the Son of God ? 

Jesus rebuked the generation around him, and specially accent- 
uated his rebuke when he looked at his disciples, but he himself 
was not disturbed about the case. It might have excited his anxi- 
eties ; it would certainly have troubled an impostor. With a sin- 
gular Qonfirmation of his own truthfulness, he begins by pouring 
almost contempt, certainly stern rebuke, upon those who had 
failed in the great encounter. ‘ ‘ O faithless and perverse genera- 
tion, how long shall I be with you .? how long shall I suffer you ?” 
That was not the introduction which a man would have adopted 
who had any doubt about the sovereignty and completeness of his 
own resources. Woe unto us, when our rebukes of others are 
greater than the redemptive power that is in our own hearts. He 
is not the saviour of his age who can but curse it. It may be in 
eloquent denunciation the prophet may pour his maledictions 
upon his time, but unless he can follow his malediction by bene- 
ficent action on his own part, he is but a Balaam, self-inspired, 
and his curse mat' possibly return to his own head. 

What did jesns Christ sa}'-, after rebuking the faithlessness and 
perverseness of the generation.? He said, “Bring him hither to 
me. Mark the noble majesty, the simple ease, the absolute con- 
sciou-sness of adequate power. “ Bring him hither to me.” He 
had been upon the Mount of Transfiguration, but that gave him 
no access of power ; he was the same before he ascended the hill. 
He had seen Moses and Elias, and conversed with them about the 
decease that was to be accomjflished at Jerusalem, but long before 
that there was Resurrection in the hem of his garment, and heaven 
in the utterance of his benediction. 

“ Bring him hither to me,” The case is a difficult one ; 
“bring him hither to me.” Others have tried and failed; 



THE SPIRIT OF UNBELIEF. 


35 


“bring him hither to me.”; The church has done its little ut- 
most and the church stands with hands helplessly hung by its side 
— “bring him hither tome.” So would we have all church 
difliculties settled. When men complain of the inefficiency of the 
church, the uselessness of the ministry, the want of power in Chris- 
tian institutions, we will not close the argument upon grounds so 
narrow ; we add, “You have still to see the Master ; you must 
wait until he comes down from the mountain height. After you 
have seen him you shall form a complete verdict upon the case, 
but not until you have had an interview with Christ himself must 
you consider yourself in a position to adjudge the merits of Chris- 
tianity, as he alone can represent it. ” 

Judge everything by Christ’s speech. Condemn the church if 
you please, and your condemnation may be generally just, but do 
not let the condemnation of the church include one word of | 
criticism concerning its Head and Lord. You cannot be so dis- \ 
appointed with the church as Christ himself was. It is not in | 
your power to form an indictment' against the church so com- 
plete, so incisive, so withering as that which Jesus Christ himself 
framed and launched in language of fire. He is more grieved 
than we can be over the failures of the church ; still he stands 
there with undiminished light, with undiminished grace, still will- 
ing to make up the church’s deficiencies and to set up his per- 
sonal claim to the sovereignty of all hearts. 

There was one spirit which Jesus Christ himself could not cast 
out. As for this devil, he ordered it out of the young sufferer — 

“ Come out of him,” said he, “and enter no more into him,” 
and the devil, after a last paroxysm, came out. There was, how- 
ever, a spirit which Jesus Christ himself could not so expel. 
What was it that defied Omnipotence itself ? It was Unbelief, the 
spirit of unfaith, the spirit that says, “ Bo not go in that direction 
or trust that word or risk that adventure ; keep within your own 
strength, make provision for yourself, and do not trust the Divine 
word. Always keep hold of the world with one hand whilst you 
try to lay hold of heaven with the other. That is the spirit of un- 
belief and Jesus Christ himself could not expel the spirit from the 
human heart. Hence he said to the suffering parent, “ If tliou 
canst believe, all things are possible to him that bclieveth. ’ ’ Even 
we have to provide something upon which the Son of God can 



36 


iMATTIIEW XVIL 14 - 27 . 


operate. Miracles have to be done by consent -vAi&xi they touch the 
moral region. 

How is it that ye have no faith .? What is faith? It is the 
sixth sense ; it is the unnameable and immeasurable power of the 
human heart ; it is that peculiar faculty which sees God and lays 
hold of him, and magnifies the part into the whole, and rests with 
absoluteness of trust upon the almightiness and the equity and 
love of God. You cannot define faith in adequate words. All 
that is in our power is but thus to hint at it dimly. The soul 
which has felt its sovereignty, and has been borne on under its 
benign and elevating influence, can understand in .speechlessne.ss 
the Divine faculty, and can perform the marvellous function. 

So, then, Jesus Christ is baffled sometimes. He can walk upon 
the sea, or raise the dead, or cast out devils, but when he comes 
against the unhelieving heart, when he encounters the spirit of tin- 
faith, which is the spirit of self-trust, he cannot do any mighty 
works there. We must, then, begin by repairing, so to say, our 
faith, if we would have deeper fellow.ship with heaven, larger and 
richer manifestations of Divine grace and bestowals of Divine 
powder. The wound is not in our intelligence, it is in our faith ; 
the fatal stab has not been inflicted upon our Genius, but upon 
our Belief. 

Surely this man prayed for us all when he said, “ Lord, I be- 
lieve ; help thou mine unbelief. I bring a little faith — all I 
have ; I gather up my heart into one strain of faith, but so much 
is lacking— help thou mine unbelief ; make up what is lacking, 
complete what is deficient, and thus let the miracle begin in me 
and pass on to my child.” Why should the church be raising 
false issues and following false scents altogether, by supposing 
that the wound is in its intelligence, its literature, its genius, its 
iniellcctual department ? whereas the church probably never was 
stronger in intellect or richer in literary resources than she is to- 
day. It is her faith that requires renewal, replenishment, enlarge- 
ment. I know not of any nobler, sweeter prayer, punctuated with 
sobs and tears, than this cry, ” Help thou mine unbelief !” 

Yet the disciples had this redeeming fact on their side. They 
were troubled about their own failure ; they asked a frank question 
about their inability to cast out the devil. “ Then came the dis- 



EARNEST INQUIRIES. 


37 


ciples to Jesus apart, and said, Why could not we cast him out?” 
They will do better things some day ; men who can thus freeh^ 
talk about their own failures will not fail in the long run. Given 
a number of men who fail and, never inquire about the failure, that 
is to say, never search into its reason, and such men will never do 
anything great or lasting in the world ; but, given people in any 
department or relation of life who diligently and search ingly ask 
themselves, “ Why did we fail^ — how is it that we have not suc- 
ceeded in this instance ?” and, whatever the occasion be which 
elicits that inquiry, success must of necessity follow such inquests 
into inability and failure. Men in business should ask themselves 
once a week or once a month, “ How is it that we have not suc- 
ceeded?” Students and learners of all kinds should ask them- 
selves, “ How is it that we have not mastered this diffictilty ?” 
Churches looking out from their windows upon the world's dis- 
tress and madness should ask themselves, penetratingly and with a 
sense of humiliation, which is itself the beginning of strength, 
“ How is it that to-day the world’s lunacy is as grievous as it ever 
was ? Why those multitudes outside ? why this blasphemy in the 
sacred air of the Sabbath ? why this contempt of religious institu- 
tions ? why the laugh of mockery as the multitudes pass the 
church ?” 

When we set ourselves to such earnest inquiries, Christ will tell 
us how it is that we have not succeeded. It will be the beginning 
of better days for us when from the first line to the last we go in 
searching critical inquest through our whole ministry and mission 
in the world, asking haw it is that we have not succeeded. Do 
not cover up the case. Seek not to wrap it up or throw it behind 
and become indifferent about it, but stand over your failures, ac-, 
knowledge them, blame yourself for them, and ask the heart and 
ask the Master this searching question, “ Why have we failed ?” 

Mark now points out that Jesus Christ went through Galilee, 
and he would not that any man should know it. He was, as it 
were, skulking through to the end. In his own land he was pass- 
ing as one who was afraid of being identified ; it was as if he had 
walked out in the night-time, and studied a map of the place, and 
found out the mountain paths and the untrodden ways that he 
might get to the end. 



AfA TTIIE W XVTI. 14-27. 


)crate. Miracles have to be done by consent when they touch the 
oral region. 

How is it that ye have no faith .? What is faith? It is the 
fth sense - it is the unnameable and immeasurable power of the 
iman heart ; it is that peculiar faculty which sees God and lays 
)ld of him, and magnifies the part into the whole, and rests with 
)Soluteness of trust upon the almightiness and the equity and 
ve of God. You cannot define faith in adequate words. All 
lat is in our power is but thus to hint at it dimly. The soul 
Inch has felt its sovereignty, and has been borne on under its 
snign and elevating influence, can understand in speechlessness 
le Divine faculty, and can perform the marvellous function. 

So, then, Jesus Christ is baffled sometimes. He can walk upon 
le sea, or raise the dead, or cast out devils, but when he comes 
gainst the mhelieving heart, when he encounters the spirit of un- 
lith, which is the spirit of self-trust, he cannot do any mighty 
'orks there. We must, then, begin by repairing, so to say, our 
lith, if we would have deeper fellowship with heaven, larger and 
icher .manifestations of Divine grace and bestowals of Divine 
ower. The wound is not in our intelligence, it is in our faith ; 
le fatal stab has not been inflicted upon our Genius, but upon 
ur Belief. 

Surely this man prayed for us all when he said, “ Lord, I be- 
ieve ; help thou mine unbelief., I bring a little faith — all I 
lave ; I gather up my heart into one strain of faith, but so much 
3 lacking — help thou mine unbelief ; make up what is lacking, 
lomplete what is deficient, and thus let the miracle begin in me 
md pass on to my child.” Why should the church be raising 
alse issues and following false scents altogether, by supposing 
hat the wound is in its intelligence, its literature, its genius, its 
nrellectual department ? whereas the church probably never was 
Wronger in intellect or richer in literary resources than she is to- 
:iay. It is her faith that requires renewal, replenishment, enlarge- 
nent. I know not of any nobler, sweeter prayer, punctuated with 
5 obs and tears,. than this cry, “ Help thou inine unbelief !” 

Yet the disciples had this redeeming fact on .their side. They 
were irouhkd about their own failure ; they asked a frank question 
about their inability to cast out the devil. " Then came the dis- 



37 


EARNEST INQ UJRIES. 


ciples to Jesus apart, and said, Why could not we cast him out ?” 
I'hey will do better things some day ; men who can thus freely 
talk about their own failures will not fail in the long run. Given 
a number of men who fail and never inquire about the failure, that 
is to say, never search into its reason, and such men will never do 
anything great or lasting in the world ; but, given people in any 
department or relation of life who diligently and searchingly ask 
themselves, “ Why did we fail — how is it that we have not suc- 
ceeded in this instance ?” and, whatever the occasion be which 
elicits that inquiry, success must of necessity follow such inquests 
into inability and failure. Men in business should ask themselves 
once a week or once a month, “ How is it that we have not suc- 
ceeded.?” Students and learners of all kinds should ask them- 
selves, “How is it that we have not mastered this difficulty?” 
Churches looking but from their windows upon the world's dis- 
tress and madness should ask themselves, penetratingly and with a 
sense of humiliation, which is itself the beginning of strength, 
“ How is it that to-day the world's lunacy is as grievous as it ever 
was ? Why those multitudes outside ? why this blasphemy in the 
sacred air of the Sabbath ? why this contempt of religious institu- 
tions f why the laugh of mockery as the multitudes pass the 
church?” 

When we set ourselves to such earnest inquiries, Christ will tell 
us how it is that we have not succeeded. It will be the beginning 
of better days for us when from the first line to the last we go in 
searching critical inquest through our whole ministry and mission 
in the world, asking hem it is that we have not succeeded. Do 
not cover up the case. Seek not to wrap it up or throw it behind 
and become indifferent about it, but stand over your failures, ac-. 
knowledge them, blame yourself for them, and ask the heart and 
ask the IMaster this searching question, “ Why have we failed ?” 

IMark now points out that Jesus Christ went through Galilee, 
and he would not tliat any man should know it. He was, as it 
were, skulking through to the end. In his own land he was pass- 
ing as one who was afraid of being identified ; it was as if he had 
walked out in the night-time, and studied a nrap of the place, and 
found out the mountain paths and the untrodden ways tliat he 
might get to the end. 



MATTHEW XVll. 

Now that the miracle is performed, he returns to the great sub- 
ject of converse on the mount, “ While they abode in Galilee, 
Jesus said unto them, The Son of man shall be betrayed into the 
hands of men, and they shall kill him, and the third day he shall 
be raised again ; and they were exceeding sorry. “ Instead of say- 
ing, “Ye shall deliver him,” he said, “ He shall be delivered 
into the hands of men, ” for it was God that delivered him, not 
man : Jesus was not murdered, he was offered as a lamb. Mur-- 
der may be charged upon those who laid bloody hands upon him, 
but in the larger view this was the Divine doing, and the fulfil- 
ment with in the limits of time of the sovereign purpose of eternity. 
The disciples heard only the first part of the speech — “ The Son 
of man shall be betrayed, and they shall kill him.” We seldom 
hear any sentence quite through : men are bad listeners, they catch 
what they imagine to be the leading words, and on those they rest 
and from those they draw all their inferences, and so absorbed do 
they become in parts of the introductory speech that they do not 
hear its final close. Otherwise when Jesus Christ said, “ On the 
third day he shall be raised again,” they would have been as men 
. who beheld a harvest field clothed with golden w'heat, waving its 
head gently and as it were gratefully under the breezes and under 
the great light of noonda)'. Instead of seeing the end, they saw 
only the beginning : they heard the bad news, or what to them 
was bad news, and they listened no longer. It is possible to listen 
to the gospel and not to hear it : it is possible to listen to the 
reading of the Divine word and to miss the one verse that casts 
light upon the whole story. He that hath ears to hear let him 
hear. 

I include in my exposition to-day the passage concerning the 
payment of tribute money, just to show the violent transitions 
through which this wondrous life passed. Here we have a man 
performing a miracle which the disciples left unperformed ; here 
we have him forecasting his death and preaching the great fact and 
doctrine of his resurrection, arid then we have him vexed and 
humiliated by some question of personal taxation. How com- 
pletely did he fulfil every function of life ! with what attention he 
attended to the details of every day’s engagements ; nothing hur- 
ried, nothing overdriven, nothing neglected, no fragments lost. 
Why, when he comes to leave the tomb, we may not have to 



PRINCIPLE OF CONDUCT. 


39 


wonder if, we find the linen clothes w^rapped and laid away by a 
patient hand. If we so find the grave-clothes, it will be of a piece 
with all the attention to details which has been disclosed in this 
marvellous life. 

The Man has received the death-shock r he is straitened until the 
baptism of blood be accomplished ; his soul is in great suffering, 
and yet he is challenged about the tribute money, and attends to it 
as if it were his whole business. Nor does he chide Peter too 
sternly. Peter had committed the Master ; being asked aside 
whether the Master paid tribute money, he rashly answ'ered 
“ Yes." Pie often gave foolish replies, and in this instance he 
committed the Master ; but the Master w'ould not commit the 
servant. He did not contradict him ; he took the case up as 
Peter himself had placed it ; though he compelled him to acknowl- 
edge .that he was historically and argumentatively wrong, yet he 
would not place him in a dilemma. Things were now getting 
serious — he gave Peter a lesson about the payment of the tribute 
money when his soul was getting exceeding sorrowful even unto 
death. So he told Peter what to do, wdiere to find the money, 
and he laid down as the principle of his conduct, ‘ ‘ lest we offend 
them.” Give no needless offence; do not go out of your way 
to vex and harass people. If some great moral principle be not, 
involved, then take you the course of conciliation, and be anxious 
always to do that which is courteous and graceful. If a great 
moral principle be involved, then go to the cross rather than sur- 
render it ; but if there be no such principle involved, then put 
yourselves to a good deal of trouble not to give unnecessary offence 
and inflict needless vexation. ^ 

The picture suffers nothing from being looked at in its extreme 
lights. The great miracle, the greater sacrifice, and the little ques- 
tion of tribute money— -that is human life to-day in the Church : 
praying, crying to heaven, lifting up great psalms to heaven, and 
to-morrow opening the door, lighting the lamp, cleaning the win- 
dow, writing the letter, and doing earth’s little business with dili- 
gence and faithfulness. The Master did all tliis, and to all this we 
are called. If we settle the question of the tribute money, and all 
other little questions of detail in the spirit of the great Sacrifice, 
then our little actions will be great, and about our meanest doings 
there will be something of the sacredness and the dignity of Christ’s 
sacrifice. 



LXXII. 


PRAYER. 

Almighty God, vre have come at the appointed time to the appointed 
place, and we know that thou wilt be more gracious to hear than we can 
be expressive in prayer ; thine answer is greater than our request, as thy 
grace is greater than our sin. Thou art able to do exceeding abundantly 
above all that we ask or think : as the heaven is high above the earth, so 
is thy thought high above our thought. In thy presence we see our little- 
ness, and before the unsearchable riches of Christ we see our poverty ; 
but those riches were gathered for us — he who was rich for our sakes be- 
came poor, that we through his poverty might become rich. Through 
death we have life, through blood we have cleansing and forgiveness, 
yea, thou hast made the wrath of man to praise thee, and out of evil hast 
thou brought infinite good. 

Behold, thou dost work by thine own way, and none can search thee : 
we cannot find thee out unio perfection, nor can we understand the mind 
of the Lord and express it in words of men. We will therefore trust 
thee, resting in thee with unquestioning love, casting all our care, as we 
have cast all our sin, upon him who is mighty to save. We will not ques- 
tion thee, nor set up our reason against thee, nor endeavor to clear away 
the cloud by our own feeble breath. Whilst we are in the cloud do thou 
speak to us, and thy voice shall give us security and joy. 

Through all the week thou hast kept us ; thou hast beset us behind and 
before, and laid thine hand upon us. Thou hast measured out unto us 
our food, and thou hast kept for us a place of rest, and thou hast not 
withheld the blessing of sleep. The light has been the brighter for thy 
presence, and the darkness has rested upon us, not as a fear, but as a 
benediction, because of thy tender care. Gathered together in thine 
house our hearts glow with ardent love, and our mouth is opened in 
sweet and holy hymn, which we breathe unto the heavens because we 
must praise the hand from which our blessings come. 

As for our sin, it is our daily distress ; we loathe it and repeat it ; we 
pray for its forgiveness and then commit it again. Yet the blood of Jesus 
Christ thy Son cleanseth from all sin. If our daily sin be upon us, so is 
the daily sacrifice near at hand— the eternal cross, the tree of life, the 
way to pardon. “ God forbid that we should glory save in the cross of 
our Lord Jesus Christ.’' We would be crucified with Christ — we would 
know the fellowship of his sufferings that we may also know the power of 
■his resurrection. AVe would be fellow-sufferers with Christ, he atoning, 


41 


iYiVi YKR. 


we repenting ; he the one propitiation, and we the receivers of the atone- 
ment which he made. Grant unto us sweet answers to this our prayer, 
then shall all other prayers be answered in this infinite repfiy, “ He that 
spared not his own Son, but freely delivered him up for us all, how shall 
he not with him also freely give us all things ?” Grant us this unity with 
Christ, this identity with the Son of God, this tender, gracious, growing 
oneness with the very heart of thy grace ; then shall all our life be 
within the ministry of thy care, and we shall lack no good thing. 

We put our life into thine hands ; it was thine before it was ours, it 
will be thine again. We brought nothing into this world, and it is cer- 
tain we can carry nothing out. Our days are swifter than a post ; yea, 
sxvifter than a weaver’s shuttle ; yea, swifter than a flying shadow, and 
there is none that abideth. Help us whihst it is called to-day to call upon 
thee with our whole heart and to serve thee ■with our whole strength. 

We have come to bless thee for blessings at home : for the care of the 
little ones, for all the light that has made the house glad, for all the suc- 
cess with which thou hast blessed the week. Hear us when we praise 
thee for special revelations of thy grace — for close and tender presences 
of thyself amid distraction and darkness and manifold vexation. Keep 
our hearts and minds in the love of Christ, save us from all bitterness of 
feeling, spare us from the distress of -ivrath, clamour, and uncharitable- 
ness, help us to forgive our enemies as we otirselves are forgiven of God. 
May we live the noble life and breathe the ever-enlarging prayer, and 
realize the ever-gracious blessing of our Father’s presence. Amen. 

Matthew xviii. 1-14. 

1. At the same time came the disciples unto Jesus, saying, Who is the 
greatest (superior) in the kingdom of heaven ? 

2. And Jesus called a little child (probably one of Peter’s) unto him, 
and set him in the midst of them. 

3. And said, Verily I say unto you. Except ye be converted, and be- 
come as Tittle children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. 

4. Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, the 
same is greatest in the kingdom of Jieaven. 

5. And whoso shall receive one such little child in (on account of) my 
name receiveth me. 

6. But whoso shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, 
it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and 
that he were drowned in the depth of the sea. 

7. Woe (an interjection of unto the world because of offences ! 

for it must needs be that offences come ; but woe to that man by whom 
the offence cometh ! 

S. Wherefore if thy hand or thy foot offend thee (cause thee to sin) cut 
them off, and cast them from thee : it is better for thee to enter into life 



43 


MATTHEW XVIIl 1-14. 


halt or maimed, rather than having two hands or two feet to be cast into 
everlasting fire. • 

9. And if thine eye ofifend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee : it 
is better for thee to enter, into life with one rather than halving two 
eyes to be cast into hell fire. 

10. Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones ; for I say 
unto you, That in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my 
Father xvhich is in heaven. 

11. For the Son of man is come to save that which was lost. 

12. How think ye ? If a mao have an hundred sheep, and one of them 
be gone astray, doth he not leave the ninety and nine, and goeth into the 
mountains, and seeketh that which is gone astray ? 

13. And if so be that he find it, verily I say unto you, he rejoiceth more 
of (over) that sheep, than of the ninety and nine which went not astray. 

14. Even so it is not the will of your Father which is in heaven, that 
one of these little ones should perish. 

GREATNESS IN THE KINGDOM. 

A t the same time came the disciples unto Jesus, sajdng, Who 
is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?” So blatantly 
can we debase the sublimest subjects! See how they put their 
words together, and learn from the wild incoherence how possible 
it is for us to commit the same impious ironies. “ Who is the 
greate.st in the kingdom of heaven?” as if there could be any 
greatness there of our making, as if our stature could outshoulder 
the great dignities, as if we could be somebody in the infinite king- 
dom of light and purity and grace. These men were not struck 
by the grandeur of the idea of the heavenly kingdom, they were 
plagued with the vexatious que-stion as to which of them should 
cut a figure in it ! 

Is it not so now, to some extent ? ' Are we overwhelmed by the 
occasion, or do we lift our heads above it and wave our hand over 
it as if we were bigger after all ? In the church, for instance, in 
holy psalm, in tender prayer, in the reading of the revealed word, 
how do we deport ourselves ? Do we shrink away into an all but 
inx’isible perspective, being nothing when such light shines and 
such music thrills the air, or do we come forward in bold, plain self- 
assertiveness ? The subject — when that subject is the kingdom of 
heaven — should always be greater than the men who approach its 
con.sideration. In that sense the altar should be greater than the 



TR UE GREA TNESS. 


43 


suppliant ; for the altar stands for God and the suppliant but a 
piping, whining sinner that may hardly let his voice be heard lest 
his very prayer should become an impiety and his intercession 
aggravate the guilt which he deplores. 

One would have thought that men having had given to them 
the phrase, “ the kingdom of heaven/' would have been so dazzled 
by its gloiy and so impressed by its tender graciousness, that they 
would never have thought of themselves at all, and especially never 
have thought of their gradation, or their status within its infinite 
circumference. I tell you we all have learned the wicked trick of 
spoiling evervdhing God gives to us ! We would pollute the stars 
if we could clutch them. We have spoiled the earth, ripped it up 
into millions of graves, and made it an Aceldama, and if we could 
only get at the stars we should disfigure and mar their symmetry 
and music. 

Yet how keen we are in blaming the ancients for all these 
things. We sing about the M'icked Jews, and relieve ourselves by 
historical psalmody. We reproach the past, not knowing that we 
ourselves crucified, the Lord of Glory, zve made tlie cross, stretched 
the sufferer upon it, drove the nails, and crushed the thorns into 
the throbbing temples. Do not let us put away such events as if 
they were historical only ; that is a subtle device of the enemy. 
Men write books now against Christ or against the Christian 
theology, and they only succeed in so far as they can dig a great 
historical chasm between the facts and the critics. My Christ is 
crucified /o-dqy : there is no space of time between me and him. 
If I could scatter eighteen centuries between us I should gain so 
much relief from selLtorment. But he is the same yesterday, to- 
day, and for ever, and whilst we are in this world we must be 
partakers of its greatest tragedy. We cannot separate between the 
cross and ourselves any number of years that may mitigate our 
personal heinousness in the matter of this infinite responsibility. 

So, then, we are asking the old questions now, repeating the 
old deeds to-day, and at this, very moment there may be upper- 
most: in some men’s thoughts the inquiry — “ W'ho is the greatest 
in the kingdom of heaven We are not appalled by the subject : 
contrariwise, we are familiar with every sacred phrase — yea, wc 
have taken God’s whole revelation and gone over it in words so 
frequently that now wc repeat them almost mcchanicall}'; Could 



44 


MATTHEW XVIIL i~i4. 


we think ourselves back to the time of Matthew the Apostle, who 
gives us the expressive phrase, “ the kingdom of heaven” — could 
we think and feel ourselves back until the phrase came to us for 
the first time, what throb of feeling, what high and sacred anima- 
tion, what marvellous challenges of the imagination should we 
feel ! Yet that phrase may be repeated so often that we may begin 
ourselves to map it out into greater, smaller — greater, lesser — 
higher, lower — superior and inferior, and allot men to its various 
occupancy. Familiarity may destroy reverence : we may repeat 
our sacred phrases so often as to lose their lustre or their 
bloom. 

Jesus Christ now answers the question with a great but most un- 
expected reply : ‘ ‘ And Jesus called a little child unto him, and sat 
him in the midst of them, and said, Verily I say unto you, Ex- 
cept ye be converted and become as little children, ye shall 
not enter into the kingdom of heaven.” As if he should say, 
“You are asking who is greatest in the kingdom of heaven, for- 
getting the earlier question, hem to get into the kingdom of heaven. 
Pause before you begin to take your seat in the kingdom of heaven : 
be sure you are in the kingdom itself.” The question takes upon 
itself a thousand wrong accents, and smites like a great wind from 
every corner of heaven. ‘ ‘ Before you preach the truth, be sure 
you feel its power ; before you theologise be sure you can pray ; 
before you hold high controversy on things literary and theological, 
be sure your hearts have been cleft in twain, and all your self- 
righteousness has been expelled from you like the poison of hell. 

‘ ‘ Not every one that saith unto me. Lord, Lord, shall enter into 
the kingdom of heaven, but he that doeth the will of my Father 
which is in heaven.” “ You are asking me who is greatest in the 
kingdom of heaven — I draw your minds to an earlier question : 
Are we in heaven's kingdom — have we mistaken the vestibule for 
the temple — have we mistaken the gate for the inner fire, and the 
gentle, infinite hospitality of God ?” Let us first consider whether 
we are in the kingdom, and in proportion as we feel ourselves to 
be in the kingdom of heaven shall we have little concern as to our 
particular place within the glowing sphere. 

Speeches like these of Christ’s go right down to the very core 
and root of things, and make us fundamental in our questioning, 
vital, anxious even to agony in the inquiries which we address to 



THE ILLUSTRATIVE CHILD. 


45 


him. A small thing to settle gradation, if we have not entered 
into the mystery of participation. 

Jesus Christ was always fundamental in his teaching. Who but 
himself dare have represented the kingdom of heaven and his 
greatness by a little child.? Who but himself had the suidimc 
audacity, the infinite tranquillity of power, which enabled him to 
say, “ The kingdom of heaven is like a grain of mustard seed ?” 
Christ lifted up the little into grand t3'pology ; Christ came to seek 
and to save that which was lost ; Christ lighted the candle and 
swept the house diligently till he found the tenth piece ; Christ 
wandered over the mountains to seek the strayed one ; Christ 
gave commandment to gather up the fragments that nothing be 
lost. He is great walking upon the sea, great when standing at 
the grave of Lazarus, and, with a loud voice that sent its resurrec* 
tional resonance through all the chambers of the dead, says, 
“Lazarus, come forth;’’ but, oh, to me in my tenderest mo- 
ments, when my heart is all tears and nay life is lifted up into one 
crying prayer, he is greatest when he calls a child and reveals the 
kingdom of heaven under the infinite simplicity of a child’s trustful, 
loving, gentle heart. 

It was a great day in the Church when that little child stood 
there and ail -unconsciously represented the kingdom of heaven. 
Dear little child ! — so little that the Saviour took him up into his 
arms : a hand all dimples, a cheek so fair, made for the kiss of 
love and trust and blessing, and eyes that had no speculation in 

them, still a gentle wonder of dreamy love, looking round itself 
wondering at the scene. And yet that child was made that 
day to set forth to all the ages the kingdom of heaven ! Where, 

then, arc the great, the noble, the wise, the rich ? Where are the 
ingenious, the intellectual, the learned, the men of mighty brain 
and mind .? Where are they .? There is folly in that question, I 
have always found that in proportion as a man is truly learned is 
he truly modest ; in proportion as a man is really great is he really 
childlike. Herein I would repeat my own experience as a 
preacher : if I have to preach one sermon upon which my whole 
future depends, and if I have to choose my audience, I shall 
fill the church with the greatest preachers, the greatest scholars, the 



46 


MATTHEW XVHL 1-14. 


greatest men — they will have more pity for me, more sympathy 
with me, keener insight into any faculty I may possess, than 
inferior men can have. As it is better to fall into the hands of 
God than into the hands of men, so it is better to fall into the 
hands of the higher class of men than into the hands of those who 
are inferior in conception, insight, and range of sympathy. 

Jesus Christ in this discourse, as in every other, was himself \he 
sermon. He humbled himself and took upon him the form of a ser- 
vant ; he was rich yet for our sakes became poor; he took a 
towel and girded himself and washed the feet of his disciples, and 
said, “ Ye call me Master and Lord : so I am ; if I therefore have 
washed your feet, ye ought also to wash one another’s feet. 
Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly of heart, and ye shall find 
rest unto your souls." He shall not strive, nor cry, nor cause his 
voice to be heard in the streets. We arc called not only, therefore, 
to see the child in his arms, but to see the still younger, purer 
child that held the typical one. They are both children : the 
child represents the Christ, the Christ represents the Father ; ‘ ‘ He 
that receiveth me receiveth not me, but him that sent me. " 

Herein, then, is a practical inquiry : have we the child-htari? 
We might pause here to rebuke those who found denominations 
upon isolated texts. In ancient times there was a denomination 
actually built upon this one expression about the little^child ; 
people who mistook childishness for childlikeness built a denomi- 
nation upon the illustration here given by Jesus Christ. They 
thought the more childish they were the more like Christ they 
would be. I will not recite to you the enormities they perpetrated 
in the name of childhood. I only dwell upon the point to show 
you how possible it is so to strain the letter as to miss the spirit, 
and how mischievous it is to pervert the sweetest and grandest .say- 
ings of the Lord. Childlike ness does not mean ignorance : child- 
likeness docs not mean pretended modesty ; childlikeness does not 
mean that a man who is conscious of his pi uver should tell a lie, say- 
ing that he is not at all conscious of spiritual strength and insight. 
Childlikeness is simplicity, trustfulness, utter unconsciousness in 
the sense of vain boasting and glory, gentleness, love,' sincerity of 
heart and motive. Do not strain the letter, but endeavour to 
penetrate the meaning of the spirit. Few words are so mi.sunder- 



TR UE CH1LDLJKE.\ESS. 


47 


stood as childlikeness, modesiy^ atmabiliiy, simplidly. Whenever I 
hear of a preacher who is so simple, so very simple, I feel no par- 
ticular warming of heart towards him ; it may be that he is only 
inane, wanting in vigour, jejune, sapless, fireless. Simplicity — do 
not abuse the word — ^simplicity is the last result of wisdom, 
energy, robustness, and intellectual industry. Simplicity is an 
outcome, a result, as rest is. The worlds that fly around their 
centres are at rest because of their velocity. This childlikeness is 
not an ostentation, not a strenuous endeavour to become a child 
outwardly and literally ; it is wholly different, and can be only 
understood in its deeper senses and finer applications by those who 
have passed through the great spiritual process of crucifixion, hav- 
ing had all boasting taken out of them by the cross of Christ, 

So Jesus proceeds to say that if the hand offend, or the foot 
offend, or the eye offend, there must be cutting off and plucking 
out. Whatever stands in the way of that grand spiritual reduction 
which ends in childlikeness must be taken away. Where then are 
we ? Where are the children, the little children .? We are 
theological — are we Chrislian P We are clever — are -^^good ? We 
talk about Christ — do we live Christ 1 We defend the Gospel — do 
we exeynplify it } We speak widi the tongues of men and of 
angels — have we charity? How do we take rebukes, slights, re- 
buffs, misconceptions, misrepresentations 1 There is an ostenta- 
tion of childlikene.ss, and I know of no outrage much greater upon 
the spirit of the sanctuary than to appear to be children when we 
have not in reality the child’s lieart. 

This course of reasoning would be attended — were it carried out 
legitimately — by many practical results. Many would be first who 
are now last, some might be last who are now first. At all events, 
the great vital question would be jiut by eveiy man to his own 
heart — -am I in the kingdom } Jesus Christ will not have the child 
spirit slighted, insulted, or neglected : " Whoso sliall offend one 
of these little ones that believe in me, it w'crc better for him that a 
millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in 
the depths of the. sea,” It was the emstom in Syria and in Greece 
so to treat criminals. It was an ancient custom to encase criminals 
in lead and to throw them into the sea furthest from the shore. 
Jesus Christ is not now inventing a new method of punishment : 
he is not speaking vindictively, he is adapting his conversation to 


48 


MATTHEW XVIII, 1-14. 


what was well known to the people to whom he addressed himself. 

‘ ‘ Whoso shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me. ’ ’ 
Why, what harm can there be in that? It is the pastime of the 
church, it is one of the chief recreations of the world, to snub the 
Christian, to contemn the praying man, to give the suppliant a 
nudge as you pass him, and to laugh at the fool who speaks into 
vacuity. The Master takes another view of the case. We shall 
have to account for our contempt. The idle words we speak 
against sacred exercises and spiritual relationships will gather 
themselves up into a severe accusation against us one day. These 
children, men of the child-heart, keep the world sweet. Ten 
righteous men saved the city, the child-heart saves the world from 
the decrepitude and ghastliness of old age. 

When this doctrine is realized, ■vv’e shall live more in grace than 
in genius ; our life will be simple because deeply rooted in God 
and in truth. Instead of vexing ourselves with ten thousand 
questions which never can be settled, we shall nestle ourselves in’ 
the heart of the Father. Recall the case of Abraham. In his case 
one of the greatest words in human speech or human history had 
its beginning. The Lord took him out one night and showed him 
all that was visible of the host of heaven, and said to the childless 
wanderer, “Look up— even SO shall thy seed be.” What 
followed 1 And Abraham, no longer the mighty chief and au- 
dacious explorer of lands unknown, no longer the owner of 
countless flocks and riches of an Eastern kind, became himsdf a 
little child : and Abraham BELIEVED God — the first time the 
word “believed” occurs in the Bible in that instance — and 
Abraham believed God: said to Sight, “Stand back I” said to 
the laws of Nature, “Hold your peace !” said to a misgiving 
heart, “ Silence, thou lying tempter !” And he believed God. 

How much there is in that word believe as it w^as first written ! 
Abraham nestled in the heart of God, nurtured and fed himself 
upon the Divine vitality — such is the meaning of the word “ be- 
lieved. ’ ’ Abraham as a little child nestled in the very heart of 
God, so he became the father of the faithful, the head of all the 
children. He exemplified the child heart, relinquishing his own 
grandeur, his own ability, his own social status, his own will. 
Impoverishing himself of all that the world would have counted 
characterisflc as to grandeur arid force, he became a little child, 



THE CHILD - HEART. 


49 


and went into the warm heart and fed himself upon the Divine 
life and love. 

May we thus know by manifold discipline, by anxious experi- 
ence, even by painful suffering, what we can never be taught by 
tne mere letter — how wondrous, how restful is the child-heart J 


LXXIII. 


PRAYER. 

Almighty God, our hearts have a longing desire to enter into thy 
courts, even into the innermost place of thy dwelling, there to behold 
such of thy glory as our vision can endure. Thou hast inspired us with 
a great ambition ; this is not of our own creation, but of thine; our de- 
sire is to see thee, to love thee, to read thy truth more deeply and more 
understandingly, and to express thy purpose in all the breadth and force 
of our daily life. We have come home, we have been brought home ; 
stung by pain, made mad by hunger, embittered by disappointment, we 
have returned to our Father's house, and to-day we would be admitted to 
his presence. Thou didst seek us and thou hast found us, and what is 
worthy in us to be found thou only knowest, for we are filled with shame, 
and wounded and utterly undone. Behold the image is in us, but in 
the eyes of thine own grace, and by the grace of God we are what we 
are. Wherein we have done evil and spoiled all our days and utterly 
stained them with guilt, let thine answer be one of redemption and not of 
judgment : let grace prevail over law, and let the tender gospel of the 
blood of the Son of God prevail to silence the just accusations of thy law. 

Thy law is severe upon us, but still righteous. It cries for our life, it 
pursues our soul, it demands the uttermost drop of blood that is in our 
guilty hearts ; but thou hast arrested the law, thou hast spoken thy gos- 
pel, thou hast set up the cross, and Jesus Christ is now our Redeemer 
and Saviour, our Priest and Prophet and King, and in him would we 
hide ourselves as in a rock that cannot be shaken. There is no end to 
thy mercy, thy compassions are more in number than the dews of the 
morning, thy kindness is thrown round about us as a great defence and a 
perpetual comfort, and thine eye is upon us, not searchingly in judgment, 
but compassionately in redemption. Herein therefore do we hope, and 
in this is our abiding confidence. 

Whilst we are iu thine house, fill the place with thy presence. Make 
room tor thyself, and grant unto us visions of thy face that shall make 
our iiearts rejoice with a great gladness. There is trouble in our soul, 
there are great tears in our eyes, a solemn fear burdens our spirit like a 
weight that cannot be borne, and the little light that is in the sky is 
threatened to be driven out by an infinite gloom. Do thou then come to 
us thyself with revelation and light and assurance and with repetition of 
the grace that is in Christ Jesus, and so do thou command thy blessing to 


rest upon us as to liberate us from every chain and bring us from under 
the dominion of every terrifying fear. 

Thou knovvest what our days have been, and what to-morrow shall yet 
come, with new chances and opportunities, and offers of larger light and 
nobler liberty. Thou knowest those who have a great fear before them 
during the coming week, who are dreading the hour that shall try their 
very life, who are now crying unto thee to be fortified against the trial 
that awaits them. The Lord’s grace be magnified above man’s fear, the 
sustaining power of the goodness of God lift up those that are crushed, 
until they feel the burden no more. Enter into every one of our houses, 
not as a glance of light, itresently to depart, but as an abiding glory, a 
perpetual guest, yea as King of the house, and Father and Ruler of all. 

Go with us in our walking up and down in the earth, and in the doing 
of all the business of life ; help us to do it with moral dignity, with a 
consciousness of integrity before God, knowing that our purpose is true, 
and our design wholly honourable in thy sight. Give us a right view of 
things : show us that our life is in our nostrils, that we are here for a 
moment, and will presently be gone : animate us by the spirit of Christ, 
fill us with the grace that is in Christ Jesus, ennoble us by every consid- 
eration that can lift up the life towards the light that is in thyself ; save 
us from despair, deliver us in temptation, guard us in danger, surround 
us all the way through this slippery path, keep our feet from falling, our 
eyes from tears, our soul from death. 

Have compassion upon us every moment of the day. Help us to for- 
give our enemies ; with the noble charity of Christ’s own spirit enable us 
in all things not to return evil for good, but to return good for evil ; smit- 
ten on the one cheek, may we turn the other also ; may it be our desire 
to know what Christ would be and do, that we may be and do as Christ. 

The Lord help us in all time to bear the burden, to walk steadily across 
the swamp— enable us to find the bridge of God’s own building over 
every diflicult river — bring us every one at last to see the meaning of it 
all, and to give praise to him who by many a devious way has led us to 
the common rest. Amen. 

Matthew xviiL 16-35. 

15. Moreover if thy brother shall trespass (and if thy brother shall sin) 
against thee, go and tell him his fault (convict him) between thee and him 
alone ; if he ^hall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother, 

16. But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, 
that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word maybe estab- 
lished. 

17. And if he shall neglect (refuse) to hear them, tell it unto the church : 
but if he neglect to hear the church (assembly or society), let him be unto 
thee as an heathen ?nan and a publican-- 


MATTHEW XVIIl 15-35. 


X Verily I say unto you, "Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be 
^'und in heaven ; and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed 
in heaven. 

ig. Again I say unto you, That if two of you shall agree on earth as 
touching anything that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my 
Father which is in heaven, 

20. For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there 
am I in the midst of them. {Ubi ires, iH Ecdesia—a. saying of the 
Fathers.) 

21. Then came Peter to him, and said. Lord, how oft shall my brother 
sin against me, and I, forgive him ? till seven times ? 

22. Jesus saith unto him, I say not unto thee, Until seven times; 
but, Until seventy times seven (symbolic numbers). 

23 Therefore is the kingdom of heaven likened unto a certain king, 
which would take account of his servants, 

24. And when he had begun to reckon, one was brought unto him, 
which owed him ten thousand talents (two millions and a half sterling) : 

25. But forasmuch as he had not to pay, his lord commanded him to be 
sold, and his wife and children, and all that he had, and payment to be 
made. 

26. The servant therefore fell down, and worshipped him, saying, 
Lord, have patience with me, and I will pay thee all. 

27. Then the lord ■ of that servant was moved with compassion, and 
loosed him, and forgave him the debt (literally a debt contracted through 
a loan). 

28. But the same servant went out, and found one of his fellow-ser- 
vants, which owed him an hundred pence ; and he laid hands on him, 
and took him by the throat, saying, Pay me that thou owest. 

29. And his fellow-servant fell down at his feet, and besought him, 
saying, Have patience with me, and I will pay thee all. 

30. And he would not but went and cast him into prison, till he 
should pay the debt. 

31. So when his fellow-servants saw what was done, they were very 
sorry, and came and told unto their lord all that was done. 

32. Then his lord, after that he had called him, said unto him, O thou 
wicked servant, I forgave thee all that debt, because thou desiredst 
{enireatedst) me : 

33. Shouldest not thou also have had compassion on thy fellow-servant, 
even as i had pity on thee ? 

34. And his lord was wroth, and delivered him to the tormentors, till 
he should pay all that was due unto him. 

35. So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from 
your hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses. 



CHRIST'S mRTRAJTC/RE OF SIA\ 


S3 


BROTHERHOOD AND FORGIVENESS. 

A THREAD of connection binds these apparently broken 
sentences. The subject is the child-heart — these are illus- 
trations of its actions in daily life. A notable consequence is the 
fact that Jesus Christ himself was the living exemplification of his 
own doctrine. He was himself the child in the midst of us ; he 
was meek and lowly in heart. Our first lesson, therefore, is 
founded on the fact that the child-heart may be associated with 
the keenest inielkciual peneiraiion. Carefully considered, it will be 
found that these illustrations are mogt remarkable instances of 
Christ’s intellectual virility, especially as revealing profound knowl- 
edge of human nature. 

How could he know how to portray sin so vividly w’ho knew no 
sin himself ? How could he enter into feelings which had never 
excited his own heart ? Account for this. Yet never was sin 
drawn by the hand of so potverful an artist. We are told that only 
those who have knowm delirium tremens can describe its effect, or 
give any true hint of its infernal revelations. Surely only the 
sinner can talk about sin. There will be some slip of the tongue 
on the part of any man who attempts to talk about that of which he 
himself has had no experience : he will break down in his 
portraiture, he will employ false colours, he will set things in un- 
due relationships. Yet the absolutely sinless One describes sin : 
spotless, incorruptible Virtue sits down to paint every lineament of 
hideous vice, the Sun of holiness undertakes to photograph the 
ghastliness of crime ! 

How can it be done ? We should mock the man who knew 
nothing about music undertaking to give his opinion about it. A 
man who had never handled a brush or mingled two colours 
would be mocked if he claimed to paint the simplest object in 
nature. His want of experience would be thrown in his face as an 
argument against his pretensions, and justly so. It is in this way 
that men acquire influence and draw around themselves the trust 
of others ; their experience is so rich, so varied, so painful in its 
exactness, so exquisitely coincident with the facts of this tragical 
life. Jesus Christ, however, undertakes to describe sin, and to 
track the evil motive all through and through its winding way in 



54 


MA TTHE W X Vlll 1 5-3S> 


the cavernous heart, and to watch its coming out at the last in 
vivid and actual expression, llow will he do this ,? We can 
tell, too, exactly how the Sun will paint the portrait of crime— we 
can compare the photograph with the original, we can say, ‘ ‘ Look 
on this picture and on this/*' and laugh at the minister who under- 
took to complete a photograph about which he himself knew 
nothing. In this way we can tell precisely whether Christ 
preached in pretence or in truth when he attempted to describe 
human nature. 

The doctrine must be without value if he does not fully under- 
stand the nature to which he proposes to apply it. We have many 
superficial religions, simply because we have many superficial 
theories of human naiure. How can prescribe for a disease who 
never heard of it before .? How can he undertake to speak a 
language of which he does not know so much as one letter ? We 
have easy remedies, because we have ignorant conceptions of the 
symptoms and realities with which we have to deal. Christianity 
is mysterious because sin is mysterious — the remedy must be 
adapted to the disea.se. Christ saw the mystery of our life, and 
adapted the mystery of his religion to it. Beware of any sugges- 
tion that is marked by extreme and miscalled simplicity in this 
matter of redeeming and reclaiming human nature. Human 
nature is not itself -x simple construction : find simple keys for 
simple locks, but where the lock is complicated, the key must 
match its complication in every line. 

When I enter the Christian sanctuary and hear the Christian re- 
ligion enunciated, I am struck by its mysteriousness, its remote- 
ness from all common things, its metaphysical and tianscendental 
claim and point of observation, and in my ignorance I say, 
“Surely .something simpler than this could be devised,” But 
God sends me back to consider my own nature — know thyself 
When I have studied the lock, I find that the mystery was in vie, 
not in God-~hxi sin, not in truth — in rebellion, not in redemp- 
tion. " . ■ 

How could Jesus Christ undertake to speak that parable of the 
■prodigal son .? His audacity amazes me. Let him paint the well- 
aehaved boy, that never left h’s father’s house an hour, that retired 



KNOWLEDGE OF HUMAN NATURE. 55 

regularly and rose punctually, and pursued the even tenor of his 
wa}' all through the hours of the day, with undeviating punctilious- 
ness ; let him tell us about his prayers, his virtues, his unteinpted 
integrity, his paper loyalty — -there may be at home ; but Son of 
God, Child of the heavens, Companion of angels — how can he un- 
dertake to describe the way of the prodigal ? He will stumble ; he 
will make the most ludicrous mistakes. How will he talk about 
riotous living and harlots, and all the ways of darkness and all the 
speech of hell .? He will pronounce that speech like a foreigner ; 
there will be an accent in its utterance that will make us smile as 
if mocking the man who had undertaken to speak such a speech. 
Let any critic sit down to consider the parable of the prodigal son 
simply as a delineation of human nature, and say if he could 
amend one word, add one hue to the vivid colouring, or mark in 
more graphic boldness the outline of the madman’s career. 

Whence this knowledge of human nature ? Truly Jesus needed 
not that any should testify of man, for he knew what was in man. 
That he should never have been corrected in his delineation of 
virtue is a commonplace, but that he should never have been criti- 
cised successfully in his delineation of transcends in power of 
surprise any miracle of his with which I am acquainted. Take this 
instance of trespasses and forgiveness and ask how far they co- 
ordinate with all we know of human nature. Did the Man know 
what he was talking about ? Did he pronounce our language like 
a foreigner ? Did he give merely superficial etchings, or faithful 
and undeniable delineations of our very selves ? Let us see. 

“ If thy brother shall trespass against thee.” But brothers 
trespass against one another? How bold the assumption, how 
improbable the circumstance ! I'he Man romances. It is im- 
possible that brother should trespass against brother — what is the 
speaker thinking of ? Brothers will love brothers, brother will 
never disagree with brother— it must be, “ If a man shall trespass 
against his enemy — kill a wild beast, shoot a bird of prey.” It is 
not so, “ If thy brother shall ti'cspass against thee. ” This man 
knows what he is talking about, he is familiar with facts, he looks 
at human life in its actuality. . He paints nothing in merely rosy 
hues, he proceeds upon the assumption that the whole social head 
is sick and the whole social heart is faint. He who grips funda- 


S6 MATTHEW PfVIII. \S-3S. 

mental facts in this way may possibly have some remedy for the 
disease which he depicts. 

“ If he will not hear thee.” It is impossible — a brother not 
hearing a brother, a man turning a deaf ear to a fellow-man who 
goes to expostulate with him, a man hardening himself into an 
unresponsive stone when the human voice falls upon his ear in 
piteous and pleading tone ! O Christ, thou art now in regions too 
remote for thy thought to be familiar with — so would one talk 
about such words as these — but what are the facts of daily life ? 

Have you met with men who will not listen to you when you 
go to state your complaint, or to ask for redress, or to demand 
that simple justice be done ? Are there stubborn men, are there 
deaf souls, are there those who draw themselves up into impene- 
trable isolation when you wish them to listen to statements which 
you suppose will correct their judgment and bring their conscience 
to bear intelligently upon a given set of circumstances ? Is the 
picture correctly drawn .? 

‘ ' Take with thee one or two more. ’ ’ How did he, the Christ, 
know how to treat a social difficulty ? If the brother would not 
hear the one man, how would he possibly hear the one or two 
more? “That every word may be established.” Why, w'ould 
the man go back upon his owm word ? What need have we of 
witnesses in social life, especially in Church or Christian life? 
When a brother has spoken a sentence, he will never surely 
modify it, recall it, deny it, trifle with it — why should there be 
one or two more listening, taking notes, and called in for the 
purpose of verification? Truth is simple, truth is easy, truth 
will never be denied, truth will stand when all things fall — why 
should there be one or two more ? Have you never felt the 
necessity of having a witness present when a man was talking who 
had done a trespass ? The very fact that he had done the trespass 
gave you ground for believing that he would do the further 
trespass of denying his own word. How he knows us, how he 
searches us through and through, how his eye burns upon us — 
there is nothing hidden from the light thereof ! A man who talks 
so about our personal and social relations may have something 
to say presently of a deeper kind. 

“Let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a publican.” 


CHJUS7" S UNlVmSAL PRESENCE. 


57 


There is a point at which patience gives out. Jesus Christ points 
to a similar circumstance in our higher relations — the Lord is long- 
suffering and very kind of heart, and his eyes are filled with pity 
and he longs to see us come home, and he has prepared broad 
welcome for our prodigal, penitent hearts ; yet there is a point at 
which he says, “Let him alone: this sin hath forgiveness neither 
in this world nor in that which is to come. " To God we may be 
as a heathen man and a publican, to our Creator we may be an 
eternal offence. This is the my.stcry of life — we may be cast out 
of our Father’s heart, and be thrown by our own sinful hands ^ 
beyond the bounds of penitence and forgiveness. 

Jesus Christ then says that whenever a process is conducted in 
this fashion and the final word is spoken, be it a word of binding 
or of loosing — whatever is done rightly upon earth is done also 
in heaven. The earthly books on which the transaction is written 
may be burned, but the registry above is beyond the reach of fire. 
Not only so, he says that where the right process is conducted, 
and two or three come together to settle the matter, there he is. 
This matter is not settled in stubbornness and resentfulness or in 
a spirit of social injustice, but it is done religiously ; where two 
or three are gathered together in my name, to cut off any man or 
to take any man back again into the fold which he has left, 
there am I in the midst of them. This passage has been quoted 
in reference to prayer meetings, and in reference to small re- 
ligious gatherings, and has been misquoted so as to bring in 
the word.s, “and that to bless.” Jesus Christ is not speaking 
about such meetings — his subject is altogether different ; it is 
solemnly and graciously true of every meeting of hearts for the 
purpose of worshipping God through Christ ; but in this instance 
Jesus Christ is speaking about another subject altogether, and 
therefore the text must not be wrested from its immediate ap- 
plication to . bear but a secondary reference to other sets of 
circumstances. He would rather not be present when any man 
is accounted a heathen man and a publican — but he must be 
there. He is Judge as well as Saviour. 

Peter now' interposes and show's that he knows nothing about 
human nature. We see how grand Christ is by seeing how 
pitifully little ever}' other man is in comparison. Peter comes 


5S MATTHEW XVllT iMM^ 

forward with a half-question, based upon a half-view of human 
nature : “ How oft shall brother sin against me and I forgive 
him ? ’ ’ The question is founded upon a foolish assumption. You 
do not know how high the mountain is till you see some other 
mountain and set it up against it shoulder to shoulder. Mont Blanc 
does not impress strangers who visit the neighborhood for the 
first time — they arc rather surprised that the mountain is not 
higher. But let them climb the old king’s shoulder, and one 
by one how the mountains are left behind, as the traveller 
goes up into awful solitude. So with this Christ. We could 
have read this passage ending with the words ‘‘There am I 
in the midst of them,” and never felt its grandeur; but when 
we hear Peter, our own brother, who ought to have known all 
about human nature, we feel ashamed of him. ‘ ‘ How oft 
shall my brother sin against me and I forgive him — the self-com- 
placent dog ! “My brother sin against me?" Just like us ! It 
never occurred to Peter that he might sin against his brother. 
Standing there in conscious perfectness of character and disposition, 
will and thought, godly man, serene and most pious soul, he won- 
ders how often he has to play the great man by forgiving somebody 
else ! He starts from a wrong point. The question is not an in- 
nocent one, it is steeped in guilt if he did but know it ; but who- 
ever assumes his own peccability, who ever starts the question from 
the possibility that he. may be the offender ? 

Peter further discloses his littleness by making a suggestion as to 
the number of times— -“till seven times?” Now let us look at 
Mont Blanc and see how far this little molehill compares advanta- 
geously with the infinite majesty. “1 say not unto thee until 
seven times, but until seventy times seven.” My thought is not 
your thought, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord. For 
as the heaven is high above the earth, so are my thoughts higher 
than your thoughts. 

The answer a/)j>als me, the answer rejoices me. You have in this 
sentence an illustration of the severity and the goodness of God. 
We are called upon to forgive the repentant brother until seventy 
times seven. If he turn saying, “I repent,” forgive him. How 
oft? a countable number of times? No, an uncountable number 
of times ! Therein is the discipline most severe. Why, then, 
does the text rejoice me ? In this way ; because if God asks so 


FORGIVENESS FROM THE HEART. 


59 


much from me, whatwili he be prepared to be and to do himself in 
reference to my repentance ? I will point out his own words if 
the argument should grow very serious and high — laying my 
finger upon this celestial arithmetic, how I might plead with him ! 
The Lord is slow to anger, plenteous in forgiveness. He multiplies 
to pardon ; it is not a thin transparent wave he allows to flow over 
the black stone of my sin, but sea upon sea, Atlantic upon Atlantic 
he pours upon that blackness, letting it be found no more for ever. 
Let the wicked forsake his way and the unrighteous man his thoughts, 
and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon 
him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon, with multi- 
plied forgiveness, wave upon wave, billow upon billow of forgiv- 
ing love, and our sin shall be as a stone cast into the depths of the 
sea. 

Out of this reasoning Jesus brings the flower of a parable about 
the kingdom of heaven being likened unto a certain king which 
would take account of his seia’ants. Search that parable and 
you will see that the kingdom of heaven puts forward rights and 
claims, and insists upon their being met. There is no trifling with 
the law of righteousness in this parable : no mere bubble of senti- 
ment is this, but a living thing with a living claim. He who has 
nothing to pay must be sold, and payment must be made. Read 
this parable further, and you will see that whilst righteous claims 
are set forth the spirit of mercy is consulted. “ Have patience with 
me and I will pay thee all. ’ ' Observe, there is nothing sentimental 
here ; the debt is acknowledged, payment is promised, patience is 
invoked, and the king, grand in imperial majesty, becomes grander 
still in moral clemency. So the flower is rooted in the rocks, and 
the rocks arc rooted in the sun, and the sun is rooted in God. 

We need not pursue the bad sen’ant, who, being forgiven him- 
self failed to forgive another ; we must hasten to the solemn word 
which closes the parable. “ So likewise shall my heavenly Father 
3o also unto you, if ye from yoiir hearts forgive not every one his 
brother their trespasses.” There can be no doubt, then, whatever 
as to the operation of this law of retribution and pardon — a child 
can understand this parable ; no secret wizardry or black art prevents 
us from seeing God’s meaning in this great matter of human forgive- 
ness. There is no grammatical puzzle in the interpretation of this 
parable - do not seek to And any way out of it ; it comes to one of 



6o 


MATTHEW XVIII. 15-35. 


two things ; either forgive for Christ's sake and be forgiven, or do 
not forgive and be not forgiven. 

Wondrous is the word, “If ye from your hearts. ” Forgiveness 
is sometimes an affair of the lips, pardon is accompanied with a 
thousand reservations. I know of no men so disinclined to forgive- 
ness as professing Christians. How barbarians do I cannot tell, 
but professing Christians cannot forgive. Ministers of the gospel 
there are who have never known the joy of having forgiven a brother 
man. They forgive with parentheses, they forgive with great big^ 
following the reluctant words. They will forgive but not forget, 
they will watch, they will wait, they will hope, they will even hope 
for the best, but it will take a long time to restore confidence! 
Marvellous Christianity, — evangelical doctrine, diabolical temper. 
Spotless orthodo.xy, — black, hideous devilism. Forgiveness should 
be the delight of Christian men, Forgiveness must be based upon 
repentance— there must be confession or there cannot be pardon. 
“But if thy brother turn again, saying, I repent, forgive him’' — 
do not take six months to see how he behaves ; you must behave 
well, “If thy brother turn again saying “I repent, forgive him." 
Do not say, “It W'ill be a longtime before the old love comes back” 
— ^where would you be this day if God forgave you with. a distinct 
intimation that he was going to withhold his old love ? Happy he 
who can pray, ‘ ' Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that tres- 
pass against us,” That is the crux of prayer, — that is the supreme 
difficulty of intercession I 


HOMILETIC NOTE ON THE PARABLE. 

23-35. — The principal ideas suggested by this parable are 
I, The kingdom of heaven recognises individual responsibility , king 
would take account of his servants ; 2. The kingdom of heaven is a 
kingdom of justice , — “ his lord commanded him to be sold,” etc. (verse 
25) ; 3. The kingdom of heaven is a kingdom of mercy, — “ the lord of 
that servant was moved with compassion 4. The kingdom of heaven 
teaches that personal obligation should become z. social benefit ,-— who 
has been forgiven should forgive; 5. The kingdom of heaven having 
failed In mercy will have recourse to absolute justice, — “his lord was 
wroth, and delivered him to the tormentors, till he should pay all that 
was due unto him.” 



LXXIV. 


PRAYER. 

Al.MlGHTy God, how wonderful is thy word, and how dull is our un- 
derstanding ! We come that we may be inspired to read thy word, which 
is itself inspired, that so we may know its meaning and feel its gentle 
power. Thy word is truth ; but what is truth ? Behold, it is higher than 
the firmament, and brighter than all the stars. Help us to yearn after it 
in its own spirit, to cry mightily for it in earnest and believing desire ; 
and satisfy us with daily revelation as thou dost feed us with daily bread. 

We have come into thine house to find here what we cannot find other 
where. This is the house of our Father, the place of the shining of his 
countenance, and in this holy sanctuary is there rest for those that are ill 
at ease. Here thou dost cause the weary to sit down awhile that they 
may recover their breath, and here thou dost bind that which was broken 
down and heal it with heaven's own health. Here thou dost speak to the 
heart in tenderest music, and here thou withholdest nothing of the gospel 
that can redeem and liberate from its burden and its torment, and turn 
every affliction of life into a new and hopeful sacrament. This thou dost 
in Jesus Christ, in whom, indeed, thou doest all things. Centre of all. 
Sum and Total of all, Alpha, Omega, Beginning, Ending, Root and 
Branch, behold it is in him alone that we may find every answer to every 
question. On his shoulder is the key of the house of David, and in him 
is all authority and light. We have reconciliation by him, he speaks of 
forgiveness, from his lips we hear most tenderly and fully of all thy love, 
and to him we come for every answer to our sorrow, and for deliverance, 
complete and final, from the pressure of our sin. 

How wonderful is thy way! Behold thy Son is God and Man — 
Emmanuel, God with us. We cannot understand thee nor follow thee, 
and the poor line of our reason cannot sound the infinite fathoms of thy 
great wisdom. Thou bast made the dust into man ; the crumbled bread 
into a sacrificial body ; the wine left in the cup thou hast reddened into 
atoning blood ; of the Virgin thou hast made the Mother ; of Three thou 
hast made One, and of One Three. So dost thou contradict our reason 
and abase it with painful humiliation ; and yet above all dost thou reign 
in indivisible unity, Sovereign of the universe and Father of all. Lift 
up our thought to thyself ; give it enlargement and ennoblement; save 
us from all mean conceptions and unworthy views of thyself and thy uni- 
verse ; give us that bold and quiet and noble view and hold of all things 
which thou alone canst give, for thou only hast the keys of all fower. 



62 


FJ^AV£R. 


We have come to bless thee : one, sweetly, with subdued voice and 
pensive tone, and others with trumpets and instruments of brass, loud 
and ringing, because thou hast done great things for them ; but for one 
purpose we have all come ; the bruised reed to bless thee for healing, 
the smoking flax to thank thee that thou hast not extinguished its dying 
spark ; and all of us who have received much at thine hand have a song 
with which we would fain equal the gift if we could. Flear, then, we 
humbly ask thee, the utterance of every heart, the sighing of every spirit, 
the cry of the weak and the desire of the strong ; and according to our 
varied necessity let thy blessing come from the sanctuary and rest upon 
every one of us. Give the feeblest strength, give the meanest a standing 
before thee which we could have no other where, and let the wanderer 
feel that the great house door is still open, and the great Fatherly heart 
still yearning, and that even now the prodigal may return and sit down in 
his Father’s house. 

Hear all special praises for household mercies, for business prosperity, 
for deliverance from entanglements and embarrassments, and for such 
hopes as make the heart young and strong amid life’s burden and storms. 
Sanctify our afflictions, bring us the nearer together for our momentary 
separations, and may there be in all our hearts glowing love to him who 
for us bore the Cross. 

Thou knowest what we are, how thou hast made us ; for we are the 
work of thine hands, and we are not of our own fashioning. Thou 
knowest our characteristics ; thou knowest our special temptations, pe- 
culiar difficulties ; and thou wilt deal gently with the creatures of thine 
hand, for it is not In all thine heart to judge us with destruction. Lord, 
have mercy upon us ; Christ, have mercy upon us ; Spirit of the living 
God, dwell with us ; Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, come to our hearts 
and make them dwellings for the Holy One. 

And send sweet messages of love and hope to all for whom we ought 
to pray. Remember the little sick chamber, curtained and screened be- 
cause even the light is a pain, and speak to those whose strength is going. 
When their feet touch the last cold river, may the waters part and stand 
on heaps, that thy redeemed ones may go through as on dry ground. 
Pity those who have no pity on themselves — who break their father’s and 
their mother’s hearts, who break every commandment and insult every 
courtesy, and despoil the most sacred, associations of life. Only thy gos- 
pel, full of redeeming blood and redeeming love, can reach extremities so 
violent. Go with those who are upon the sea, and give them good voyag- 
ing and safe landing. Be with our dear ones who have become our cor- 
respondents, who once were our daily companions. The Lord give them 
favour in the sight of the people by whom they are surrounded, and may 
their letters to us be letters written with love and filled with light. Ak 
for the prisoner and the doomed man and the outcast and the blas- 
phemer, what can we say ? Thou knowest what we ought to say : take it, 
we pray^ee^as said in many words and with many tears, and out of the 



THE TEXT. 


63 


infinite fulness of thy grace do thou send us answers tliat shall make us 
glad. Amen. 

Matthew xix. 

1. And it came to pass, that when Jesus had finished these sayings, he 
departed from Galilee, and came into the coasts of Judaea beyond 
Jordan ; 

2. And great multitudes followed him ; and he healed them there. 

3. The Pharisees also came unto him, tempting him, and saying unto 
him, Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause ? 

4. And he answered and said unto them, Have ye not read, that he 
which made them at the beginning made them male and female, 

5. And said, For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and 
shall cleave to his wife : and they twain shall be one flesh ? 

6. Wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh. What therefore 
God hath joined together, let no man put asunder. 

7. They say unto him, Why did Moses then command to give a writing 
of divorcement, and to put her away ? 

8. He saith unto them, Moses because of the hardness of your hearts 
suffered you to put away your wives ; but from the beginning it was not 
so. 

9. And I say unto you, Whosoever shall put away his wife, except it 
be for fornication, and shall marry another, commilteth adultery ; and 
whoso marrieth her which is put away doth commit adultery. 

10. His disciples say unto him, If the case of the man be so with his 
w’ife, it is not good to marry, 

11. But he said unto them, All men cannot receive this saying, save 
they to whom it is given. 

12. For there are .some eunuchs, which were so born from their 
mother’s womb ; and there are some eunuchs, which were made eunuchs 
of men ; and there be eunuchs, which have made themselves eunuchs for 
the kingdom of heaven’s sake. He that is able to receive it, let him 
receive it. 

13. Then were there brought unto him little children, that he should 
put his hands on them, and pray : and the disciples rebuked them. 

14. But Jesus said, Suffer little children, and forbid them not, to come 
unto me ; for of such is the kingdom of heaven. 

15. And he laid his hands on them, and departed thence. 

16. And, behold, one came and said unto him. Good Master, what 
good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal life ? 

17. And he said unto him. Why callest thou me good? there is none 
good but one, that is, God ; but if thou wilt enter into life, keep the com* 
mandments. 

18. He saith unto him. Which ? Jesus said, Thou shalt do no murder, 

Thoii shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not 
bear false witness. : ^ 



64 . 


MATTHEW XJX. 


ig. Honour thy father and thy mother ; and, Thou shaft love thy neigh- 
bour as thyself. 

20. The young man saith unto him, All these things have I kept from 
my youth up : what lack I yet ? ‘ 

31. Jesus said unto him, If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell that thou 
hast, and give to the poor, and thou shaft have treasure in heaven ; and 
come and follow me, 

22. But when the young man heard that saying, he went away sorrow-, 
ful : for he had great possessions. 

23. Then said Jesus unto his disciples. Verily I say unto you, That a 
rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven. 

24. And again I say unto you, It is easier for a camel to go through 
the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. 

25. When his disciples heard it, they were exceedingly amazed, saying, 
Who then can be saved ? 

26. But Jesus beheld them, and said unto them, With men this is im- 
possible : but with God all things are possible. 

27. Then answered Peter and said unto him, Behold, we have forsaken 
all, and followed thee ; what shall we have therefore ? 

28. And Jesus said unto them, Verily I say unto you, That ye which 
have followed me, in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit in 
the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the 
twelve tribes of Israel. 

29. And every one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, 
or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my name’s sake, 
^hall receive an hundredfold, and shall, inherit everlasting life. 

30. But many that are first shall be last ; and the last shall be first. 

FUNDAMENTAL ANSWERS. 

J ESUS CHRIST sho\v.s himself perfectly familiar with subjects 
which apparently lay at an infinite distance from the purpose 
which he came to accomplish. The question of divorce and 
the salvation of the world would seem to have no connection. 
Does the Master appear to disadvantage in conversing upon this 
umamiliar theme? Surely he will decline to enter upon it ; he 
will silently leave it to the scribes, the men of letters, the lawyers, 
whose business it is to read all the stipulations and arrangements 
connected with such a subject. He will say, “I do not touch 
those themes. I have come for quite another purpose, and can- 
not attend to such questionings as yours.'* Surely he might 
have taken that course with some fitness. What does he do? 
He answers these men as if he had made the question of divorce 



65 


* CHRIST ON DIVORCE. 

the study of a lifetime. Is there no argument in that fact ? Did 
he require time to consider the knotty question ? Did he say, 
“ I would rather evade the subject ; but if you press me to its 
consideration,. I must take time to consult the old black-letter 
law” ? They touched the cloud and they evoked lightning ; they 
asked a tempting question and drew upon themselves, happily for 
the intelligence and direction of the world, a grand revelation. 
Let us see how Jesus deports himself under such tempting interro- 
gations regarding subjects which appear to lie at an infinite dis- 
tance from the cross which he came to lift up into a life-tree and 
a throne. 

Jesus Christ goes back to original facts and laws. You cannot 
settle anything by mere detail. No man can come wisely into a 
great controversy or a great study at some intermediate point. 
Herein it is that tve lose so much, and so often stultify and disap- 
point ourselves, by imagining that we can come' into a case in 
the middle of it — that we can understand a controversy or a dis- 
pute by looking at any one solitary point in it. Jesus Christ 
here shows w'hat we have had occasion to point out, that he is 
fundamental in his teaching, original in his conceptions — that he 
stands back at the right point for taking in the whole field ; and 
unless a man shall stand at a proper distance from a picture he 
cannot rightly view it, and unless he shall stand at the right point 
in history and in divine purpose, he cannot take in all the firma- 
ment of God’s light and dignity. 

See, then, how Jesus Christ does not ask questions about par- 
ticular persons and particular circumstances, but how he goes 
right back to the origin and start of things, and says everything 
must be judged by the divine purpose and by the divine intent and 
revelation. How grand he is, therefore, in moral tone! How 
he shakes off all vexing and petty details, and stands squarely and 
firmly on an eternal rock ! How comes it that we have so much 
shilly shallying in the Church and various view’s and little dis- 
pute.?, and narrow and vexing controversies } Simply because w'e 
undertake to deal w'ith deiails instead of going back to the begin- 
ning and ascertaining, so far as wo may, the clear purpose and 
intent of God. 

Having told them, ” Have ye not read that he which made 



66 


MATTHEW XIX. 


them at the beginning, made them male and female?” they said 
unto him, “ Why did Moses then command to give a writing of 
divorcement, and to put her away ?” That would puzzle him : 
he was but a peasant. He had not gone into such knotty ques- 
tions or pursued such intricate inquiries as these. Now he will 
be nonplussed, and stand in humiliating attitude. Look at 
him : have they smitten him dumb ? Is there no more lightning 
in that cloud ? Swiftly he answers, ‘ ‘ Moses, because of the 
hardness of your hearts, suffered you to put away your wives, but 
from the beginning it wus not so.” He knew all about the 
domestic law ; he was as familiar with it as if he had been a 
lawyer for half a century or more ; he knew what Moses had writ- 
ten. He answered on the spot. This wars not written after three 
months’ consideration : the whole w^ord was in him. Moses drew 
the word from him, and he who was the Original could best ac- 
count for the transcript. 

Wonderful, too, in point of philosophic grasp and moral sym- 
pathy ! “ Because of the hardness of your hearts, Moses suffered 

you to put away your wives. ” We have to do some things expedi- 
ently ; we have to make arrangements to meet peculiar circum- 
stances. The divine law sometimes takes a singular bend, so to 
say, in order to gather up certain peculiar human circumstances, 
and otherwise unmanageable eccentricities. Sometimes the divine 
law stoops to pick us up and give us another chance, for there is 
mercy always in supreme and complete righteousness. 

‘ ' But do not mistake, ’ ’ said Christ, ‘ ‘ a temporary arrangement 
for an oi'iginal purpose. Do not turn the exception into the rule. 
Do not make the subordinate into the supreme. From the 
ning it was not so.” How did he know? He ze/as the Begin- 
ning ! “lam Alpha and Omega!” From the first it was not 
so. When God made them male and female, no thought of a 
divorce was in his mind ; this w’as forced upon the universe by the 
blasphemy of the heart, by the impiety, the recklessness, the vio- 
lence of that which was almost divine at the beginning. This is 
the sour wine, this the spoiled milk, this the blackness of unim- 
aginable sin. 

No interpretation can be complete or profound which does not 
go back to the beginning. No man can understand the Apocalypse 
who has not read the book of Genesis. You cannot come into the 


ORIGINAL MEANINGS. 


67 


Bible about the middle of it, and begin to form an opinion of the 
divine revelation by reading some of the minor prophets. Revela- 
tion is a whole. It has a first word — a beginning ; and you must 
begin with the beginning and go steadily and calmly through the 
whole unfurlment of the divine thought, if you would have any 
grasp of it that will stand you in good stead amid the temptations 
of the Pharisees, and amid the insinuations and malign assaults 
of the enemy. 

Would we knowwhat man is ? We must go back to the begin- 
ning. I cannot consult the anatomist as to what man is. Human 
nature is not a modern discovery ; the human heart is not a yes- 
terday’s trick in mechanism. > Man is old, and I must go back to 
his birthday, and study him from the germ, if I can, that I may 
know his true meaning in the universe of God. Would I know 
what the Sabbath is ? I must not read some modern tract about 
it, or some recent attack upon it, nor must I consult the conveni- 
ence of to-day about it. If I want to know what the Sabbath is, 
I must go back to the beginyihig: and in the beginning it was 
God's day, God’s rest, God’s festival, God's rounding off and 
sphering out of labour and creation and service and sacrifice. 
So it must ever be, or it ceases to be a sabbath day at all, and 
becomes a mere ecclesiastical expedient to be twisted thus and so 
and otherwise, according to the suggestion of the moment. We 
become confused amidst details and cross-w'orkings, and the only 
true philosophical way of dealing with Man, with Marriage, with 
Life, with Law, is to go as far back as we can towards the begin- 
nings that we may take in field enough and set every object of con- 
templation in its proper perspective, and bring to bear upon it the 
only light w'hich can reveal its proportions. 

So with the idea of Saalfice. Is it not possible for men to dis- 
cuss sacrifice by beginning with the epistle to the Hebrews i Do 
not many persons attempt to settle the question of sacrifice by 
quoting individual and isolated texts } How then shall I under- 
stand this subject of sacrifice t By going back to the beginning. 
What was there in the beginning t This ! A Lamb slain before 
the foundation of the world. Not an after thought, notan inci- 
dent in history, not something measurable by our terms represen- 
tative of time ; but the original thought, the heavenly purpose, the 
atonement before the sin ! If the Cross had only come up as an 


68 


MATTHEW XIX. 


incident in history, then Christ’s death might have been a mur- 
der ; but with the shadow ot the Cross flung across the firmament 
from the beginning, we have the mystery and the sanctity of sacri- 
fice. Do not let us suppose, therefore, as Christian students, that 
we can settle any question, say even of divorce, or of domestic 
life or business relationships or church appointments, by coming 
into it about the middle or the end. We can only get the right 
grip of it and the right look of it by going back to the beginning, 
and setting ourselves as far as possible in opposition to the revealed 
appointments of God. We will return to this after considering 
the next two incidents. 

In the next incident there is a very tender scene. Such a lily 
is not to be painted. They brought unto “him little children 
that he should put his hands on them and pray — that is, their 
mothers brought the little children. Observe, they w'ere brought ; 
they did not come of themselves. Some of us are carried to God, 
some of us are brought in loving arms to Christ. We want to 
bring all men to Jesus. 'You have been sinning all these years, 
and your wife says, “ I will take him to Christ to-day in some 
great big prayer bolder than I have ever yet ventured to hurl at the 
very gate and throne of Heaven. I will mr;;;' him to-day.” 0 
Avoman, grand heart ! she is going to do it by persuasive violence, 
by gentle force. You, again, are a black sheep in the family. 
Your mother .says she will carry you to Christ ; she says she will 
believe for you if he will let her : she has so much faith she thinks 
that she could even include in the sw^eep of her trustful belief. 
0 man, young man, man of the black, thankless heart, think of 
that ! She wants to believe for you — to stretch her faith so that 
it will include both herself and you ! That ought to melt you 
into tears and bring you broken-heartedl}', with infinite contrition, 
to your mother and to your Saviour. Bring your little children to 
church, but do not make a burden or a punishment of it. Make 
them happjf in the church — make the church the very sunniest 
place they can go to : brmg them, don’t force them— draw them 
by love and by many a promise, and let the mother and the father 
and the preacher combine as often as possible to make the church 
its own attraction. 

Why was Jesus so fond of these little ones ? Did he pick out 


69 


THE VALUE OF LIFE. 


all the beautiful children, and say, “I would like to touch that 
one,” and ” Do let me speak to that sweet child” ? No : that is 
our selfishness. If you were going to make a home for little chil- 
dren, you would take nobody into it, if you could help it, but the 
pretty ones. That is not philanthropy ; that is seljishicss with a 
religious visor on. You gave the child a shilling, a toy, a kiss, 
because it wus comely. Ah, you yonrsel/ t)\Q toy ; you kissed 
yourself in that mean act What did Jesus do ? Sought out the 
lost, and if he gave one child a sw^eeter kiss and a tenderer em- 
brace than another, I know, by what else I have seen of him, that 
it was the ugly child, the shapeless, deformed one, the child that 
had fewest friends, the little creature that was cared least for. That 
was love : such love was Christ's. 

But why did he gather all these little flowers to him and bind 
them to his breast ? Does he give any reason for this ? He does : 
“ For of such is the kingdom of heaven. ” Oh, how he warmed 
to that kingdom in every aspect of it ! When you are in a foreign 
land, and you hear any one speaking English, you say, “How 
sweet ! how home-like ! I know that mother tongue ; I like the 
tone all the better for hearing it in this dreary country, of the lan- 
guage of which I do not know one word. ’ ’ And if he, the Christ 
of God, saw down here in this rough climate any flower such as 
he had seen grow upon the heavenly slopes, what wonder if he 
bent over it and bestowed upon it tenderest and fondest interest. 
This was Jesus Christ’s reason : whatever represented the king- 
dom of heaven was precious to him ; wherever he saw any trace 
or hint of it there he was in the fulness of his sympathy and in all 
the tenderness of his music. 

What was it that Jesus Christ loved in these little ones ? He 
loved the life. When shall we come to the proper conception of 
that boundless term.? The little oti&s lived ; that was enough. 
Society will not allow you to destroy even a child one hour old. 
The magistrate and the judge will lay severe hands upon you if 
you take away the life of a child that has just breathed. Why? 
It knows nothing, it can answer no question, it can make no ap- 
peal in words; and yet society rises up in indignation, with 
flu.shed face, with clenched hands, if some poor woman should 
stop the life she feels can only be a tragedy, and may possibly 
end in hell. If the magistrate \z so anxious about life, if society is 



70 


MATTHEW XJX, 


so protective of its little ones, shall the take any lower 

view ? 

The next case is not out of keeping with the former. Then 
came one “and said unto him. Good Master, what good thing 
shall I do that I may have eternal life?” What does Jesus Christ 
do ? Goes back to the beginning as in the two former cases — 
God’ s purpose in the case of divorce, the kingdom of heaven in 
the case of the little children, and God in the case of this young 
man. Jesus Christ goes back to the beginning of character^ — 
law ; Jesus Christ goes back to the beginning of law , — the com- 
mandments. He treats nothing in mere detail. He will not be 
vexed and distracted by momentary questions ; he. stands at the 
fount and origin of things and reads all life in the light of the 
divine purpose. Understand that all the great questions of human 
life have been answered from the heghming. The young man pro- 
posed the question as if some riew answer were about to be given. 
God has no new answer to give to any man. All great questions 
of the heart were answered before the heart began to speak. As 
sacrifice antedated sin, so the law antedated all character. Do not 
imagine that God has left all the great questions of the heart to be 
answered until now. All questions have been replied to, all light 
has been given that is necessary for the beginning of our superior 
and supreme education. 

The young man had kept all the commandments, and yet he 
had not kept one of them ! Is it possible to be so contradictory ? 
It is not only possible, it is actual in every life. We keep things 
in the letter and we break them in the spirit. A man may possi- 
bly be right in letters and syllables beyond all just impeachment, 
and yet in the spirit he may be breaking every law which he ap- 
parently embodies. A man is not necessarily in church when he 
is merely bodily present there. It is possible to be in church in 
the body and at the same moment to be a thousand miles away 
from the altar, transacting business that has but a very question- 
able relation to the sanctuary. 

In all these cases the disciples have something to say ; and, as 
usual, they belittle every occasion. You do not, I repeat, know 
how grand Christ is as a talker till you hear the piping, whining 
voice of the disciples. You may listen to Christ so much that you 


CHRIST'S VIEW OF CHILDREN. 


71 


think every other voice is as his own in tulness and music, suggest- 
ivcness and colour and sympathy. Not until you hear some other 
man speak do you know how grand was the voice of God’s Christ. 
Now, let us hear the disciples : their remarks will be instructive 
by their feebleness. 

Having heard the Master speak about divorce, the disciples say 
unto him, ‘ ‘ If the case of the man be so with his wife, it is not 
good to marry.” “Fools,” .said Christ, “you do not know 
what you are talking about” You cannot set aside the great 
pressures of nature — ^)'ou cannot set aside the original law and 
force of things. It is not for man to say, “ If that be so, then I 
think I will d(} something else.” Man is caught wdthin the sweep 
of a mighty law, and he cannot rid himself of the gravitation which 
God has brought to bear upon him to keep him in his right place. 

‘ ‘ It is good for a man not to marry*. ’ ’ It is no such little human- 
ity that Jesus Christ came to pamper and build up. Jesus came to 
make men. God said, “ Let us make man and, in the doing 
of that, he must pass through a thousand trials, and fight his way 
to conquest and tranquillity. 

Then the disciples intervene in the case of the little children. 
The disciples rebuked them, the disciples forbade them, the dis- 
ciples severally and jointly shook their heads at them. Oh, how 
these disciples do belittle whatever they touch ! How they throw 
discord into the music that was sweeping like a heaven-filling wind 
from the mouth of Christ, the great Revealer and Teacher ! We 
do too much forbidding There we commit many*- grave er- 

rors, and set up many hindrances in the way of honest and noble 
men. We think that if we put our veio upon something we have 
exercised a very noble function. The church should not love to 
forbid so much as to encourage. If the disciples could- have said, 
“ Behold, little children are being brought to our King ; make 
way, stand back for the army of the little and the beautiful,” they 
would have risen to something like the grandeur of the occasion. 
But they were afraid of noise ; they did not like children to cry 
in church. As if Jesus Christ had committed to memory some 
very beautiful literary* piece as a recitation which he was about to 
pronounce to the people, and he might be hampered, and forget 
where he was, and the whole thing would be lost ! But he was 
the Life. He would have turned the cry into a prayer ; he would 


72 


MATTHEW XIX. 

have founded upon the child's unconscious laughter some grand 
hope. When shall we speak the Master’s language with the 
Master's accent 

I'he disciples intervene in the third instance. And Peter said, 
“ Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed thee ; what shall we 
have therefore ?’ ’ How this man drags the stars out of heaven and 
tramples upon them! How he debases the ideality of life, the 
prophecy and the apocalypse of human being and education 1 
" We have forsaken all and an all it was to forsake— a few nets 
that required mending, an old boat that was not seaworthy : they 
had forsaken ALL ! 

Plave 3 ^ou left all, and done it with the right motive and with a 
right, strong, healthy heart? Then I promise you, in Christ’s 
name, kingdom and honour enough, in so far as the cause was 
Just and the motive good. 

How Jesus answered the man f Read the twenty- eighth and 
the twenty-ninth verses, and you will find a cataract of promise 
and pledge and gift in reply to a man who had left his broken 
nets and his poor ship. Yet the thirtieth verse says, “ Remem- 
ber, there are many that are first that may be last, and the last 
may be first ’ ’ Do not count upon all this property you are going 
to have until you have lived worthy of your great vocation. At 
the last you may fall, and he who left all at the first with a wrong 
motive may get nothing at the last, and so may be a pauper at both 
ends. 

Christ is equally great, whether in answering his enemies or his 
friends. Bold, complete, dignified, he answers, not as if strug- 
gling with a problem, but as if granting a revelaiion ! 


SEIJSOTED NOTES, 

Verse 7. — The sphere of Law is not the same with that of Duty. Many 
things are right, which are not to be sought by force ; and many things 
are wrong, which are not to be thus prevented. • Law may permit a 
wrong, lest by prohibiting it a greater wrong should be produced. The 
text of the law was interpreted differently by the Jewish lawyers. To the 
question proposed, the school of Hillel said, Yes! and the school of 
Scharamai, No I Deut. xxiv. i. 



NOTES. 


73 


Verse lO.— This section is peculiar to St. Matthew. The same term is 
used both literally and figuratively. There were some who might serve 
men and God better in the unmarried state ; but only some. 

16 Verse 13.— Christ did not baptize the children, and he never baptized 
grown persons. He declared that children shared with adults the holy 
instruction and influence, the safety and blessedness, of the kingdom ot 
Heaven. He taught that they were to be received and recognised by his 
disciples, as those to whom the kingdom of Heaven belonged. And he 
showed that symbolical services and prayers were proper and profitable 
for them. ' 

From the arrangement of the three Evangelists it appears that this con- 
versation took place in the last journey to Jerusalem. 

Verse 16, — The contents of this division are closely connected, and the 
first three sections are common to the three Evangelists, the last being 
peculiar to St. Matthew. In reply to the question proposed, our Lord 
first exposes a fundamental error ; all good is to be received, from God, 
who only is independently good. He then refers to the rule, which 
rightly applied would lead to the right cause. And finally he points to 
his own example, which all disciples were to follow in principle, and some 
in voluntary poverty. • 

Verse 23. — The disciples supposed that riches would be aids to, and 
rewards in, the kingdom of Christ, as in earthly kingdoms ; and they 
were surprised to learn that they were hindrances, to be surrendered, not 
sought for. 

Verse 28. — There would be great rewards ; but not of t^it kind expected, 
nor according to the supposed The new creation is in the future. 

Acts iii. 21 ; Rom. viii. 19; 2 Peter iii. 13 ; Rev. xxi. i. A similar 
promise to the Apostles is found, Luke xxii, 30. 


LXXV. 


PRAYER. 

Almighty God, we bless thee for all special days and sacred memo- 
ries ; they come to stimulate and encourage us in all holy things. We 
have seen the blackness of one day, its great cross and all its appalling 
solemnity, and now we stand in the brightness of a cloudless sky, rejoic- 
ing that the Lord is not in the tomb, but that be is risen and is qur Priest 
for evermore. We bless thee for seeing an open grave— -the tomb has 
been the great mystery of our experience, and the great pain and wonder 
of our forecast of life. We knew not what it was, but thou hast opened 
it and delivered the captive and set him on high and crowned him with 
immortality and infinite glory, and they that are Christ's shall be brought 
with him at the last : thou wilt leave no grave unsearched, and thy jewels 
shall be gathered together. All thy buried ones shall awake and arise 
and come forth out of the dust, and them that sleep in Jesus thou wilt 
bring with him. 

For all such hope we bless thee. This is a sure confidence and a source 
of exceeding strength. So now we can say, “ O death, where is thy sting ? 
O grave, where is thy victory ?” It was but a moment’s viuory, to be 
overcome with everlasting conquest, for death is svvaliow-<d up and the 
grave for ever forgotten. Help us to believe these sacked truths, to 
treasure them in our hearts, to draw from them inspiration in the time of 
weakness and fear and desolation, so that we may have songs in the 
night time and know not the pain and loneliness of orphanage. Thy rod 
and thy staff they comfort us ; thou boldest a great light over the valley 
of the shadow of death ; thou dost deliver with mighty deliverances all 
who put their whole trust in thy power and wisdom. This is our joy, our 
song, our unutterable delight, our ineffable peace- Lord, root us and 
ground us in these truths, and no stone shall fall upon us but to do us 
good ; and the coming of death shall be the coming of our deliverer. 

. Do thou give us to know the joy of resurrection in the heart. Raise 
again every buried hope, revive every tender affection, give life again to 
all our noblest resolutions and purest ambitions. May we, now bending 
before thine altar, remember the words of love and loyalty which we 
uttered to thee in the days now far gone ; and, recalling every one of 
these, with tender recollection and fondest gratitude, may we now rise 
into newness of life and be clothed with ever-enlarged affection towards 
thyself ; may our service be stimulated by all that is noble m our own 
recollection, as well as all that is gracious in thy tender love. 



THE TEXT, 


7 S 


Grant blessings unto the homes which we now represent. Come to every 
life that is here anti to every spirit that is present, and reveal thyself in 
tender glory. Thou wilt not dazzle us with intolerable light ; thou wilt 
shine upon us with subdued splendour, so that we may be able to bear the 
revelation and enjoy it, and feel in its warmth the prophecy of a still 
broader and warmer summer. Deliver us from all evil, we humbly pray 
thee, in the name and strength of liira who to-day ro.se again from the 
dead. May his power be in our hearts, mny his grace rule our spirits, 
may his love be the secret of our devotion and the defence of our char- 
acter-— may we in all things seek to glorify Christ, and to have no other 
purpose or ambition in the world. 

For all thy tender care our life long we bless thee. Our first breath 
was thine, our last thou wilt take unto thyself ; and all the days between 
thou wilt make precious by thy presence and memorable by thy redemp- 
tions and deliveranres. Give us confidence, we humbly pray thee, in 
these solemn land gracious truths — then shall our hearts be quiet and shall 
cease from fear, and our life shall be profoundest peace. 

Let thy blessing rest upon the land. God save the Queen, spare her 
life and increase her comfort and her joy. Direct all who lead our senti- 
ment, and give us our attitude amongst the nations of the earth. Be with 
all great men, with all rulers, judges, magistrates, and persons in 
authority, -with all who direct our thinking and lead our sentiment, and 
grant unto every man the assurance that his work is blest from on high. 
Disappoint those whose hearts are set on mischief, overrule events upon 
which we can exercise no decisive control, unfold our life unto us day by 
day, keep us from all impatience and impious curiosity, subdue within us 
the penetration that would spoil thy secrecy and transgress the mysteries 
of thy government ; give us a holy re.signation, a spirit of waiting, a calm 
assurance of faith, and the end shall see the meaning of it all, and in 
doing so thou wilt increase our love and heighten our song. Amen. 

Matthew sx. 1-16. 

1. For the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an house- 
holder, which went out early in the morning to hire labourers into his 
vineyard. 

2. And when he had agreed with the labourers for a penny a day, he 
sent them into his vineyard. 

3. And he went out about the third hour, and saw others standing idle 
in the market-place, 

4. And said unto them, Go ye also into the vineyard, and whatsoever 
is right, I will give you. And they went their way. 

5. Again he went out about the sixth and ninth hour, and did likewise. 

6. And about the eleventh hour he went out, and found others stand- 
ing idle, and saith unto them. Why stand ye here all the day idle ? 

7. They say unto him, Because no man hath hired us. He saith unto 


76 


MATTHEW XX. i-i6. 


them, Go ye also into the vineyard ; and wjiatsoever is right, that shall 
ye receive. 

8 . So when even was come, the lord of the vineyard saith unto his 
steward, Call the labourers, and give them their hire, beginning from the 
last unto the first. 

g. And when they came that were hired. about the eleventh hour, they 
received every man a penny. 

10. But when the first came, they supposed that they should have 
received more ; and they likewise received every man a penny. , 

11. And When they had received it, they murmured against the good- 
man of the house, 

12. Saying, These last have wrought but one hour, and thou hast made 
them equal unto us, which have borne the burden and heat of the day. 

13. But he answered one of them, and said. Friend, I do thee no 
wrong : didst not thou agree with me for a penny ? 

14. Take that thine is, and go thy way : I will give unto this last, even 
as unto thee. 

15. Is, it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own ? Is thine 
eye evil, because I am good ? 

16. So the last shall be first, and the first last : for many be called, but 
few chosen, 

THE LARGER JUSTICE. 

W E cannot understand this parable by itself : it is the puz- 
zle of all persons who come upon it without paying any 
attention to the circumstances which led up to it. You see from 
the grammatical construction of the first verse that this parable 
belongs to something else — “ Ehr the kingdom of heaven is like 
unto. ” We must therefore ask, What has given occasion to this 
method of presenting the kingdom of heaven ? Peter had put a 
selfish question. Having heard Christ’s speech about the rich 
man and his infinite difficulty in entering into the kingdom of 
God, Peter said to Jesus, ” Behold, we have forsaken all, and 
followed thee; what shall we have therefore He wanted his 
Christianity to his eye was wandering in the direction of re- 
sults, he wanted the pro quo. Now the parable was meant to 
show that the kingdom of heaven is not founded upon rules of 
barter : it is like unto a householder who proceeded upon a larger 
principle than had yet been tried, a principle which created antag- 
onism at first, but which in the end vindicated itself. 

Looking at this parable within its own limits, looking at it from 


THE REWARD FOR ALL, 


77 


a mere trade point of view, regarding it in the light of what we 
call political economy, it is absurd ; it touches the sense of justice 
very sharply in every man, and we are prepared to stand beside 
those who complain, and to say that they have a strong point in 
their favour. But the whole object of the parable is to show that 
there is to be no bargaining about the kingdom of heaven : it is 
not a question of time, of pennies, of understandings and cove- 
nants that can be measured in the market-place. By this parable 
Jc.sus Christ lifts the kingdom of heaven right away above all trade 
considerations and all economical criticisms, making a new thing 
of it altogether, and carrying itself up into a larger and completer 
justice than could be measured by our arithmetics and reckonings 
and commercial laws. God has one reward for all — he gives to 
every man a penny — the last is as enriched as the first, and the 
first as the last — so it seems to be. Yet it is not so. Jesus here 
takes delight in confounding us, utterly turning upside down all 
our favourite calculations and canons of justice and rules of barter. 
From end to end he upsets our regulations and calculations, and 
it was his delight to do so, to mystify and bewilder us, and to 
bring in a householder who contradicted every rule of every trade 
and every instinct of limited justice. 

Has God only one reward for all.? So in very deed it would 
seem from this parable. Do you tell me that the martyrs who 
went up to heaven in chariots of fire shall have no more than the 
child that died in its mother’s arms with a believing prayer, who 
had never encountered one difficulty or endured one great trial for 
Christ ? I-Ias the martyr a penny and the child a penny equally ? 
Shall the old worn-out missionary, who has gone to heathen lands 
.and suffered all the tlangers of travel and the perils of climate, and 
all the difficulties of strange relationship — shall he have no more 
than the man who has never gone out of his own country, but 
who has enjoyed Christianity as presented by and defended by the 
highest and richest civilisation of his day ? Has each tu have but 
the bare penny ? So it would seem on the face of this parable, 
and yet there is not , a word of truth in that representation. The 
martyr, and the man who ha.s died in what ina)- lae called the lux- 
ury of Christianity, cminot have the same in reality, though they 
may have the same in mere denomination of quantity, 


78 


MATTHEW XX. i-i6. 


Therein is a myster}^ easy of explanation, not, perhaps, easy to 
be set out in so many words ; but the martyr and the non-martyr, 
each receiving his penny, have not received the same, except in 
mere nominal value. We are rewarded as we go. We get a vic- 
toiy in eveiy fight, we have a heaven every sunset ; we are paid by 
the hour, by the moment, by the breathing. We get what we 
can receive, we are rewarded according to our capacity, and we are 
not at liberty, according to this parable, to estimate things by 
hours and by pennies and by time spent, but by another law 
which comes into revelation and operation oftentimes beyond the 
limits of mere words, so that we cannot explain the law to a man 
who has not actually lived under its beneficent operation. 

God will not have our calculations in the church. He says the 
first shall be last and the last first — what does he mean ? Does 
he mean, in a merely literal sense, that he will put Judas in the 
place of Peter and Peter in the place of Judas, and thus perform a 
little fantastic trick in arrangement and gradation in his kingdom ? 
No. What, then, does he mean ? To expel the whole system of 
reckoning from his church — to banish arithmetic, and all that 
little, dwarfed, mistaken reasoning that pretends to say how things 
should be in the eternal sphere. He takes your arithmetic out of 
your hand, and says, ‘‘ Make no use of this in the church.” He 
takes your dried-up, desiccated reason, that adds two and two, and 
says they make four, and he says, ‘ ‘ They do not, in the church : 
such reckoning in the market-place may be right enough, but in 
the church none of your two-and-two reasoning ; another law, 
wdder and higher, and all-comprehending, must rule the spirit and 
the administration of things Christian.” How, then, we are 
snuffed out, and how our knuckles are rapped by the iron rod, 
and how we are beaten back when we come to reckon up things 
by numbers and gradations and appointments, and all the arrange- 
ments of the Heavenly hierarchy ! We are reasoning by arithmetic, 
and Christ says, “He who has worked from sunrise to sundown 
shall have a penny ; he who has worked only one hour towards 
the w'estering of the sun shall have a penny. The first shall be 
last and the last first.” He takes delight in confounding our 
reckoning and making confusion of our mighty rea^)nings. If he 
did so in this parable only, it might be difficult to maintain the 
position, but it is the rule of his universe. Thus you say it was 


79 


A WIDER REVELATION, 


unjust on the part of the fean to give those labourers who came in 
at the eleventh hour as much as was given to those laljourers who 
went out early in the morning. Are you sure that your notion of 
the word jiistvi right? May not the w'ord “just” be a larger 
word than you have yet realized ? May we not need larger and 
truer definitions of common terms in order to enable us to rise to 
the height of these great Christian arguments ? Consider whether 
there is not a point in that suggestion. 

But see, and tell me how your idea of “just” vindicates itself 
under such circumstances as these. Here is a child a day old, and 
that child is tainted with a disease for which itself is in no degree 
accountable. Its life will be a pain, its days will be a burden, its 
future win be a cloud, and yet the little one is in no degree re- 
sponsible for the tremendous and insufferable infliction under 
which it groans. Is HoN-just.? And yet it is a fad. God will 
not accept our little ideas of justice : he always rebukes them. 
They are too narrow', they are too shallow, they do not bring in 
all the terms and elements which belong to the subject. We see 
within the limits of a da}\ we draw a little circle around u.s, and 
call that little circumference the sum-total of all things. God will 
show us a wider revelation some day : he will give us a right scale 
of measurement, and then we shall know that what we thought 
was injustice w'as but one section of a grand whole. He will 
“ vindicate eternal providence and justify his ways to men, ” 

Take, again, the notion of sin and everlasting punishment, and 
sec the very principle of this parable in active operation there. 
Let the case stand thus. Take what notion you please of the 
words “everlasting punishment,” — let them mean everlasting 
destruction, complete annihilation, or eternal torment ; the defini- 
tion of these terms has no relattion to what I am now about to 
say — but take them in any sense, and then answer whether it is 
just that a man who has lived a few years in a world he never 
asked to come into, and who has sinned those few' years all through, 
staining every moment of them witli blackness — what arc the 
moments but a handful,' w'hat are the days but a sharp sudden 
breathing and all is over, a spasm and the life i.s forgotten — and 
yet for these few day's’ sinning he shall be thrust into a lake of 
fire, shut up there for ever to burn in eternal consciousness of 
pain, or shall be snuffed, obliterated out of the universe, or shall 


So 


MATTHEW XX, i-i6. 


die a lingering and painful death in some hidden hell ? Where is 
the proportion P There is none. 

The parable is written upon all the economies of God's admin- 
istration. If it were a question of arithmetic, a question of quid 
pro quo — thus much sin and thus much punishment — there could 
be no proportion between the sin possible to a man in all his 
seventy years if he never slept an hour, if he cursed God in every 
throbbing moment of the seventy years— there could be no pro- 
portion betw'een that short blasphemy and infinite duration of 
penalty. So the Lord teaches us in this parable that we must not 
begin to reckon, and to audit God’s ways, and to carry forward 
sums, and bring up additions, and make an arithmetical calcula- 
tion of his providence and his way. The first shall be last and the 
last first — the missionary shall have nominally as much as the man 
who never went from home, and the martyr shall have the same 
penny in mere name that is given to the man who lived a life of 
Christian ease, useful enough within its own limits, but without 
one pang of martyr fear, without one throb of martyr suffering. 

So the parable is not written here once for all. It is the parable 
of the universe, it is the mystery of providence ; it shows itself as 
vividly in the higher and nobler aspect of reward as in the aspect 
of punishment. What relation, arithmetical or statistical, is there 
between helimng and eternal life P Some men seem as if they 
could not help believing. It comes, in a sense hardly to be ex- 
plained, natural to them to go to church and to believe and to be 
good. They seem to have no individual Devil that tears their life 
in twain every day, that blows away with hot hell-breath their de- 
votional breathings at the throne of the heavenly grace. They are 
not tortured, torn, mangled, pursued, but they fall with easy grace 
into \vays that are good. What relation is there between their 
believing and eternal honour, Heavenly paradises, celestial inheri- 
tances, immeasurable duration . of bliss t Why, if they had 
believed the moment they breathed, and if they had been singing 
hymns all their life, and doing deeds of charity through all the 
cycle of the seventy years, what relation could there possibly be 
between seventy years, how crowned soever with service and sacri- 
fice, and innumerable millions of ages. of reward? There is no 
relation. You cannot find out God to perfection in this matter, 
you cannot search him with arithmetic, you cannot make his ways 


ADMINISTRATION OF MERCY. 


8i 


I-' 


equal by statistical schedules, your barter laws are not known here. 
This is the great mysteiy of life — revelation of a wider justice, a 
glimpse of an infinite administration that will not stop to be meas- 
ured by the measurements of sense and time, and our dw'arfed 
and crippled justice. 

Jesus never departs from the spirit of this parable. Wherever 
we find him, he is living this parable out. Thus : “ How oft 
shall my brother sin against me and I forgive him ?’’ Peter will 
be arithmetical ; he will have two sines in his book ; he is deter- 
mined to reduce everything to logarithms ; “Plow oft shall my 
brother sin against me and I forgive him ?“ and in some mood 
of charity, very sublime to him, he says, suggestively, “ until seven 
times?” Jesus anticipates this very parable, condenses it into a 
sentence, says, “ Until seventy times seven.” What is the mean- 
ing of that representation ? The evident meaning is that there is 
to be no arithmeiic in the church, no reckoning by numbers, no 
algebraic symbol representing numerical value, no sign for “ equal 
to” in all the reckoning of the church. Thus is the justice of God 
evidently displayed on the one side of life as manifestly as on the 
other, for he himself will not take a cup of cold water without giv- 
ing back a cup of wdne for it. Where is the relation arithmetical ? 
There is none. He himself wall not be sick and imprisoned and 
visited without giving all heaven in return. Where is the barter 
equality ? There is none. 

These reflections lead up to the still grander thought that reason 
as such, in its carnal limitations and possibilities, has no place in 
the inner and upper sanctuary of divine purpose and thought. 
There we live by faith, there we say, “ Not my reason be done, but 
thy justice — not my will but thine be done.” 

So, then, we do the work without any reference to the reward. 
You who came to Christ full fifty years ago will have your penny 
— as well as the dying thief that had to bring only yesternight one 
foot out of hell. Will, you, then, be placed on equ'al terms ? It 
never can be so. Can a man of fine capacity and mind go along 
any road and have as the result of his walking only that which the 
common clodhopper has, \vho ‘ ‘ thought the moon no bigger than 
his father’s shield, and the visual line that girt him round the world’s 
extreme” ? Have they both enjoyment put,.,Qf the, same cir- 


82 


MA TTHEW JCX. r-i6. 


cumstances ? It is impossible. The walk to the philosopher is a 
walk in church, a climbing up the altar stairs. He sees angels, 
he hears voices, he is touched by: reverences, he is in the presence 
and sanctuary of God. Yet the road the same, the day the same 
— the road through a garden, the day the queenliest in all the 
summer train, yet in that walk one man found heaven, the other 
only a convenient road to a place to sleep in. 

So with Christian service. We get out of it according to our 
capacity. We are rewarded by the loork itself, and we are to enter 
into it in the spirit of love, and in no other spirit. Yet ye say the 
way of the Lord is not equal. Judging him by this parable you 
would come to false conclusions about the law of the kingdom of 
heaven. The teacliing of the parable is this ; no reckoning in 
numbers, no clever schedule-making in the church, no compara- 
tive statistics — banish the whole of them, and live in love. Beware 
of the statistician in the church : he will mislead you, though he 
says he takes the prose of facts. Tacts may be so represented as 
to be lies. The statist tells me that our service last year amounted 
to, say, ten thousand, and our service this year amounts to, say, 
two thousand, therefore he says we have gone down. He seems 
to have right upon his side : people say you cannot quarrel with 
figures. Within given limits that statement is perfectly true, but 
the limits themselves are wrong. Within given limits the earth 
stands still, and yet the earth never pauses for one moment. Within 
given limits 3 '-ou can draw a straight line upon the face of the earth, 
and yet, really and truly, no line upon a globe can be straight. I 
must therefore go further in my Judgment, and ask under what cir- 
cu?nstances the two thousand was realized .? Circumstances of great 
depression, circumstances of great trial and trouble, circumstances 
that made strong men tremble, and hopeful men begin to feel the 
coldness of a great fear, and under circumstances the result 
was two thousand. Under what circumstances the ten thousand .? 
Summer all the year round : the earth but touched, and she laughed 
in flowers and in fruits ; the hand but put out, and it brought back 
riches. Then the two tiiousand arc more tlian the ten ! The 
first .shall be la.st and the last first ! . 

Let God be judge, and banish foolish talk about the eleventh 
hour, and the first hour, and the heat and burden of the clay, and 
the penu)- given to each and all alike. You can make a tale cd 
distress out of. it, but in the soul of it God will Justify him’^elf. 



LXXVI. 


PRAYER. 

Almighty Goh, how can we bless thee for this Jesus Christ, who 
speaks of himself as the Son of Man ? Thus would he come very nearly 
to us ; calling himself the Son of God he stands away, but calling himself 
the Son of Man we feel his infinite strength drawing us into his own 
security. We bless thee every day for the sweetest name of Jesus : it 
makes the days bright and warm, it brings the summer of Heaven upon 
all the lands of time, it makes us glad in the night season, and rapturous 
in the valley. We thank thee for the cross : so ghastly, indeed, and yet 
so winsome ; having no beauty that we should desire it, and yet growing 
up out of its black root into infinite blossoming and beauty and fruitful- 
ness, the very tree of life set in the midst of the nations. Sacred cross, 
holy thing, made by man but accepted by God. As thou didst turn the 
bread into flesh and the wine into blood, so hast thou turned the barren 
wood into a great living tree. 

Thou dost turn all things to higher uses. Behold what manner of love 
thou hast bestowed even upon us that we should be called lhe,sons of 
God. And it doth not appear what we shall be ; thou dost not reveal our 
whole future to us in one great breadth of outlook, but day by day, yea, 
moment by moment, dost thou come to us with some new revealrnent, 
some unexpected light, some uncomprehended beauty. Thou art able to 
do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think : as the Heaven 
is high above the earth, so are thy thoughts higher than our thoughts. 
We are lame and blind, we are withered and dead : thou must do the 
whole miracle, we cannot even pray thee to do it, we can but ask thee 
dumbly, in the extremity of our helplessness, to do what thou wilt of thy 
clemency'. 

Thou always hast compassion. God is love — Jesus wept. Jesus, Son 
of Man, Son of God, have mercy on us. We would be good, and oh, 
thou knowest how subtle is the enemy and how hard the road. Our 
hearts leap up in great prayers and our lives yearn oftentimes to become 
holy sacrifices unto God, and yet our prayer Ls .stopped ere it reach thee, 
and our life is killed before it reach the altar. Yet thou kuowe.st it all, 
there is no surprise in Heaven : thou dost understand our constitution, 
thou knowest that we are but dust, a wind that cometh for ;i little time 
and then passeth away. What is our life? It is a vapour, dying whilst 
it burns and flickers in the air. Our breath is in our r!u.strils, we are 
tottering to the tomb, we are gropers in the darkness, and yet there are 



84 


MA TTHE W XX. 1 7-34. 


in us passions and impulses, strange forces that terrify us by their energy 
and their ardour. Surely we shall see the time of revelation, and enjoy 
the all-biightening light, and know why we are and what we are, and out 
of all the retrospect we shall gather some grand new hymn ineffable in 
sweetness, eternal in gratitude. 

Look upon us, poor bruised ones : we have come back from the week’s 
fight and we are tired ; we have left the week’s business and we would 
think awhile of Heaven. We have left behind us all that could bring 
down our whole soul to the earth, that we might look up from this place 
of the altar to the great heights, and inhale the very air of heaven. Pity 
us: carry the lambs in thy bosom, give special grace and uplifting of 
heart and hope to the man who wants to be better, and who dreads the 
return of the curse that slays him. Give light that shall be as a revela- 
tion from God to the child doomed to daily embarrassment and perplexity 
teach those who have knocked at the door and had no answer to knock 
again, and whilst they stand on the outside do thou speak comfortably to 
their waiting hearts. 

The Lord heal the sick, and be pitiful to those who have no friends, 
and come in by every door and window to the houses where sits the black 
desolation. Gi ve the young chastening suited to the enthusiasm of the 
moment : thou wilt not blow out the light of their hope, thou wilt rather 
watch it and rekindle it and give it strengthening, till it shall fulfil its 
type in all the glory of the final revelation. 

Look at those who are just goinn to drink of the cup of happiness, and 
are afraid it will never reach the lip. Lord, help them to drink deeply, 
for their life has been a weary one, and one draught of gladness will to- 
day lift them up into ecstasy. Be with our dear ones who are not here — 
in the sick chamber, in the nuisery, in the place of sad solitude, on the 
great sea, far away in the other countries of the globe — building up their 
homes, and blessing their firesides. 

The Lord unite us in the indissoluble fellowship of sympathy with the 
heart of Christ : wash us in his dear blood, precious blood, blood of sacri- 
fice, blood of atonement. Amen. 

Matthew xx. X 7 - 34 . 

17. And Jesus going up to Jerusalem took the twelve disciples apart in 
the way, and said unto them, 

18. Behold, we go up to Jerusalem ; and the Son of man shall be be- 
trayed unto the chief priests and unto the scribes, and they shall condemn 
him to death, 

19. And shall deliver him to the Gentiles to rhock, and to scourge, and 
to crucify him ; and the third day he shall rise again. 

20. Then came to him the mother of Zebedee’s children with her sons, 
worshipping him, and desiring a certain thing of him. 

21. And he said unto her, What wilt thou ? She saith unto him. Grant 



THE ELAN OE LIFE. 


85 


that these my two sons may sit, the one on thy right hand, and the other 
on the left, in thy kingdom. . 

22. But Jesus answered and said, Ye know not what ye ask. Are ye 
able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of, and to be baptized with the 
baptism that I am baptized with ? They say unto him, We are able. 

23. And he saith unto them. Ye shall drink indeed of my cup, and be 
baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with : but to sit on my right 
hand and on my left, is not mine to give, but it shall be given to them for 
whom it is prepared of my Father. 

24. And when the ten heard it, they were moved with indignation 
against the two brethren. 

25. But Jesus called them unto him, and said. Ye know that the princes 
of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great exer- 
cise authority upon them. 

26. But it shall not be so among you : but whosoever will be great 
among you. let him be your minister ; 

27. And whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant : 

28. Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to 
minister, and to give his life a ransom for many. 

29. And as they departed from Jericho, a great multitude followed him. 

30. And, behold, two blind men sitting by the way side, when they 

heard that Jesus passed by, cried out, saying, Have mercy on us, 0 Lord, 
thou son of David. ' 

31. And the multitude rebuked them, because they should hold their 
peace ; but they cried the more, saying, Have mercy on us, O Lord, thou 
son of David. 

32. And Jesus stood still, and called them, and said, What will ye that 
I shall do unto you ? 

33. They say unto him, Lord, that our eyes may be opened. 

34. So Jesus had compassion on them, and touched their eyes : and 
immediately their eyes received sight, and they followed him. 

THE PLAN OP LIFE. 

H e had told them this before ; he had indeed nothing else to 
tell them. Whatever else he said belonged to this pathetic 
and sublime revelation, and was, as compared with it, but as the 
small dust of the balance. Look what a plan this is. Life i.s a 
plan— you will have trouble and grievous unrest and dreams that 
will plague you like enemies at night, if you do not seize the all- 
restful idea that life is not a game of chance, but a Divine plan. 
I'he very hairs of your head are all numbered : not a sparrow 
falleth to the ground without your Father. Your troubles are all 
reckoned, your tears are all numbered. The valleys that you 


86 


MATTHEW XX. 17-34. 


would not have on the road were all excavated by the Divine hand. 
Every controversy, every cross wind, every cold steep climb up the 
barren rocks — all is included, fore-appointed, and is part of the 
Divine purpose. There hath no temptation befallen you but such 
as is common to man. With every temptation God will make a 
way of escape. Brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into divers 
temptations, for every trial has its own purpose and its own sweet 
outcome. He knoweth the way that I take, and when he hath 
tried me he will bring me forth as gold. This verse has about it 
all the beauty and massiveness of an architectural febric : it is not 
a heap of loose stones, it is a building with shape and polish and 
high utility. So is your life. 

Why then this restlessness and feverishness apd miserable dis ■ 
content ? Ail things work together for good to them that love 
God. Fear not, little flock : it is your Fathers good pleasure to 
give you the kingdom. Nevertheless the foundation of God 
standeth sure, having this seal, The Lord knoweth them that are 
His, “I am persuaded,” said one who spoke soberly and in- 
spiredly, “ that he which hath begun a good work in you will 
carr}'- it on until the day of redemption, completion, and perfect- 
ness.” There are parts of the plan you do not like, but you must 
deal with the plan as an entirety, and do not suppose that the 
unfinished house is the complete building. By-and-by it will be 
finished, and then God will allow you to say what you think of 
his high meaning. 

Observe this is a lohole plan, it is not pa7-f of a design, it is not 
one little patch plucked out of the pattern— the whole thing is 
here. I found an argument upon that circumstance. Nothing 
happened to Christ that is not in this paragraph. What do you 
make of that .? Remember the circumstances, recall and re-live 
the tragedy, and tell me what you say to this — that nothing oc- 
curred in any tittle of incident or throb of pain that is not in this 
paragraph. The going up, the betrayal, the condemnation, the 
mocking, scourging, crucifying, rising again — ^are all gone through 
before one cruel hand is laid upon him, or one mocker dares spit 
in that holy face. The man who can so deal with his future can- 
not be crucified, in any sense that will bring him into despair. He 
discounts the future ; its tragedies come to him in a sense as com- 
monplaces, its crosses are but punctuations of a literature which he 



CHRIST'S PREVISION. 


87 


himself has written, and perused, and approved as to its final out- 
come and significance. We are troubled because we have no great 
cdiilook : we take in no field of vision, our life comes into our 
house in little pieces, in mocking details, and not knowing what 
is going to come next, we fret ourselves wall sore chafing. The 
one thing we need not know is the detail, the great thing we may 
know is the solemn wholeness. 

Herein Jesus Christ endeavoured to strengthen the missionaries 
when he sent them out. We have seen in our examination of the 
great missionary charge, which he delivered in the tenth chapter 
of this gospel, that Jesus Christ spread all the future before his 
agents, told them of the mocking and the scourging and the 
delivering up to the Councils and banishment from the synagogues 
— ay, he made the wdnter of a grievous desolation howl with its 
bitter winds, before they took a step from the sanctuary of his own 
presence, and his owm immediate protection. That is how to 
live. 

Tell me how is this, that the whole thing is known to Jesus 
before it is done by tlie Jews and Gentiles ? He was mocked and 
scourged and spat upon and crucified and reviled, wdthin himself j 
so when it came to him, he received it with ineffable meekness and 
acquiescence in the Divine will. He was never surprised. He 
did not turn round and say, “ What — this indignity never entered 
into my contemplation of the sad event : smitten upon the head 
with a reed, struck on the cheek-bone with a clenched hand, spat 
upon.” — He never said, ” This did not come within my view 
when I looked upon the scene that was coming,” It was all 
reckoned, it w'as all expected, it was all borne wdth corresponding 
equanimity, — with the astounding peace which passeth under- 
standing. 

Surely he will walk now straight upon this great height, and have 
no more interruption. Such is not the case. In a moment he is 
pulled down from his elevation as we have seen him upon former 
occasions, ‘ ‘ Then came to him the mother of Zebedee’ s children 
with her sons, worshipping him, and desiring a certain thing of 
him. ’ ■' When have we ever seen the occasion kept up throughout 
his whole purpose and scheme in this life of Jesus Christ 1 Never. 
He had never climbed a mount of sublimity from which he is not 
brought down by some ruthless and mean hand. He was all but 


8S 


MATTHEW XT. 17-34. 


crucified in the nineteenth verse, and in the twentieth verse he is 
dragged down to answer a question of most selfish ambition. This 
action on the part of the mother of Zebedee’s children shows what 
viisconsimclions of a Divine plan are possible. We suppose that 
such and such misc^structions of human purpose never can be 
conceived. Read the life of Jesus Christ in answer to that vain 
imagination. It is possible to misconstrue God, it is possible to 
suppose that God is capable of mean ideas and selfish arrange- 
ments in his kingdom. What wonder that you and I should be 
misunderstood ? Is it amazing beyond all imagination that you 
and I should not be comprehended in our small circle, when we 
have before us the astounding fact that nearly every word of Jesus 
Christ’s was taken hold of at the wrong end and turned to impious 
uses ? 

How was this woman revealed } She was revealed at the point 
of unreasonableness. We may have a thousand fantastic dreamings 
in our hearts, and a most vile self-consciousness, and no one need 
know anything about it, but the moment we become unreasonable 
we show what sin really is, in some of its practical relations and 
aspects. Men who could not understand sin in its abstract relation 
to God, as a spiritual offence, understand it and hate it the mo- 
ment it assumes the attitude and exercises the prerogative of unrea- 
sonableness. We understand sin in some parts of its conjugation, 
not in its reality and essence. 

The ten were moved with indignation when they heard of the 
kingdom being so divided. They were not moved with indigna- 
tion until the point of unreasonableness was reached. We are 
shocked at points ; we do not take the right grasp and scope, but 
we are shocked at detail. It is possible to be more offended by a 
discourtesy tlmxhy crime. 

What will Jesus Christ do now ? He will lift up the occasion 
back to its grand level. He was never responsible for the lower- 
ing of the occasion. The moment he comes into it he lifts it up. 
In this instance he restored the occasion to its sublime level— 
hence he laid down the great law of meekness, self-crucifixion, and 
service in his kingdom. “ Whosoever wdll be great among you, 
let him be your minister ; and whosoever will be chief among you, 
let him be your servant : even as the Son of Man came not to be 


CIIRISl' AS A THIRD PERSON. 


% 

ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for 
many. ” That is the law of greatness in the Divine kingdom. 

Observe that in both these instances Jesus Christ speaks of him- 
self as a third person. Great is the mystery a®id great the gracious- 
ness of this Man. Of whom does he speak in the eighteenth verse 
— ‘ ‘ I'he Son of Man shall be betrayed unto the chief priests and 
unto the scribes?” Of whom does he .speak in the twenty-eighth 
verse-^“ Even as the Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, 
but to minister?” Why does he not speak directly of himself as 
I ? Do we not sometimes relieve our sorrows by this imperson- 
ality, by this enlargement of ounsclves into reprcsentativcnc.ss, and 
do we not sometimes .subdue what otlierwise might Ire an ambition 
by speaking of ourselves as types of a divine class or purpose ? He 
enlarges the occasion by this very use of the third person. Some- 
times he said “I — Me” with a wondrous pathos, but he most 
frequently called himself the Son of JMan when he spoke of his 
suffering and of his glory. He w'ould make all occasions grand : 
he would never draw pity upon the mere son of the carpenter, he 
would never have himself, in the littleness of his actuality and per- 
sonality, wept over and pitied as a mere atom. Whatever answer 
was made to his appeals must be made not to the local man, not 
to the Nazarene, not to the individual measurable by the vision 
that looked upon him, but to the Son of Man , — a term yet to be 
understood. Jesus Christ projects these great phrases, and the 
ages have to live up to them — the kingdom of heaven, the Son of 
]\Ian, the Son of God — these are . expressions w'hich do not empty 
upon us their w'hole meaning at once : they are age- words, they 
sj)read themselves over the throbbing seons of all time, and have 
their ministry for generation after generation until the close comes. 

We have spoken of murmuring men. We have just had before 
us'two disappointed men. Now there come before us two rejoicing 
men. Let us hasten to the sunny side of the histor}', where the 
light falls warmly and there is room enough to be glad in. ‘ ‘ Be- 
hold, tw'o blind men sitting by the way side, when they heard that 
Jesus pa.ssed by, cried out, saying,. Have mercy on us, O Lord, 
thou Son of David.” Again observe what has already attracted 
our attention. No man ever appealed to Jesus Christ for help of 


96 


MATTHEW XX. 17-34. 


this kind in the name of justice. We cannot too strongly keep 
that fact before the mind ; we have had it again and again in this 
history, and because it occurs again and again, the comment must 
be as frequent as the repetition of the incident. The blind men 
never said, “ We ha\# heard that thou didst cure a leper, therefore 
in the name of mipartialiiy we charge thee to heal us of our blind- 
ness,” Every suppliant came to Christ along the line of 7 nercy. 
So it must be to the very end. That God has pardoned one sinner 
for Christ’s sake is no reason why I should go to him and chal- 
lenge him in the name of justice to be as impartial to me as to other 
men. There are circumstances in life in which we stand alone, 
in the solemnity of perfect individualism, every man carrying his 
own burden, every man stung by Ids own sin, every man burnt in 
a hell of his own, and out of the pit of his own particular distress 
he must vehemently call upon God in the sweet name of mercy. 

Humanity asserts itself in these great cries ; in pain, in want, 
in helplessness, in conscious desolation, the soul is lifted above 
mere technicality. Trust the soul in those high moods of con 
scious need, confronting the great Giver : when the soul speaks 
then, it speaks in perfect eloquence. Do not attempt to pray until 
you feel the need, or you will be mocked by your very supplica. 
tion, and your religion will be turned into scepticism and your 
simulating piety wall become as sourness in the heart. Do not 
shut the eyes unless you really wish to see God, or the very dark- 
ness will become a burden upon your eyelids, and you will wonder 
that you should have undertaken a w'cariness so painful ; butw'hen 
consciously blind, halt, bruised, shattered, wounded, needy, and 
you hear that the Son of God passes by, then lift up the voice with 
great shouting, and vehemence and crying and tears, call for him, 
and you will know wiiether prayer is a device of the fancy, or a 
reality and a necessity of the life. 

Perhaps the powder of Jesus Christ is now exhausted, and there- 
fore he did not give to the mother of Zebedee’s children what she 
asked for. Now' and again he did say ” No” to men, but rarely. 
He would rather have said “Yes” a thousand times. Can he 
give any more .? Let me read. “ So Jesus had compassion.” I 
may pause there, for I know the rest. Once let his compassion be 
touched and his omnipotence goes along with it. Had he no 
compassion on the mother of Zebedee’s children ? None. No 



THE CONTROVERSY ABOUT BRAVER. 


9 ^ 


appeal was made to pity or to love. The moment we read that 
Jesus had compassion, we may close the book, for we know the 
rest, down to its uttermost line and hue. “ And he touched their 
eyes, and immediately their eyes received sight and they followed 
him.” It is well that this incident occursiimmediately after the 
conversation with the mother of Zebedee’s children. We won- 
dered if the power had run out, we began to be surprised at this 
answer, as supposing that mayhap the almightiness, as we imag- 
ined it, had exhausted itself, and now he was making up by much 
reasoning what was lacking in sterling strength. It is not so. 
His “Yes” would not be so grand if he could not say “No.” 
He is so complete to me that I follow him through Ins whole life, 
for here he says to a mother with her two children “ No,” and 
there he says to two blind men, “What do you want.’” 
“Sight.” “Then,” said Jesus, “ take it and see.” 

Now herein is the whole controversy about prayer settled, to my 
ow'n satisfaction. I pray God to let me sit sometimes on the right 
hand and sometimes on the left of the majesty of heaven, and he says 
“ No.’’ Then I pray him to pity me and take me up and heal 
my sicknesses and supply that which is lacking, and I approach 
him in the right spirit, humbly, self-renouncingly, hopefully, 
unable to see him because of the great hot tears that blind me, and 
yet sometimes seeing him the better for those waters of contrition. 
Then he says, “ What w'ilt thou Open thy mouth wide and I 
will fill it. What wilt thou ? and thou shalt have it even to the 
half of my kingdom — what wilt thou ?” Then seizing the occa- 
sion I tell him what my real necessity is, and he who said “ No” 
to my ambition, gives me to overflow when I plead my necessity 
and urge the plea of a burning pain. Ten thousand little prayers 
fall down upon the altar, from which they went feebly up, because 
they were inspired by ambition or vitiated and tainted by some 
selfisli purpose, whereas other praj'crs that went up for pardon and 
pity, help, light, succour — when I asked him to sit up all night 
because of the affliction that is in the house, to open mine eyes be- 
cause I could not see one step before me, and to lead on where 
the way was all bog — then he gave me great Amens which repro- 
nounced and answered the prayer of my aching heart. 



LXXVII. 


PRAYER. 

Almighty God, who can follow the way which thou dost take, or un- 
derstand the writing of thy books, or hear all the music of thy voice? 
We are always left behind : we cannot keep pace with thy going ; we are 
tired, and if thou didst not gather the lambs in thy bosom and carry them 
in thine arms, behold thy whole flock would be left in stony places. But 
thou art mindful of us with tender care : when we are weak then are we 
strong, because thou dost draw us still nearer to thine own almightiness. 
We have heard of thee from Jesus Christ, and he calls thee our Father : 
he hath revealed the Father, he told us that he himself came from the 
bosom of the Father — his speech about thee has made us glad with true 
joy. 

Thou hast numbered the very hairs of our head, thou hast given unto 
us all thy heart’s love, yea thou didst so love us as to give thine only-be- 
gotten Son to live, to die, to rise again, to pray all his breath in Heaven. 
He is our Priest and Intercessor and great King, as he was our Saviour 
when he died upon the cross and poured out his precious blood for the 
ransom and redemption of the world. Why do we not believe thee ? 
Behold some of us now in thine house are dumb and deaf and blind, and 
our hearts are as the nether millstone. Some of us have never wept at 
the cross, some of us have never felt the cleansing blood. Why are some 
altars left unlighted, why are some lives left among the beasts that perish ? 
We cannot understand this : it is too high for us and too deep and alto- 
gether out of our scope and reach. We mourn it. 

Thou art kind unto the unthankful and to the evil. Thou dost not 
pour thy rain upon the gardens of righteous men alone, nor dost thou 
confiae the shining of the sun to the windows of those that are open tow- 
ards the heavens in loving expectation and desire, but thou pourest thy 
rain upon good and bad, just and unjust, and the shining of the sun is an 
impartial glory. So surely is thy love in Christ ; did he not die for the 
whole’world, is he not sent into every country, has he not a gospel for 
every heart, did he not cry over the cities that rejected him, is not his 
heart filled with compassion towards all the children of men ? Why this 
hardness, why this imanswering rebellion of spirit? May we pray that 
now the mighty change may be accomplished— may we desire in loving 
prayer that now may be the day of salvation to all who have not yet 
uttered the oath of love or received the seal of pardon ? Come suddenly 
to thy people : now that we are all in one place may we be of one accord 


93 


THE TEXT 


— when Ave are of one accord thou wilt not withhold the pcntecostal bene- 
diction and revelation. 

Spirit of the living God, come now — Spirit of fire, answer us from the 
high Heavens — Spirit of life, let thine answer be unto us great and tender 
and full of satisfaction. Dry the tears of our sorrow, staunch our bleed- 
ing wounds, lift up those that are cast down, speak comforcably unto 
Jerusalem, let tender solaces recover our strength and messages from 
Heaven rekindle the lamp of our hope, O save us. Mighty One — draw 
us to thyself, and set not the foot of thy power upon any one of us, or we 
shall be crushed and destroyed, but open thine heart and bid us welcome 
to thy love, and shoiv us the meaning of the cross of Christ, and at the 
close of this, our waiting upon thee together, rvith one consent, may we 
have seen the King in his beauty and heard voices from Heaven. Amen. 

Matthew xxi. 1-16. 

1. And when they drew nigh unto Jerusalem, and were come to Beth- 
phage (on the road from Jericho, and to the east of Bethany) unto the 
mount of Olives, then sent Jesus two disciples, 

2. Saying unto them, Go into the village over against you, and straight- 
way ye shall find an ass tied, and a colt with her ; loose them, and bring 
them unto me. 

3- And if any man say aught unto you, ye shall say, The Lord hath 
need of them ; and straightway he will send them. 

4. All this w'as done (has come to pass) that it might be fulfilled which 
was spoken by the prophet, saying, 

5, Tell ye the daughter of Sion, Behold, thy King cometh unto thee, 
meek, and sitting upon an ass, and a colt the foal of an ass. 

f). And the disciples went, and did as Jesus commanded them, 

7. And brought the ass, and the colt, and put on them their clothes, 
and they set him thereon. 

8. And a very great multitude spread their garments in the way ; 
others cut down branches from the trees, and strawed them in the way, 

g. And the multitudes that went before, and that followed, cried, say- 
ing, Hosanna to the son of David : blessed is he that cometh in the name 
of the Lord ; Hosanna in the highest. 

10. And when he was come into Jerusalem, all the city was moved 
(filled with pilgrims at the beginning of Passover week), saying, Who is 
this? 

11. And the multitude said. This is Jesus the prophet of Nazareth of 
Galilee. 

12. And Jesus went into the temple of God, and cast out all them that 
sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the money- 
changers (Syrian, Egyptian, Greek, the money might be), and the seats 
of them that sold doves. 

13. And said unto them, It is written, My house shall be called the 



94 


MATTHEW XXI. i-i6. 


house of prayer ; but ye have made it a den of thieves (Palestine was 
then swarming with brigands). 

14. And the blind and the lanle came to him in the temple ; and he 
healed them. 

15. And when the chief priests and scribes saw the wonderful things 
that he did, and the children crying in the temple, and saying, Hosanna 
to the son of David, they were sore displeased, 

16. And said unto him, Hearest thou what these say ? And Jesus saith 
unto them, Yea ; have ye never read, Out of the mouths of babes and 
sucklings thou hast perfected praise ? 

THE ENTRY INTO THE CITY. 

H OW did he know where the ass was, and the colt, and in 
what condition they would be found ? This seems to be 
a little thing in the reading, but if you will think yourselves back 
into the exact details of the situation, even in this little bush you 
may find a fire that burns, but does not consume. How did Jesus 
know all the little things of which he spake in the course of his 
ministry upon earth ? How did he see Nathanael under the fig- 
tree, how did he read and picture his character and state it in 
words that startled the man himself t How did he know who it 
was in the tree looking down upon him in a spirit of curiosity? 
How knew he the man’s name and the man’s circumstances, and 
how did he dare say that he would be the man’s guest that day ? 
And by what power of vision does he see the place where the ass 
is, and the colt, the place where two ways meet, and the possibility 
of the owners being there ? How does he charge the disciples to 
explain their errand to any one who should interrogate them upon 
it ? We take these things too much as a matter of course, but dili- 
gently consider them, and weigh them, and bring them up to their 
proper and complete totality, and tell me if the upgathering of 
these fragments does not fill many baskets, and does not awaken 
all the wonder, of a religious kind, of which man is capable. 

Yet, with all this, he uses a word which seems to set it in singu- 
lar and all but painful contrast. He speaks as a man of 7ieed ; he 
who could see all things and foretell all things confesses to his per- 
sonal necessity. The head that carried all knowledge had not 
where to sleep, of its own right and title. And again in that very 
selksame sentence he used a word which throws the term ‘ ‘ need ’ ’ 
into striking contrast — T.ord. Such strange mixture do we find in 


95 


FULFILLING SCRIPTURE. 

the talk of this Man. Lord and need in the same sentence ! lie 
does not give up his royalty because of his necessity, nor does his 
royalty and Lordship save him from need. And yet what need 
could he have who had but to express the wish and it was instantly 
complied with ? It was a sweet necessity, it was the pain of that 
hunger which had wherewith to satisfy itself. Is not hunger a de- 
lightful sensation when the smoking feast is before you ? What 
hunger is that which betakes itself into a banqueting hall loaded 
with all that can delight the senses and satisfy the appetite ? 
What need could he have who had but to wish and it was done, 
to command and it stood fast, to express a desire and it hastened on 
eager feet and with passionate love to satisfy it even to overflow' ? 

A W'ondrous reality you w’ill find in all the life and speech of 
Jesus. He hides nothing. He is Lord and yet he has need ; he 
is Master, and yet he hath not where to lay his head : he com- 
mands with all the breadth and cmpha!5is of one w'ho w'ould rule 
W'orlds, and yet the foxes are better housed and the birds have 
nests to themselves, w'hile he is exile and wanderer, solitary as a 
homeless one. Nothing is j)ainted here, nothing veneered, noth- 
ing kept back : the stern, simple, absolute reality faces the reader 
and compels him, if he be a man of candid mind, to acknowledge 
that nothing is set down here by way of false allurement, but eveiy- 
thing is real, strong, simple, and open, to be tested by all the 
organs and instruments of reason. 

He is now about to fulfil a scripture, “ All this was done that 
it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet.” Ho did 
nothing extempomneously, his most sudden act was a flash from 
a volcano which it had taken an eternity to gather. There was all 
the appearance of freshness about everything he did, as if it had 
never been thought about before, and yet just as he planned this 
journey did he plan the whole scheme of things of which we form 
a more or less insignificant part. He foresaw the occasion, knew 
where to find the colt on w'hich he w'ould ride, sent for it, gave an 
answer by anticipation to any •man who asked the disciples w'hat 
they were doing. See in the little event before you, wdth all its 
exquisite shaping and adaptation, on a small scale what he has 
been doing on the scale of the universe. The very hairs of your 
head are all numbered, the inventory of the universe is in heaven, 
the Writer of the books that cannot be burned is in the skies, all 



96 


MATTHEW XXL i-i6. 


things are set down there in imperishable ink, and when the Son 
of Man is come in his glory and all the holy angels with him, then 
will he read all over the earth’s long story, so bloody, tragic, ter- 
rible, and yet, in his reading, they will fall into strange weird re- 
sonance and rhythm, and we shall find that even the storms have 
been caught up within the embrace of a law inspired of God, and 
tending to the blessedness and perfecting of the human race. 

Are there not many of us who would send Jesus Christ the colt 
from the stable, the horse from the field, the cattle from the pasture, 
the gold from the bank, and yet would not send ourself ri We 
might be proud to give him anything we have — he wants m, as we 
are. He seeks not yours, but you, and having you, he has yoiirs. 
Therein is a solemn truth, deep as life. It is not' enough to give 
him out of the hand, we must give him the hand itself. Ye are 
not your own, ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God 
in your body and in your spirit, which are Christ’s. We are not 
to subscribe, W'e are to sacrifice ; We are not to send something, we 
are to take ourself. We beseech you, therefore, brethren, by the 
mercies of God, that ye present yourselves as living sacrifices, holy, 
acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service. 

‘ ‘ And a very great multitude spread their garments in the way : 
others cut down branches from the trees and strawed them in the 
way, and the multitudes that went before and that followed cried.” 
They might do all that, and do nothing ! The men sent the colt : 
the great multitude spread their garments, others cut down 
branches, and all cried w'ith a loud voice, as if the King had come, 
and must be hailed in shouts of loyal delight All that might 
mean nothing, and yet, if it meant the right thing, it was itself 
necessary. What is there under it ? If the life be under it, then 
the enthusiasm is not only contagious, it is necessary, and it is 
most beautiful. Christ awakens enthusiasm ; the loyalty which is 
paid to Christ is a loyalty of passi6nate and uncontrollable love, it 
keeps back nothing, it considers that nothing has been done while 
anything remains to be attempted. Such love holds that nothing 
has been given whilst anything has been withheld. 

Where is passion to-day ? Who now is excited in a godly and 
healthy sense about Jesus Christ ? Yet he is the Man of the day. 



WEEPING 0 VER THE CITY. 


97 


books written about him are still read and asked for, and are 
greatly multiplied. ■ Still he is the puzzle of the times : he over- 
looks every shoulder, breathes upon every honest labourer, speaks 
comfortably to every suffering heart, divides the burden and multi- 
plies the joy of every life. Are we not too cold about him ? Are 
we not too respectable, in the mercl}'- conventional sense of that 
term, in the arrangement and expression of our piety .? Are we 
not as successors, the unnamed but real posterit}?- of the Scribes 
and the Pharisees who were appalled by the enthusiasm which 
Jesus Christ evoked ? Consider this well. I do not want any of 
you to spread your garments in the way and cut down branches 
from the trees, and to join the great cry, unless these things ex- 
press a real and healthy condition of the Yet it must not 
be left unsaid, that where there is absolute, unreserved consecra- 
tion of the soul, there will be corresponding expression in the 
whole demeanor of the life. 

“ And when he was come into Jerusalem, all the city was 
moved," — but Luke puts in an incident which Matthew omits : 
goi'Rg towards- the city, unable to see it because of a shoulder of 
the hill, he turns suddenly round, and there was beauteous queenly 
Jerusalem, great light shining upon it and covering it as with a 
robe of purest snow. And yonder were the marble pinnacles, and 
yonder the gilded roof of the temple— such a sight in form of a 
city never flashed on human eyes. Yet the Evangelist saj’s, ‘ ‘ And 
when he came near the city he wept over it." He never wept for 
himself : when he told the disciples that he was going up to Jeru- 
salem to be betrayed into the hands of men who should mock him 
and scourge him and crucify him, no tear stood in his eye — but 
when he was come near the city, he wept over it, and said. 
“ Hadst thou known, even thou, in this thy day the things that 
belong unto thy peace ! But now they are hidden from thee. ’ ’ 
When he stood in the judgment hall, when he was smitten with 
the reed, when men spat upon his face, when they plucked the 
hair from his cheek, he wept not — but when he was come near 
the city, he wept over it, and said, “ O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how 
often would I have gathered thee, but thou wouldst not ! It is 
now too late. " 

He weeps over you, hard hearts ; he weeps over you, disobedi- 


98 


MATTHEW Xr/. i-i6. 

ent and self-pleasing will and purpose of life. No scourge could 
make him cry for himself, no nails driven into his hands ever 
caused him to weep weakly for the pain's sake ; but when he was 
come nigh unto the city he wept over it. Those tears were the 
prelusive drops of a thunder shower that destroyed the (jucen of 
cities : they went before the great black thunder drops that fell on 
the hot streets — and as he cries over us to-night his tears have the 
same meaning — he will rain fire and brimstone from heaven upon 
those that continue their sin beyond the reach of his patience. It 
is one of two things, it is falling upon that stone and being 
broken, or having the stone falling upon us and being ground to 
powder. 

“And when he was come into Jerusalem, all the city was 
moved, saying, Who is this .?’ ’ Cities are moved by various causes. 
Let news of a great mar be reported in London, and, great as the 
city is, it will be moved from centre to circumference. Let a 
great vim die, even in a green old age, and the city, tlie country, 
the civilised world feels that the cedar has fallen. It is a great 
thing indeed to have such responsibility attached to power aifd to 
life, that when the man dies the world shall feel itself poorer Ire- 
cause of his withdrawment. The death that eclipses the gaiety of 
nations, that stops the mad dance half through, that makes the 
winebibber set down his goblet half drained, that interferes with 
the business of the day, — marvellous indeed is such a fact. We 
cannot hope to attain that infiuence, but we can obtain a Iretter. 
You may so live as to be missed by your family for your good 
deeds, you ma}' so live that the house will be empty without you, 
and those who loved you will have no more Joy under that roof 
because you have gone away. 

The whole city was moved. Here was a Man who could move 
a city and could satisfy every emotion he excited. Some men 
cannot control the excitement which they raise — others raise it 
only to mock it by grievous disappointment. Here is a Man wlio 
moves the city to the uttermost depths of its feeling and expecta- 
tion, and having stirred the city life into one vehement prayer, 
has the Amen upon his lips which can satisfy . its every petition. 
Would that whole cities would cry unto him ! That will never be 
done until individuals as such approach him in the right spirit. 



99 


PRAISING GOD IN SONG. 

Do not therefore let us yearn for the movement of whole cities, 
but. begin where we can, by every individual heart calling him 
“ Lord,” and crying unto him as Saviour and King. Speak you 
the holy word just now ; poor broken bleeding heart — call him 
Saviour: strong man without a tremor of weakness, a ptmg of 
pain, or an emotion of fear or distress, go over to his side and 
bless him for your strength, and offer it as a sacrifice upon his 
altar. And you, little children, may also join this act of loyal 
worship.' 

“ And when the chief priests and scribes saw the wonderful 
things that he did, and the children crying in the temple,” — those 
children were boys : it is a masculine noun-— but, little girls, you 
may join the hymn. Boys and girls of every condition in life, 
rich and poor, well instructed and ignorant, you may bring your 
tribute of praise. You may be rebuked : the priests and scribes 
when they heard the boys crying in the temple and saying, “ Ho- 
sanna to the son of David,’ ’ were sore displeased. The boys were 
choristers in the- temple : they were paid to sing, and they did not 
rece'ive their money for the purpose of crying “ Hosanna” to a 
foreigner, especially this Jesus of Nazareth and Galilee, and they 
thought that Christ himself ought to interfere and rebuke such 
enthusiasm. They said unto him, “ Hearest thou what these 
say f” as if he did not hear everything. We are told that the great 
musician hears every instrument in the whole band. We have 
heard of one great conductor throwing up his baton because one 
instrument was not doing its duty in the great musical fra3C He 
stopped, saying “ Flageolet.” The burst of music in all its swing, 
and fulness, and grandeur, and expressiveness, was not pleasing 
him because one small flageolet was missing its duty. As if Jesus 
did not hear who was singing in the congregation and who is not 
singing, as well, and it pains him to see some who ought to be 
singing who are not uniting their voices in the common praise. 
Yet singing is not a question of the voice only ; do not say a man 
is not worshipping God in the song because he is not singing ; 
one sings sympathetically as well as vocally. You sing with the 
spirit and with the understanding as well as with the voice. It is 
an error of a very mischievous kind to suppose that a man is not 
singing or praising God simply because he is not doing so vocally. 



loo MATTHEW XXL 

I sing best with the greatest singer : when I hear one who can sing 
1 sing with the singer. It carries my soul aloft : every heart-throb 
of mine heightens the great song. 

Jesus Christ answered these men from their own standpoint, 
Obsen'e, they were persons whose business it Avas to read the law 
and understand it, and again and again in his life Jesus Christ 
turned round upon these men and said, “ Have ye never read 
They were spending a lifetime in reading the letter, and they sel- 
dom touched the vital spirit. These children were not singing 
extemporaneously; it was not a piece of haphazard work in the 
temple ; this utterance of the boys was a fulfilment of prophecy, 
“ Have ye never read, Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings 
thou hast perfected praise”.? He had read everything. How 
did he come — -he was not a man of letters— to have read every- 
thing .? Because he had written ever}dhing. He was not the 
reader only, but the writer : he inspired Moses. “If ye believed 
Moses, ye would have believed me, for he Avrote of me.” And 
beginning at Mose.s and all the prophets and the psalms, he ex- 
pounded unto his disciples, in all the scriptures, the things con- 
cerning himself. 

Jesus Christ ahAnys said a kind word about the children. The 
disciples rebuked them, and he protected the dear little creatures. 
The priests and the scribes were sore distressed because of the chil- 
dren’s A'oices, and Jesus said, “They are fulfilling prophecy.” 
When did he turn any one aAvay who ' Avould offer praise to his 
name or express gratitude for his goodne.ss ,? What I Avant to do 
myself is not to send him my colt or gold or flowers or branches 
or clothes, and not to join only in some loud IoamI cry of delight, 
but to offer him my poor, wounded, guilty SELF. If he will 
accept me, cleanse me, make me without spot or wrinkle or any 
such thing, purify me by the washing and cleansing of his own 
blood, then the hou.se is his, and the garden, and the business, 
and the bank. Having secured the heart, he has secured all. 



LXXVIII. 


PRAYER. 

Almighty God, if we put our trust in thee, our souls shall know no 
unrest or pain, for thou wilt bring forth our righteousness as the light 
and our judgment as the noonday. Thou dost carry all government, and 
none can rule but by thy permission — ^behold, every sovereignty is part of 
thine own ; thou art the reigning One and there is none higher than the 
Father. Help us to put our whole trust in this sacred doctrine, that our 
souls may not be driven about and tossed with every wind that blows, but 
may enjoy a sense of security, and enter into the mystery of the peace of 
God. Thou dost hide us in thy pavilion, thou dost surround us with in- 
violable security, thine eye is upon us for good, thine hand is laid upon 
us that we may be defended. Help us to read the miracles of thy provi- 
dence, to understand them as signs given to the sons of men from Heaven, 
and may we so read thy wonderful works as to enlarge in happy contin- 
uation the word which thou hast written in thy Book for our daily in- 
struction. 

Thy law is one through all the ages : it is broken only to our senses by 
sleep and wakefulness, by surprises which reveal our ignorance, but from 
thy throne, ever continued, ever consistent, full of love, shining with 
beneficence, the purpose of God, the election and decree of Heaven. 
That we may rest on the rocks is our prayer, that our feet may stand 
upon the eternal granite of thy righteousness is our heart’s desire-then 
we shall have peace and sweet content and bright hope, and our heart 
shall be as the church of the angels. 

We have; come to sing our united hymn in thy hearing, to make com- 
mon prayer at the foot of thy throne, to lift up the voice of our thanks- 
giving without restraint, and to plead with thee that as our day, so our 
strength may be, and that according to the burden we have to carry may 
be thy sustaining grace. We come by the appointed way : Jesus said, “ I 
am the door” — we enter by that living door, we come by the cross of 
Christ, upon us and upon every syllable of our prayer is the sacred blood 
of the atoning sacrifice ; so shall we prevail with thee, and our hymn and 
our prayer shall have audience in Heaven. 

Pity us, for we are here but a little while, and whilst we are here we 
are digging our grave. Shed thy tears upon us, but withhold the glances 
of thy judgment, for we are as a vapour that cometh for a little time and 
then vanisheth away ; yet hast thou given unto us wondrous capacities — 
of sin, of knowledge, of service, of homage to thy throne, and of corn- 



MATTHEW 17-22. 


plete identification with every purpose that stirred the heart of the Re- 
deemer of the world. May those capacities be sanctified, may fire from 
Heaven take away from them everything that is impure, and may the 
Holy Ghost, the fire of the universe, the flame of light and of glory, dwell 
within us, subduing our will, enlightening our mind, leading our purified 
heart into higher rapture and more loving service. 

Thou knovvest all the purposes of our life ; the plans we have laid out 
for to-morrow thou hast read in every line and shape ; ail the secret 
things in our heart are written with sunbeams on the walls of Heaven— 
thou knowest us altogether, our purposed journeyings and voyagings, our 
breakings up of immediate relations that they may be renewed in still 
tenderer embraces, our commercial enterprises, our family designs, every 
trouble that depresses, every light that brings us joy — all is known unto 
thee : thou art ruling and directing all. We pray for the spirit of resigna- 
tion and trust and complete love, that we may rest in the Lord and com- 
mit our way unto the Father. 

Take away from us the delight of our eyes, the pride of our life, the joy 
of our home, and the staff of our pilgrimage if thou wilt, but take not thy 
Holy Spirit from us. We yield ourselves into thine hand ; they are well 
kept whom thou dost keep. Make our bed in our aflHiction ; when the 
enemy is strongest, be thou mightier than he, and when he would come 
in as a flood, lift up thy Spirit as a standard against him. 

Send messages from thy table to ail the guests who would have been 
here but cannot, because of suffering, in mind, body, or estate. Speak 
comfortably to such in their solitude, turn their tears into blessings, and 
may their weakness become the point of their strength. Comfort all that 
mourn, visit those whom others avoid, let the helplessness of the weak be 
the reason of thy coming to them in the almightiness of thy grace. Watch 
all the seas of the globe, search all the lands where our loved ones are, 
find out where they be that messages of love may reach them— and as for 
those for whom we dare hardly pray, so much in hell, do thou search for 
them, and seek them, and bring them back— thou, the loving Shepherd, 
the wounded Man, the sacrificed Priest, the Son of God. Amen. 

Matthew xxi. 17-22. 

17. And he left them, and went out of the city into Bethany ; and he 
lodged there. 

18. Now in the morning, as he returned into the city, he hungered. 

19. And when he saw a fig tree in the way, he came to it, and found 
nothing thereon, but leaves only, and said unto it, Let no fruit grow on 
thee henceforward for ever. And presently the fig tree withered away. 

20. And when the disciples saw it, they marvelled, saying, How soon 
is the fig tree withered away ! 

21. Jesus answered and said unto them. Verily I say unto you, If 
ye have faith, and doubt not, yet shall not only do this which is done to 



THE HOME AT BETHANY. 


103 


the fig tree, but also if ye shall say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, 
and be thou cast into the sea ; it shall be done. 

22. And all things, whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye 
shall receive. 

THE CONDEMNATION OP USELESSNESS. 

F rom the dty to the milage — it seems to be but a short 
journey ; in point of mileage indeed it was nothing but an 
easy walk. From the city into Bethany — how far was that ? Do 
not tell me the distance in miles, statute or geographical — such 
journeys have not to be measured by arithmetical instruments. 
From the city to Bethany, was from a battle field to a home — how 
far is that Y From the city to Bethany was a journey from strange- 
ness to friendship — who can lay a line upon that immeasurable 
distance ? From the city to Bethany, a journey from tumult and 
riot and murder to love and rest and tender ministry — who can 
lay a line upon that diameter and announce its length in miles ? 
None. 

It was worth while making that little change for one night— one 
quiet look upward, one brief solemn pause iir the rush of life, that 
the head might turn towards the stars and the firmament and the 
serenities of the upper places. The house at Bethany was not 
grand, but the home was lined with the gold of love. We want 
such a home when the stress is heavy upon us — tears could be 
.shed there without being misunderstood, and the heart could tell 
its whole talc or remain in total silence, just as the mood deter- 
mined, and there would be no misconstruction. It was a church 
in the rocks, it was a sweet sanctuaiy, just out of the great high 
road of life’s business and sacrifice. Can you retire to such a 
nest t liappy is your lot ! He who can find a Bethany, a home, 
a rest-place, a Sabbath in the midst of the week, can bear his bur- 
dens with equanimity, and grace and hope. 

But we must return. In the seventeenth verse wc read, “ And 
he left them and went out of the city," and in the eighteenth 
verse we read, “ As he returned into the city." The village must 
not detain us long — ^the village for rest, the city for toil. Once 
the disciples said unto him by the mouth of their spokesman, 



104 


MATTHEW XXL 17-22. 


“ Lord, it is good to be here : let us build.” He himself could 
have said that morning in Bethany," It is good to be here : warm 
is this home, the walls are like arms round about me. Why not 
tarry here and rest till the storm blow away, and all God's great 
sky shine again in translucent blue above my head ?” But he 
returned. 

And as he returned, he hungered. See the wonderful natural- 
ness of this story : it lives in the very words which tell it. Truly 
this Jesus was human; he never w^as at pains to conceal his 
humanity, he drew no screen around his weakness, saying, ” My 
followers must not see me in this low condition.” At Sychar he 
told a woman that he thirsted; on the road from Bethany he 
hungered ; on the sea he fell asleep. About the humanity of 
Christ there can be no doubt : his deity is the greater to me be- 
cause of his humanity. The foot of this ladder is upon the earth : 
lean begin at certain points in this history and find my way up- 
ward to other and remoter points. 

The circumstance of the fig-tree must be treated in this particu- 
lar connection as illustrative of the inner life of Christ. His treat- 
ment of that tree was a revelation of himself as he was at that 
moment. Jesus Christ never did other than reproduce his real 
self at the time : whatever he did is the counterpart and outer sign 
of his own mental and spiritual condition at the time of revela- 
tion. In the action find the spirit. Read the life of Christ in 
the light of this sugge.stion, and it will be its own commentary and 
broadest and clearest exposition. Every act was a translation of 
the Man. See how true this is in the case before us. Christ 
alwaj's looked for the fulfilment of the Divine idea in everything. 
The divine idea of the fig-tree was not leaves, but fruit. There 
was no fruit, and therefore the word of destruction was spoken. 
Consider how near he was to the fulfilment of the divine idea 
w'hich he himself represented, and a man so burningly in earnest 
could brook no disappointment then. His own life was too hot 
to stand the mockery of any disappointment. He came to the 
fig-tree searching for fruit ; he found nothing but leaves, and he 
spoke the word that withered it aw'ay. 

What have we here but a great law, namely, that the earnestness 



THE EFFECT OF CHRISTS INTENSITY. 105 

of the living determines his view of everything round about 
him ? Jesus Christ was always earnest, but even his earnestness 
acquired a new accent and intensity as the baptism of blood came 
nearer. “ I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how am I 
straitened till it be accomplished. ’ ’ That was the mood of the 
Man : he could not brook any irony of a practical kind then. We 
know what this is in our own life, when high pressure is put upon 
us, when all life is centred in one effort, when all the energies of 
our nature are wakened up and are bearing upon one object w'hick 
we consider worthy of them — how impatient we then are with 
mockery and disappointment and trifling of every kind ! We who 
under other circumstances could pause and wait and wonder and 
excuse and suggest mitigations of the case, can brook no delay or 
mockery when the blood is at its supreme heat. 

Jesus Christ showed this in his cleansing of the temple for the 
second time. We wondered how the men consented to have 
themselves driven out of the place. You should have seen the 
driver, that would have explained all : you should have seen the 
royalty of his look and heard the sovereignty of his tone, and felt 
the fervour of his prayer. There are times when vice owns the 
supremacy of virtue : Jesus Christ now realised one of those times 
when he heard in the temple the voices of the brigands who 
haunted the limestone caverns of Judea : the calling of their mer- 
chandise and the clamour of their selfishness roused his indigna- 
tion, and he scourged the ruflians out of the house they had 
polluted. 

This was the temper of his mind just then, when he wanted the 
ass, and the colt, the foal of the ass — “ Say the Lord hath need of 
him, and he will be given up.” In that temper he came into the 
temple and cleansed it, in that temper he looked upon the disap- 
pointing fig-tree and withered it. All this is but a transcript of 
himself. Everything, in the judgment of Christ must be real, 
useful, and satisfying according to its nature. His very hunger 
was a judgment at that time. He did not wither away the poor 
Samaritan woman who parleyed with him about a draught of 
water : he had more time on his hands — the cross was farther off, 
it was a time of revelation , rather than of judgment, and he spoke 
kindly true words to her and held a mirror up to her in which she 
saw herself in all the length and mystery of her lifetime. He who 



io6 


MATTHEW XXI. 17-22. 


so communed with the woman at the well withered up the tree 
that did not supply him with food at the moment of his necessity. 
It was the same Christ, but the same Christ under different circum- 
stances. At Syehar he was Revealer, Interpreter of the universe, 
Messiah, the Revealed One of God — ^^on the road from Bethany, 
wanting almost his last breakfast upon earth before the great 
tragedy, he wms burning, heated sevenfold, the stress was terrible 
— every look was then a judgmmi I 

Jesus Christ here shows what he will do with all things. 

This is not a surprise in the revelation of Christ. Do not let us lift 
up our eyes from the page and say how wonderful that he should 
have done this. In very deed, if we have rightly read the story, 
this is the very thing he has been doing as he has been coming 
along the w'hole line of his life, only we see some things now and 
then more sharply than at other times. There are occasions upon 
which whole revelations are condensed in an incident, and we give 
way to a pitiful wonder which does but betray our ignorance of 
what has already passed before us. This circumstance was fore- 
told in the great sermon on the mount, when Jesus said, “ If the 
salt have lost its savour it is henceforth good for nothing but to be 
cast out and to be trodden under foot of men.” In that sentence 
you have the withered fig-tree as to all its law, and inner meaning, 

,/ and certain Judgment, and, when Christ antedated the day of final 
criticism, and brought before him the man who had buried his tal- 
ent in a napkin and brought it out and shook it down, saying, 

“ There thou hast that is thine,” he said, ” Cast ye the unprofit- 
able servant into outer darkness.” That was but the divine and 
highest view of this very fig-tree scene — the condemnation of use- 
lessness, the outcasting and final burning of unprofitableness. Do 
not let us therefore consider that we have come upon an exapimial 
instance, as though nothing of this kind had been so much as 
hinted at before. Here we find the accentuation, in a most visible 
and palpable instance of a law which has guided the Saviour in all 
his previous ministry. 

Will this be the law of his procedure always P Most certainly 
it will. If so, what will happen in society, in politics, in. the 
church .? This will occur : he will come up to our institutions 
seeking fruit, and if he find none, he will wither the institutions 



THE LAW OF JUDGMENT 


107 


away. See there the difference between him and us. We keep 
up institutions because they are a hundred years c/</— Jesus Christ 
keeps them up becau.se they bear fruit. We preserve our institu- 
tions and our organisations and machinery, because of their vener- 
ableness ; we think it a pity to touch them. True, they are not so 
useful as they w'erc woTit to be : true, they are effete, they are self- 
exhausted, but seeing that they have been standing there a thou- 
sand years, let them stand a thousand longer ! So talks an unreal 
sentimentalism. Jesus Christ says, “ If they do not satisfy the 
hunger of the age, let them be withered and cut down and re- 
moved, and new ones put in their places," He judges of your 
institutions by their power of satisfying the that immediately 

applies to them. So shall it fare with the church, with the pulpit, 
with all that we hold traditionally dear. Jesus Christ will attend 
our services, and he will draw nigh unto the pulpit and say, “I 
hunger, give me food, ’ ’ and the pulpit that does not satisfy the 
healthy and natural hunger of the soul, he will wither away. No 
matter how old, how costly, how traditionally grand, how adorned 
with faded splendours of the past, if it do not contain food and 
water for the immediate hunger of the age, he curses it and it 
must wither away. How real ha is, how stern in his healthiness, 
how utterly and grandly robust in all his demands. He will cut 
down, he will wither away, he will de.stroy, he will overturn, over- 
turn, overturn, until the right kingdom come in and be set up on 
foundations that cannot be moved. 

How swiftly the decree executed itself, ‘ ‘ And presently the 
fig-tree withered away." When was his miracle ever done other 
than presently ? How suggestive is this reflection. Early in the 
sacred book we read, ‘ ‘ And God said, T.ct there be — ’ ’ there was ! 
The be hardly died out of the startled air till the thing spoken of 
stood fast. So here and everywhere throughout the whole story 
of the miraclc.s, w^e have immediateness, instancy, obedience with- 
out reluctance, reply without hesitation. A man is withered away 
in a moment ; a great man disobedient, di.sloyal, untrue to God, 
unfaithful to oath and covenant, is touched by the invisible finger 
— \^gone! He calls it loss of memory, he speaks of it as pre- 
mature old age, he rubs his eyes as if to make them new and 
young again, and say^here is a mist before them. What is he .? 



MATTHEW XXI. 17 - 22 . 


108 

A tree without fruit, a cumberer of the ground, man without man- 
hood, a living irony, a mocker of realities, a hypocrite, a palpable 
and mischievous sarcasm ! ' 

And so at the end we have just the selfsame thing as at the be- 
ginning and at the middle. So subtle and complete is the con- 
sistency of the divine government. “ Let there be — ” and there 
was. “ Let no fruit grow on thee henceforward for ever” — and 
presently the fig-tree withered away. And at the last he will say 
to some “ Depart," and these shall go away / My soul, come not 
thou into that secret. 

It is in the power of almightiness to wither us, to turn our brain 
upside down, to confuse the memory, to cause reason- to lose her 
way in the troubled brain and to be groping there in everlasting 
night. He interrupts the currents of vitality, he isolates the 
mocking life, he will not have uselessness in his church — his is a 
withering word, nor does he spare it even on his way to save the 
world. He could have withered his betrayers and judges by one 
glance, he could have burned up the mob which was led by the 
gentility and culture of the age, and left them as white ashes on 
the ground they had dishonoured ; but the Son of Man came not 
to destroy men’ s lives, but to save them, and whilst there is one 
drop of sap in the bruised reed he will not break' it, whilst there is 
one spark in the smoking flax he will not quench it. But he says, 
as te only can say, “ My Spirit shall not always strive. 0 that 
thou hadst known, even thou, in this thy day, the things which 
belong unto thy peace. Now they are hidden from thee. ’ ’ 

When the disciples saw it, they once more fell down from the 
dignity of the occasion, and showed, as we have so often seen, lit- 
tleness and meanness of soul. Would we could jjut them all out 
of the way when we read this story : w^e should then feel as if 
walking on. mountain tops—but ever and anon we are plunged 
right down into deep valleys by those mocking foolish men. They 
marvelled, saying, “ How soon is the fig-tree withered away," 
struck by the incident, not impressed by the /rtzt; —marvelling at 
something that was comparatively of no consequence, and forget- 
ting the gland and universal doctrine that was conveyed. They 
are like ourselves. Instead of hearing the sermon, we hear how it. 



BELIEVING PRAYER. 


109 

was delivered : instead of listening for the eternal tone, and the 
eternal truth, we look at some mean transient incident of the oc- 
casion. What w'onder if we are lean in soul, poor and empty in 
mind, and tossed about because of unfaith and every mischievous 
doubt 1 We should be on the outlook for the encj-lassting, our eyes 
should be shut so that they might not be tempted or led away by 
little or unmeaning incidents, and that our heart might have in- 
tensity of concentration in reference to the great things spoken by 
Christ. , 

See how these men have not grown one solitary whit from the 
beginning until now, and in a page or two they will run away : 
they must run away— such wonderers, such puerilities, could not 
stay : they must run, they will forsake him and flee, and thus 
complete the poetic circle and bring to its proper issue the ideal 
consistency of such characters. They who had seen a thousand 
miracles, the dead raised, the blind restored, the deaf made to 
hear, the sea quieted by a command, wondered with puerile 
amazement because the fig-tree shrunk in a moment and was 
withered up for ever. Such hearers would have degraded any 
preacher but the Son of God, such hearers would have stripped 
even him of every feature of heroism and dragged him down to 
their own mean dust, if he had been other than God himself. Any 
man-lighted candle they would have blown out — because the light 
was solar and fed from eternity they could not extinguish its 
splendour. 

Now Jesus returns and lifts up the occasion again to the right 
level. Said he, “ If ye have faith and doubt not." Not only so, 
he made the occasion an opportunity of laying down the great law 
of prayer : so does he turn our wonder to great uses and make our 
ignorance the starting-point of his own revelation. “ And all 
things, whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, yc shall 
receive." Believing, not hoping for, not selfishly expecting, not 
transiently wishing, but believing : and a man cannot believe in the 
right sense who is asking for anything which his reason condemns 
as improper, unjust, or mischievous. This word " believing" 
guards this promise like a flaming sword. I cannot ask for riches 
or strength or honour or fame : I cannot ask that one may sit on 
the right hand and another, on the left : I cannot ask that the law.s 


no 


MATTHEW XXL 17-22. 

of nature be suspended and the universe be afflicted with a thou- 
sand troubles, whilst I am in the mood described as ‘ ‘ believing. ’ ’ 
How much is involved in that word : resignation, childlike trust, 
asking for what God wall give, and rounding off every prayer with 
thissw^eet Amen, “ Nevertheless not my will, but Thine, be done. ” 
Thus Jesus Christ would make us believe that w^e answer our 
own prayers just as he told the people that they had wrought their 
own miracles. So great grace was never seen before. He told 
the poor woman who went straightened and invigorated from his 
feet, that she had made herself whole— “ Daughter,” said he, “ go 
in peace, thy faith hath made thee whole. Not my almightiness 
but thy faith,” So he told all the people upon whom the miracles 
were wrought, “According to your faith be it unto you.” 
“ Canst thou believe All things are possible to him that be- 
lieveth.” And now in prayer, when I fall down before God, and 
with united heart and clenched hands, the whole man symbolical 
of homage, resignation, faith, and ask for what I need, when God 
hands it to me from his hospitable heavens, he says, ‘ ‘ Take it : 
thy Faith hath prevailed, ” 



LXXIX. 


PRAYER. 

Almighty God, thou dost see all things at once : there is nothing hid- 
den from thine eyes : our hearts give up their secrets to thee as thou dost 
look upon us. All things are naked and open unto the eyes of him with 
whom we have to do. Thou art not searching for our faults, thou art 
looking for the return of our hearts to their harmony with thyself. Thy 
look has no fire of destruction in it, but is filled with the tears of tender- 
ness. and often brightened by the expectation of loving hope. We have 
come to thine house to-day— it is a step in the upward road, may we take 
the next, and all the rest following, and by steadfast perseverance be 
brought at last into the great eternal life. 

We have come with hymns in our hearts and upon our lips because of 
thy care and love, thy pity and protection, and because our lives have 
been lived in thy goodness and have been held up by both thine hands, so 
that until this hour we have not fallen into the great darkness. We come 
to thee as the God of the Jew and of the Gentile, the God of Abraham, of 
Isaac, and of Jacob, and the Father of them that know thee not, and the 
Redeemer of the ends of the earth. We know thee by Jesus Christ thy 
Son : he spoke to us concerning thee, he called thee Father, he spake of 
thy love, he told us that he himself came to express it in daily humilia- 
tion, in the revelation of eternal truth, in living, in dying, in sacrifice, in 
resurrection, and in priesthood, so that we come to thee by the living way 
and the only path, and we find access to thy throne of grace becaiuse of 
thy Son who died and rose again for us. 

Thou hast led us by a way that we knew not, and by paths we had not 
known or understood. Thou hast found for us bread in the wilderness 
and water in desert places. From our youth upward thou hast been our 
security, a Light that none could extinguish and a Defence that none 
could violate. We live and move and have our being in the God and 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. We bless thee that through innumer- 
able faults and sins, through manifold infirmities and transgressions, thou 
dost still lead the struggling soul onward towards complete sonship and 
final deliverance from the power of sin. Thou art mindful of us in the 
darkness as well as in the light. When the devil falls upon us with all 
his power, thou do.st not permit him to deal upon us the fatal stroke. 
We are living to praise thee : our days are a continuance of thy favour, 
and before our eyes thou hast held forth the enchantment of a heavenly 
prospect. Wherein thou hast left us for a moment, gather us with ever- 
lasting kindness. Return, O Lord, to the many thousands of Israel ; 



112 


MATTHEW XXL 


come back again, thou whose absence is an infinite loss, and fill with light 
the space thou hast thyself created. 

We can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth us. We love 
his name, we are bound to his cross, his life is our hope, his death our 
sacrifice. He is to us the First and the Last, who was and is and is to 
come, Head over all, pre-eminent in Heaven, reigning over the univeise 
as over a very little thing. Fill us with the fulness of his grace, inspire 
lus with a sacred ambi^^ion to penetrate still more deeply into the tender 
mysteries of his truth, and may the sweet gospel of his cross be our con- 
solation in every hour of life, and our hope and our triumph in the^j^hour 
and article of death. 

We give ourselves to thee again, and we pray for one another in all 
tender words, that according to each man’s pain and need, some gift may 
be given from above. Send none away unblest, put in every man’s heart 
a new hope, inspire every soul with unusual gladness, may thy Floly 
Spirit be the light of our understanding, the fire of our love and the in- 
spiration of our will and purpose. Sanctify all affliction, infirmity, pain, 
trouble, and all the manifold discipline of this weary life. May we be the 
stronger for our weakness, may the hours we spend in darkness give us 
greater appreciation of thy light. Be with our friends who are with us 
from a distance. Be with the stranger within our gates, may he find that 
this Is none other than his Father’s house. Take away from him all 
sense of solitude, loneliness, and want of friendship, and seizing the idea 
of the universality of thy church, may he, by the power of sympathy and 
the divination of love, find in this house the fellowship of the saints. 

Be with those who have gone away from us for a time, who are on the 
great sea, who are in far away lands, who think of us now and mentally 
unite their hymns with ours. The Lord’s benediction make the sea quiet, 
and the Lord’s smile make foreign lands as beautiful as home. Be with 
all little children : water thou the tender plants in thy garden, visit every 
nursery and speak some little word to little hearers, and be all through 
the house, in its uppermost places and in its lowest tenements, and from 
the highest to the lowest may there be a spirit of godly content and will- 
ing submission to thy purpose, and glad expectation of ultimate deliver- 
ance and coronation. 

Speak with special graciousness to our sick ones, who can scarcely bear 
upon their cheek the breath of human love. Thou knowest the way to 
the sinking heart, thou canst speak to the closing ear ; whilst life endures 
thy hold upon it is certain, arid even when it passes away from our ap- 
peal, it stands but the freer and gladder in the inner light. Comfort 
those that mourn, may they be the richer for their tears, the stronger for 
their infirmities, and out of the buffeting . of the wind, may they bring 
some solid and lasting strength. 

This our prayer we pray in the one name, the name of Jesus Christ of 
Nazareth, whom we took and with wicked hands hanged upon a tree, and 
slew. Amen, 



THE TEXT. 113 


Matthew 3cxi. 23-46. 

23. And when he was come into the temple, the chief priests and the 

elders of the people came unto him as he was teaching, and said, By 
what authority (always conferred by the scribes) dost thou these things ? 
and who gave thee this authority ? . 

24. And Jesus answered and said unto them, I also will ask you one 
thing, which if ye tell me, I in like wise will tell you by what authority I 
do these things. 

25. The baptism of John, whence was it? from heaven, or of men? 
And they reasoned with themselves, saying, Tf we shall say, From 
heaven ; he will say unto us, Why did ye not then believe him ? 

26. But if we shall say, Of men ; we fear the people ; for all hold John 
as, a prophet. 

27. And they answered Jesus, and said. We cannot tell (a virtual abdi- 
cation of their office). And he said unto them. Neither tell I you by what 
authority I do these things. 

28. But what think ye ? A certain man had two sons ; and he came to 
the first, and said. Son, go work to-day in my vineyard. 

2g. He answered and said, I will not : but afterwards he repented, and 
went. 

30. And he came to the second, and said likewise. And he answered 
and said, I go, sir : and went not. 

31. Whether of them twain did the will of his father? They say unto 
him. The first. Jesus saith unto them, Verily, I say unto you, That the 
publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of God before you, 

32. For John came unto you in the way of righteousness, and ye be- 
lieved him not : but the publicans and the harlots believed him : and ye, 
when ye had seen it, repented not afterward (did not even repent after- 
ward), that ye might believe him. 

33. Hear another parable; There was a certain householder, which 
planted a vineyard, and hedged it round about, and digged a winepress 
in it, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into a far 
country : 

34. And when the time of the fruit drew near, he sent his servants to 
the husbandmen, that they might receive the fruits of it. 

35. And the husbandmen took his servants, and beat one, and killed 
another, and stoned another, 

36. Again, he sent other servants more than the first ; and they did 
unto them likewise. 

37. But last of all he sent unto them his son, saying, They will rever- 
ence my son. 

38. But when the husbandmen saw the son, they said among them- 
selves, This is the heir ; come, let us kill him, and let us seize on his 
inheritance. 



114 


MATTHEW JOrZ 23-46. 


39. And they caught him, and cast him out of the vineyard, and slew 
him. 

40. When, the lord thereof of the vineyard cometh, what will he do unto 
those husbandmen ? 

41. They say unto him, He will miserably destroy those wicked (miser- 
able) men, and will let out his vineyard unto other husbandmen, which 
shall render him the fruits in their seasons. 

42. Jesus saith unto them, Did ye never read in the scriptures (Ps. 

cxviii. 22), The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the 
head of the corner : this is the Lord’s doing, and it is marvellous in our 
eyes ? : 

43. Therefore say I unto you, The kingdom of God shall be taken 
from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. 

44. And whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken (Isaiah viii. 
14-iS) : but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder. 

45. And when the chief priests and Pharisees had heard his parables, 
they perceived that he spake of them. 

46. But when they sought to lay hands on him, they feared the multi- 
tude, because they took him for a prophet. 


THE APPLICATION OF PARABLES. 

O BSERVE that the chief priests and the elders of the people 
came to Jesus as he was teaching. They interfered with his 
w'orlc, and punctuated that work with a question with which they 
intended to destroy the effect of the doctrine. It is so that our 
best work is often interrupted and vilely punctuated by those who 
wish to hinder its deepest and most holy success. An ancient 
writer has told us that the wolf does not fly at a painted sheep. 
The wolf understands his purpose, though it be cruel, much 
better. So the Scribes and Pharisees and the elders of the people 
did not fly at a Christ who was doing nothing — ^they laid wait for 
him, and according to their own estimate of their opportunity did 
they summon their savage energy to work out its malign purpose. 
But when otherwise or otherwhere could they have come upon 
him at all } He was always working, he was always teaching, be 
did but lift up his head for one moment, and then his face glowed 
as if he had been looking into a furnace w'hen he said, “ Wist ye 
not that I must be about my Father’s business ?” so that if evil- 
minded men had to come upon him at all, with any purpose of 
interrupting or destroying his work, they must of necessity come 



THE ENEMY' S QUESTION. iiS 

upon him in the intensity of a toil that seemed never to avail itself 
of relaxation. 

How will he answer those men First he will hear what they 
have to say to him. What is their -question ,? The same ques- 
tion they have always been ashing. They have but one question to 
ask who come thus to Christ. They may indeed devise for it a 
thousandfold variety of words, but centrally and substantially 
there is but one question which the enemy can ask for Christ-— 
‘ ‘ Who art thou, or by what authority dost thou work, or who gave 
thee this authority, or who is thy Father, or whence dost thou 
come ?” He was the mystery of his time : he is the mystery of 
all time. He is there, and yet he seems to have no right to be 
there : his credentials are not written in official ink, or signed by 
the official hand, and yet there he stands, speaking revelations, 
working miracles, his smile a heaven, his frown a judgment, and 
people round about him in great thick files, asking who is he, 
whence came he, by what authority, quo 'joarranto, who is this 
Man, and why does he speak these great thunder-blasts of judg- 
ment, or utter these quiet benedictions of light ? 

Observe how narrow is the question put to Christ. It is a 
question about authority. Men who ask nari'ow questions can 
never be in earnest upon great subjects, I venture thus to con- 
dense into one sentence w^liat I might speak to you in words of 
many volumes. Coming to the Bible, coming to Christ, with any 
little, narrow, pedantic question, you never can grapple with the 
magnificent occasion or extract from the Book or the Man the 
vital secret. 

Jesus will answer you according to your question. Yow. yourself 
determine the speech of the Son of God ; whenever you are pre- 
pared to begin he will begin with you. How he can tantalise, 
how he can test the inquirer, how he can spoil the spoiler, how he 
can hold up to suppressed ridicule the man who would come to 
him with taunting questions ! If you have received no great 
broad gleaming answer of love and redemption from the Bible, it 
is because you have come to it with some little narrow cpicstion. 
Ask if the Book will submit itself to some theory of inspiration, 
and it may possibly mock you. Say to the Book, “ I have a 
theory by which I would test thee,"’ and the Book will be dumb 
with silence you cannot break. But come frankly, with the 


MA TTHEW XXL 23-46. 


ii6 


nakedness of absolute moral destiiuiion, without excuse or plea or 
self-defence, and knock with bruised fingers upon the door of 
3'our Father’s house, and angels will open it, and all the store of 
the house will be yours, and- your very nuhger will be turned into 
the supreme blessing of your life. Ye have not because ye ask 
not, or because ye ask amiss. Had these men of the text set 
themselves down like so many docile children saying, ‘ ‘ 0 Peasant 
of Galilee, Man qf Nazareth, Mystery of the time, yet gentle, 
wise, true, beneficent, tell us what is in thine heart,” he would 
have answered them as he answered Nicodemus. Nicodemns 
came to him in the dark, and Chrst showed him all the wealth of 
the stars, and made the heaven so bright that it was no longer a 
nocturnal interview, but a conversation held in *a light above the 
brightness of the sun. You would have more revelation if you had 
treated the Bible properly : you wmuld have ampler entrance into 
the upper courts if you had gone to God with some bold prayer 
of penitence and high inspiration of expectant and contrite love. 

Let us see how far Jesus Christ is true to the dmlopmeni ^xo\x^ 
which we have watched him in all these studies. How will he 
answer men wzf; ?• Plis teaching was always determined by the 
time and circumstances surrounding him. Look how true he is 
to himself. He is still going to make parables, but the parables 
represent him in a new light. When we studied the thirteenth 
chapter of this gospel, we thought we had passed through the pict- 
ure-gallery of the church, and seen all its most beauteous repre- 
sentations of light and shade and hue and tone. We were 
charmed with the infinite suggestiveness and fertility of the Man’s 
invention and power of utterance. So when we closed the thir- 
teenth chapter, we were as men who descended from a great gal- 
lery of divinely painted pictures, and behold in this very twenty- 
first chapter we have parables again. But observe how the Speaker 
of them has changed. In these parables you catch the tone of 
judgment : here are judicial parables as well as parables illustrative 
of great historical and moral truth. Never can 3^011 catch this Man 
off his guard ; his word is alwa3^s true to his feeling. Nearer the 
cross now than ever he was before, bis word is accentuated by 
sharper emphasis, and through all the beauty of his parable there 
gleams some forelight of the great judgment fire. 

In these facts find the proof of the Lord’s deity. In such subtle 



GOD'S RATIONAL JUSTICE. 

consistency as this find at least the beginning of an argument 
which will land you in the conviction that, whilst never man spake 
like this Man, the unusualness of his speech came out of the 
unusualness of his nature. He was the Son of God, the only 
Revealer of the Father, his companion through all eternity, the 
Angel of the Covenant in one age, the Wisdom of another, the Co7h> 
ing One of all time — God the Son. 

Observe how he speaks to these men Judicially, and how all the 
while he proceeds along the safe and obvious basis of reason and 
justice. These two parables, as well as the answer about John, 
are illustrations of the rational justice upon which God’s kingdom 
amongst men is based. “ A certain man had two sons ; and 
he came to the first, and said, Son, go work to-day in my vine-- 
yard. He answered and said, I will not ; but afterward he re. 
pented, and went. And he came to the second, and said likewise. 
And he answered and said, I go, sir ; and went not. Whether of 
them twain did the will of his father ? They say unto him, the 
first.” He put a case before them which was apparently not r«. 
ligious. Here we find our right and title oftentimes, to occupy 
secular or outside ground, in illustrating and defending the gospel 
of Christ. In such parables as these, we find the range of the 
great Teacher’s tether. He is not bound within a few inches : he 
may take his stand on the uttermost point of the horizon, and 
finding an admission there he may apply it to the whole course 
and tenor of human life within the ample circle, until it creates a 
judgment-seat before which to try the sons of men. 

Here is hope for some of us. The narrow technical mind can 
never repetii. This comes out of the very necessity of the case. Nar- 
rowness and technicality never can get into the region of emotion. 
Find a man who is a stickler for a form of words, merel}' because 
it is venerable, and you find a man who is incapable of entkusias?n, 
and incapability of enthusiasm is only another form of the solemn 
truth that some men are incapable of repe?itance. Beware how you 
become the slaves of merely literal forms and special places and 
peculiar ceremonies : do not become men of the letter, after this 
narrow sense of the term. Here you find men who are anxious 
about mere authority — they never can be other than purists and 
pedants. You may be correct and yet incorrect at the same time. 


Iis MATTHEW XXL 

You may be right and may be wrong in the very same breath. If 
a man should say that the earth stands still, he is right within 
given limits, and yet he totally misrepresents the condition of the 
earth when he puts it before his mind, and before the observation 
of others as a stationary body. Consider it ■well : the earth stands 
still and I can build upon it. So far you are literally correct, and 
yet it is correct to represent the earth as standing still for one 
solitary moment. So a man may be a purist and a pedant in the 
letter, and may know nothing about the infinite beauty and sug- 
gestiveness and redeemingness of the inner gospel of Christ, 

Do not look at the literal authority, look at the things ihat are 
done, and if the things are done, acknowledge them, and do not 
say that you pay more respect to the authority than to the accom- 
plishment of the fact. If a man is converted in his inner think- 
ing, in his moral purpose, in the whole set and tone of his mind, I 
will not inquire into the authority of the man through whose in- 
strumentality that grand fact was accomplished. He may have 
the right to say to me in all justice, “ Believe me for the work's 
sake." That was Jesus Christ’s own appeal. When a man 
comes before you with nothing but authority, and no issues follow 
to attest and complete it, then set light by what he terms his cre- 
dentials. 

Now these men were men of authority, the victims of tradition, 
the creatures of conventionality, and therefore it was impossible 
for them ever to change their minds. Take care how you join that 
company : you will be clever but not great, you w'ill have skill 
within a limited scope, but to your ability there will be no range, 
no mystery of distance, no suggestiveness of perspective — you will 
be simply strategic, clever, skilful, acrobatic, but wanting in the 
infinite genius that lays hold of God at unexpected place.s, and 
finds tabernacles for Him where others had suspected but the 
\vastes of the wilderness. 

On the other hand the impulsive man is always repenting. He 
said at first, " I will not." That was impulsive. I knew by the 
very urgency of his tone that he was a better man than he repre- 
sented himself to be. If he had uttered that sentence slowly but 
with deliberate, lingering emphasis, I should have had but little 
confidence in his change — but no sooner was the proposition 
made to him that he should go and work in the vineyard, than 


ROUGH AND REAL MEN. 119 

flashingly, with the instancy of lightning, he said, “I will not." 

I knew by his io 7 ie that he would go ! There are some men that 
misrepresent themselves — that cannot be understood as to their 
furthest and deepest meaning. Have faith in some kinds of had 
men. Have no faith in some kinds of so-called good men. 
Understand the character in its inner essence and substance, and 
then, though there be a thousand infirmities and manifold positive 
sin.s, as in the case of Abraham and David and Peter, and all the 
great princes and leaders of the Church, there will be such an ulti- 
mate attestation that the divine seed was in the heart as no true 
witness can dispute or contravene. 

Do I speak to any man who has wildly told God that he would 
not be good } I have faith in that man. Let us cheer him : I like 
him in many aspects of his character : he did not mean the rude- 
ness or the violence or the blasphemy— -he will think better of it 
and come to better terms. Do I speak to some who are always 
falling down, who begin to pray and forget midway what they in- 
tended to say .? Do I speak to any poor bruised, broken heart, 
that is always bringing itself right into collision with some cruel 
ohstacle or hindrance.? I tvould speak comfortably to such. I 
have known such among the very best people in the world. Do 
not be discouraged or cast down. You ask no little peddling 
questions about authority, you do not go into the question of 
official ink and prescriptive signature — you are real, and you want 
reality, and when you have done your worst, no man condemns 
you .so much as you condemn yourself. I shall find you one day 
with your eyes melted into. great hot tears, standing a little way 
outside the door, asking if after all you may not come in- — and 
come in you shall, come in you will ! If men were turned out 
because of errors and sins like yours, heaven itself would be but a 
wooden place filled with wooden saints. No, in you and through 
you Christ shall come into his great broad human inheritance. Is 
the seed in you, is the right purpose in you, when you sin do you 
jtidge yourself and send yourself to hell .? When you have got 
wrong do you sentence ypur soul to a lake of fire and brimstone 
where the devils are and the hot chains and the eternal burnings ? 
If so, Christ shall yet have hold of you— none .shall pluck you out 
of his hand. Out upon those who cry for mere authority and 
stand upon official conventionalism in the things pertaining to this 



i20 


MA TTHE W XXL 23 - 46 . 


inner kingdom ; ' and. a welcoinc, broad as the firmament, bright 
as the sun, to every pi'odigal heart that comes in and says, “ I 
said I woidd not go, but I want to come, after all. Open the 
door and let me in. ’ ’ He will work well because he means it well. 

“ Hear another parable," said Christ, which was inviting the 
men into a second thunderstorm. Hear another parable— it was 
asking them to bind themselves again to the whipping-post till he 
scourged them with thongs of scorpions. He calls it a parable — it 
burns like a judgment He says it is a picture, hut os they look, 
the bursts out of it, and scorches their beholding faces. In 
every Gospel there is a judgment, as in every offer of mercy there 
is the possibility of a development of obstinacy that will end in 
penalty. Hear another parable. If he had said so to us in the 
thirteenth chapter of the gospel, we should have said, " Yes, and 
gladly— ten thousand more, for they are like new stars hung up 
on the background of night’s gloom," but now we hesitate. 
Another parable ? • Another fire, another judgment, another revela- 
tion of ourselves to ourselves ! 

Then comes the parable of the householder who planted the 
vineyard, claimed the fruit, sent his servants for it, last of all des- 
patched his son to bring the fruit of the husbandmen, wlio acted 
rudely, violently, and with fatal cruelty. Then said Jesus, 
"What shall be done to the.se men.?" It was another secular 
instance, it was another instance of his extra-ecclesiastical or theo- 
logical reasoning, and these men, who were sharp in the market- 
place, clever in following the lines of an analogy, and a jagged kind 
of rude justice towards ill-behaving .servants, admitted that if the 
case were as the Speaker put it, there was nothing for those miser- 
able husbandmen but to be destroyed. Jesus said, " Have ye 
never read in the scriptures, The stone which the builders rejected, 
the same is become the head of the corner : this is the Lord’s 
doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes"? The rejection was but 
for the moment, but God’s elections will come up in the outgo 
and expenditure of the ages. He works by centuries, he breathes 
aions and epochs of a thousand years apiece, but he surely brings 
his purpose to its culmination. 

He did not himself apply the matter further. When they began 
to think of it, they said, " He means us. Kill him, We dare 


NOTES. 


not, or the people would kill us.” Sometimes in judging a case 
of human justice, we award the penalty to ourselves, and inflict the 
judgment upon our owm hearts. Let us take care lest we bring 
upon ourselves the double damnation of admitting the logic in a 
secular case and endeavouring to elude its application in spiritual 
instances. 

Still he is judge then ; and yet I could not leave these parables 
with any hope, if I did not search further into them to see if the 
dear, sweet-souled, loving-hearted Christ were not in them some- 
where — not in the authority, not in the son that would go and did 
not, not in the wicked husbandmen — ^yet he must be here some- 
where, I know he must even yet speak some sweet gospel word. 
Here it is : “The publicans and the harlots believed him: the 
publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of God before 
you : the kingdom of God shall be given to a nation bringing 
forth the fruits thereof.” There is the same Christ, the Christ that 
cast out devils, the Christ that gave a new chance in life to the 
woman taken in adultery, the Christ that expelled from the heart 
of Mary Magdalene the tenants that diabolised her. This is the 
Christ of hope — this is the Man that dined with publicans and 
sinners. Fearful as coming from his lips at that time this utter- 
ance to the priests, the chief-priests, the elders of the people, as 
who should say, “ Gentlemen, so-called in your own esteem, you 
who hold the keys of the church and the writings of the sanctuary, 
ye shall never go into the secret, sacred place, but shall be driven 
out, and publicans, sinners, harlots ; bruised, wounded prodigals, 
naked, shoeless, coatless, penniless — all tears, all sorrow — with 
such outcasts shall God fill his house, and ye proud mockers shall 
be damned. ” 


SELECTED NOTES. 

Verse 27. —^'And they ayis-wered, that they could not tell whence it was.” 
'■ They answered.” Wicked regard not a lie, serving their purpose. 

” Could not tell.” Gr. they did not know. 

He compelled them to pronounce their own sentence, as incompetent to 
fill Moses' seat. 

Ii they cannot answer here, can they a thousand ? Job ix. 3. 
Caught in a hard alternative ; extricated by an act of desperation. 


122 


MATTREvr KXt. 23 - 46 . 


They were thus convicted by all of gross hypocrisy. 

Elements of their future vengeance were slowly gathering. 

Before the Lord, all the world must keep silence. Hab. ii. 20, 

These “great knowers” who have always their we know” at hand, 
for once, after their arrogant question, say with shame, in the presence 
of the people. ‘‘ fFi? ,l*«£i 7 e/ w/.” 

Many a so-called “ honest doubter,” against his own conviction, resem- 
bles them, Le., they know it well, but ” will not say it." 

Thousands will say anything, rather than ” we are wrong-." 

Gehazi, Ananias, and Sapphira have more imitators than Peter or 
Paul. 

The unrenewed often feel more than they confess. 

Knowing the Gospel true, they want courage to confess it. 

They know Christianity is right, but are too proud to say it. 

They pretend to judge Christ’s mission, and cannot tell even that of 
John. 

Those who imprison the truth stifle conviction. 

This declaration made them cease to be a Sanhedrim. 

After this they were to Jesus only as usurpers. 

The people could have answered without hesitation. 

Rulers’ refusal showed a want of courage and honesty. 

Jesus and John were not their kittd of prophet*. 



LXXX. 


PRAYER. 

Almighty God, thou hast to-day spread a great feast for men : may 
we all come to it and sit down xn the places thou hast set apart for us, 
and eat and drink abundantly, according to thine invitation. We have 
spent our strength for naught and our money for that which satisfieth not, 
and our hunger is fierce within us, and our desire is still crying for satis- 
faction. Thou hast now called us to thine own table, spread with thine 
own hands, made rich with all the needful things which thou hast found 
in the universe : may we sit down and be glad in the Lord, and drink 
the wine of hxs grace abundantly, and enjoy the security and the light of 
his dwelling-place. Thou hast opened the door, which is. Jesus Christ 
the Son of God, God the Son : thou hast given unto us of the rich things 
of creation, of which he, the Saviour, is the one Head : in him we have all 
things, through him and by him, and alone through him and by him do 
we enjoy this table of thine, spread with all that can satisfy our hunger 
and delight our soul. We said in the far-away land, " How many hired 
servants of my Father’s have bread enough and to spare, and Tperish 
with hunger : I will arise and go to my Father.” Lord, see us at thy 
door, hear our voices, broken by the sobs of our penitence, and give us 
welcome into thy sanctuary and into thy banqueting house. We have 
been out in the cold wind, and in the desolate world, and behold the wil- 
derne.ss is full of graves, and in the rocks there is no resting-place. We 
have not found bread in stony places, nor water on the hill-tops, so bleak 
and cold, but now we are at thy door thou wilt give us large and instant 
admission : thou wilt not withhold any good thing from us whilst we cry 
for thy pity in the name of Jesus. 

We are glad that the tabernacle of God is with men upon the earth, that 
the walls of thine house are a support of the walls of our dwelling-place 
that we cannot move about without seeing the church of the living God set 
in divers places. We open the door of righteousness and the gate of sal- 
vation, and we enter in and we find in thine house sweetness, repose, 
light, and inspiration. 

We have come to tell thee of our sin and our sorrow, to repent of our 
iniquities and to ask for, thy forgiveness, and to pour out all the tale of 
our sorrow at the feet of the all-healing Christ. Thou canst read in our 
heart what we cannot speak with our lips, thou understandest our neces- 
sity and there is nothing in all the agony of our pain which thou hast not 
felt. We have a High Priest that can be touched with the feeling of our 



124 


MATTHEW XXII. i-H- 


infirmity ; he knoiveth our frame, he remembereth that we are dust, he 
accounteth our life as a wind that cometh for a little time and then pass- 
eth away, or as a vapour which dies as it ascends. He will not remember 
wrath in the time that he remembers mercy, but in all pitifulness, com- 
passion, tender patience, and long-suffering hopefulness, he will mightily 
redeem our soul from despair, and bring light instead of darkness. 

We remember the years of the right hand of the Most High. We hide 
our little transient duration in the sanctuary of thine eternity. Behold 
we all do fade as a leaf, and our iniquities, like the wind, have taken us 
away. We are likened unto the grass which to-day is and to-morrow is 
cast into the oven, unto a flower which flourisheth for a little time and 
then dies away. Behold thou hast not mocked us, but thou hast told us 
of the littleness of our time upon the earth, thou hast pointed out to us 
our already opened grave, thou hast called upon us to buy up the oppor- 
tunity, and eagerly to avail ourselves of the occasion whilst it endures. 
Thy way is simple, and thy testimony is true and easy to be understood. 
If we are mocked, we have mocked ourselves, we have not been mocked 
from on high. What misreckoning there is in our calculation is due to 
our own ignorance and unsldlfulness, for thou hast set down our time of 
threescore years and ten, and thou hast called upon us to redeem the time 
and to consider the days how few they are and short. We bless thee that 
though the shortness of the time is present to us, we see death swallowed 
up in victory, and the great eternity of heaven opening itself before our 
desire and our hope, and there we hear the voices of welcome and the call 
to a feast which never ends. May none of us fall short of thy purpose 
herein— may none of us by unbelief be disappointed at the last, but may 
every one of us and all near and dear unto us, sit down with Abraham 
and Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of light and the house of eternity, to 
go out no more for ever. To this end may we read thy word diligently, 
consider it deeply, and carry it out continually, and to this end do thou 
grant unto us the daily ministry of the Holy Ghost — may he •dwell in us, 
enlighten us, rule and guide us in everything, and undertake the adminis- 
tration of our whole life in its innermost thought and purpose and motive. 

We give thee thanks for every hope that lights our life, we bless thee 
for everything that floats down the air from Heaven upon our silent souls, 
to charm them into grateful repose. For all the sainted dead we bless 
thee, for our fathers in the church who have gone to the upper assembly, 
for our loved ones who have washed their robes and made them white in 
the blood of the Lamb—raay we be followers of their faith, and be ulti- 
mate sharers of their joy. Comfort those who now mourn their dead and 
look round to see faces that can be seen on earth no more. Grant unto 
such the tender solaces of thy gospels, the sweet and lasting inspiration 
and comfort of thy grace. 

Let thy word be amongst us this morning as a summer light, touching 
every point of our life, and lighting it all up with a tender and celestial 
illumination. May there be great joy in the church, the sound of song 



THE TEXT 


135 


and high delight within the sanctuary of the Lord, and when men ask us 
the reason of this rapture, may we find it in the closeness of our fellow- 
ship with the very heart of the Son of God. Deliver every man from 
bondage, and every soul from mean and unworthy fear. Dispel all 
dejection and gloom and ho’pelessness, and in our hearts do thou cause 
us to hear a new and gladsome song. 

Give laughter to the young, high delight and brilliant hopefulness to 
those who are in the morning of life, and give chastening and mellowness 
to those who are farther on, so that without moroseness or sourness of 
disposition or of heart, they may speak with all sobriety of the mysteri- 
ousness and grandeur of life. And to the aged and the dying, who have 
gone upstairs to come down of themselves no more, speak gentle words, 
breathe benedictions, send messages from Heaven, make the heart young 
whilst the body dies, and give hope that the soul shall, through Jesus 
Christ, Saviour and Mediator, enjoy the summer of Heaven, the rest, the 
peace of the upper places of thy kingdom. Amen. 

Matthew 3CBdi. 1-14. 

1. And Jesus answered and spake unto them again by parables, and 
said, 

2. The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king, which made a 
marriage for his son. 

3. And sent forth his servants to call them that were hidden to the 
wedding : and they would not come. 

4. Again, he sent forth other servants,’ saying, Tell them w'rch are 
bidden. Behold, I have prepared my dinner ; my oxen and my failings 
are killed (Isa. xxv. 6), and all things are ready ; come unto the mar- 
riage. 

5. But they made light of it, and went their ways, one to his farm, an- 
other to his merchandise : 

6. And the remnant took his servants, and entreated them spitefully, 
and slew them. 

7. But when the king heard thereof, he was wroth ; and he sent forth 
his armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burned up their city. 

8. Then saith he to his servants, The wedding is ready, but they which 
were bidden were not worthy. : 

g. Go ye therefore into the highways, and as many as ye shall find, bid 
to the marriage. 

10. So these servants went out into the highways, and gathered together 
all as many as they found, both bad and good ; and the wedding was fur- 
nished with guests. 

11. And when the king came in to see (not merely to look at, but to 
the guests, he . saw there a man which had not on a wedding gar- 

.ment, . 



126 


MATTHEW XXIL 1-14. 


12. Aod he saith unto him, Friend, how earnest thou in hither not haV" 
ing a wedding garment ? And he was speechless (gagged). 

13. Then said the king to the servants, Bind him hand and foot, and 
take him away, and cast him into outer darkness ; there shall be weeping 
and gnashing of teeth. 

14. For many are called, but few are chosen, 

GOD’S WELCOMES AND MAN’S REPXTSALB. 

N otice the change in the tone of the parables. The par- 
ables are not all of one class, though they all seem to be 
of one meaning and intent. Compare the parables in the thirteenth 
chapter of this gospel with the pafableg that are now before us, 
and see what a wonderful change has taken place in the tone of 
the Speaker. Whilst he was uttering his doctrine, delineating and 
exemplifying his gospel and offering it to all mankind, it was like 
a grain of mustard-seed, it was like a sower going forth to sow seed 
in various places, or like a leaven hidden in three measures of 
meal, or like a net cast into the sea which gathered of every kind. 
Now the parables are judgmmis : something has taken place be- 
tween the thirteenth chapter of Matthew and the later chapters. 
The kingdom of heaven assumes another colour, speaks in another 
accent, exhibits itself in another phase. So %vonderful is this 
kingdom— it is to you what jtw/ are to it : you determine the atti- 
tude of the kingdom of heaven towards yourselves. Be needy, be 
docile, be expectant of heavenly blessings, and the kingdom of 
heaven is like a great warm heaven shining upon all your life and 
offering you all its contents. Be rebellious, frivolous, contemp- 
tuous, self-sufficient, and the kingdom of heaven is dark with 
unspeakable tempests, ready to burst upon your life with over- 
powering destructiveness. 

How if Jesus Christ saw the kingdom of heaven vary to his 
imagination and high fancy as the time bore him onward to the 
cross } How if he closed his eyes and compared the outward with 
the inward, as if he should say, ‘ ‘ Now I see the kingdom of 
heaven like a man going forth \q sm seed, and now I see it like a 
great judgment. Now it is like leaven hid in three measures of 
meal, and now it is like king taking account oi his servants^'? 
He would be the great reader, the very seer which the times need ; 
the eloquent soul clothed with prophetic mantle and speaking in 



THE CONSISTENCY OF THE PARABLES. 


127 


the thousand tones of apocalyptic language, who could see what 
the kingdom of heaven is like by correctly penetrating the spirit of 
his age and rightly reading all the meaning of the times passing 
over him. It is open to us to make parables according to the 
suggestion of events. Jesus Christ only begins the parables. He 
ended the miracles, he only began the parables, and it is for us to 
carry out those parables and multiply them according to the ever- 
varying colour and tone of the times in which we live. If so, the 
kingdom of heaven will be like a summer day, like a winter night, 
like an angel of hopefulness, blowing a silver trumpet and -calling 
to a high banquet, or like a spirit, black, grim, fierce, vengeful, 
going forth to execute divine judgment upon stony hearts and 
rebellious lives. 

Think not that the parables are Truth has no conclu- 

sions, truth stops only to begin again : the miracle rounds itself 
up, or floats away like a gilded bubble and dies, but truth is a 
planet that belongs to the very centre of the system of things : it 
shines in the almightiness of God, and is re-fed, re-invigorated, 
from age to age, and grows younger with the time, and is more 
blooming after millenniums than when it first began to discover 
itself to the expectant mind. Make your orm parables do not 
read the weather only, read the signs of the times. Be not learned 
in the clouds, but learned in bodies celestial and in signs terres- 
trial, and in all your reading see some hint and outline of the 
divine kingdom. 

Mark through the changes that the parables pass, the king is 
never less than king, and the heaven never other than a kingdmn. 
He will take the kingdom of heaven, will this Jesus Christ, our 
Teacher, through all similitudes, but the king is never less than 
royal, and the thing spoken of is never less than kingly. Is it a 
sower going forth to sow ? He represents the kingdo?n of heaven. 
Is it a net cast into the midst of the sea, so humble and poor a 
thing as that ? Yes, but it bears upon it the similitude of a divine 
kingdom. The subject never lowers its dignity, the thing spoken 
of never falls below the royal mark. Observe that, for it is full of 
suggestion. Whether the king is. coming to reign or coming to 
judge, whether he be mocked by his servants or kept standing out- 
side the door knocking till his hair be wet with the dews of the 



MATTHEW XXIL 1-14. 


night, he is still the King, and the thing he brings is still tlic 
heavenly kingdom. Wliere there is humiliation there is no dis- 
grace ; the stoop is a royal one, and however humble and simple 
the similitude, it is like a dewdrop that throws back the image of 
the whole sun. 

So in our simplicity we ma}>- have digJiiiy, in the very humblest 
fonn through which we may pass our religious conceptions, they 
need never lose the grandeur of kingship or the splendour of 
royalty. In the simplest hymn sung to the simplest tune there 
may be the beginning of all heaven’s harmony. In the quick 
silent stoop of the head, bending down in the attitude of prayer, 
without pomp or ceremony, there may be the beginning of the 
homage that makes heaven sacred. See that you do not find in 
simplicity any degradation of the thing signified — sowing seed, 
casting a net into the sea, permeating meal with leaven, finding 
pearls or treasures,— -whatever you are doing, remember that the 
thing signified gives to the thing spoken and the thing done their 
natural measure of grandeur and sublimity. See in the church 
more than the stones and iron, the wood and glass. These things 
do not make the church ; the kingdom of heaven is like unto 
them, but if you seize the right idea of the edifice it will burn and 
glow and .shine with infinite suggestion of comfort and meaning 
and hope. Let us not be wooden in God’s house, literal and finite, 
mechanical and measurable, but pray for that inward vision iXveit 
sees in every stone a son of Abraham, and hears in all the building 
of the church the resonance of infinite music, He that hath ears 
to hear, let him hear. 

What have we then in this parable ? The strangest, sharpest 
contrasts. But first of all we have God s conception and God’s pur- 
pose of grace and love towards the children of men. How does 
he put the case .? He will have a wedding, a feast, a great ban- 
quet : a thousand messengers going forth to call those that were 
bidden to the wedding. He will have trumpets and cymbals, and 
dances and high delight Such is the conception of God always : 
he never makes less than a least, no poor mean crust is it ever his 
to offer. If there be nothing else in the wilderness, he will make 
even that into a feast of fat things, and there shall be more at the 
end than there was at the beginning ; but in his original purpose, 



GOSPEL HOSPITALITY. 


129 


when his heart speaks out of heaven, before the worlds are made, 
he says, “ I will prepare for all coming ages and coming men an 
eternal wedding feast, banners, trumpelings, delights, raptures, 
satisfactions infinite.” So he speaks in the background of his own 
eternity. ^ 

When did he ever do less ? We can hardly turn over two pages 
of the inspired Bible story w’ithout finding offers of milk and wine 
and honey and banquets and great feasts and sacred pleasures and 
unutterable delights. God’s heart will heave right up through all 
the detail of our sin, torment, and pain, and will still speak hospi- 
table things to the hungry life of human creatures, God wants us 
to eat and drink abundantly, God calls us to a feast — Ho, every one 
that thirsteth, come ye to the waters. That is the great cry, crash- 
ing, breathing, through the ages, with infinite energy of love : 
that is God’s meaning about us all, to give us satisfaction, to take 
away the pain of hunger, the fire of thirst, and all that makes life 
a burden and a trouble. Give him credit for his piirposL God 
has to be forced into judgment : he comes of himself into love. 
You have to scourge him into a judicial attitude, mock him, taunt 
him, break every law he ever made, and spit in the face of his 
heavens, before he will put out his hand for the sword or the rod. 
But in himself, in all his heart, there is the one purpose' of love, 
feasting, banqueting, enjoyment, eternal nourishment, and inward 
and spiritual delight and growth. Never miss this thought from 
your thinking, namely, God’s original purpose, God’s desire 
towards the children of men is one of vicrcy, pity, love, care, sup- 
ply, answering prayer before the prayer is half spoken, and with a 
grand Amen realizing every petition uttered by the suppliant’s 
pleading lips. 

So we are sent forth this day with the call to a great banquet. 
In so far as a man is a true preacher of Christ he will call his peo- 
ple away from the land of hunger and thirst and want into a land 
of plenty flowing with milk and honey, and eveiy field a vineyard 
and every rock a house of security. Shall I fall short of ni}- mis- 
sion .? I pray God I may answer its call, for he who is the King 
bids me tell every one who hears me and to speak the same mes- 
sage deeply to my own soul and with infinite unction to all, that 
God's purpose to-day and every day is that we should know no 
more the barrenness of de.solation, the pain of hunger, the depri- 



MATTHEW XXII. 1 - 14 . 


130 

vations of thirst and the agony of weakness, but that we should all 
eome unto his house and have the abundance of his grace and the 
infinite satisfaction of his truth. • 

My hospitable message is to every one that thirsteth, to every 
soul that feels pain, to every aching heart, to every life that says, 
“ I have an aching void which only God can fill," The gospel 
therefore is an answer to om hunger : the gospel is not a merely 
high intellectual delight, a system of spiritual metaphysics, .having 
more or less ulterior moral aims and purposes ; the gospel is an 
appeal to our sin, \rant, hunger, pain, helplessness—therefore do 
I always insist that credit should be given to original purpose 
and design of the gospel, however much the gospel may have failed 
through false misrepresentation or through an unequal utterance 
of Its hospitable purposes and welcomes. 

We have also in this parable an instance of human friwlousness. 
The guests who were first invited, having heard the invitation, 
made light of it and went their ways, one to his farm and another 
to his merchandise. So may great invitations become mere com- 
monplaces, so may the great gospel • become but as the sound of a 
noise in the air. Familiarity deprives us of much of the sublimity 
of the thing we look at. Could we think ourselves back, so as to 
feel in all, its reality and intensity the fact that God was now invit- 
ing our souls to a great feast, surely there would be nothing light 
or frivolous in our whole temper. But the air is full of these in- 
vitations, and therefore our familiarity receives them without any 
sensation of surprise, much more, without any inspiration of grati- 
tude. We know the imrd of the gospel so well that in hearing it 
we miss its spnii. Are we not ruined by our very familiarity with 
the letter ? I ask the question with timidity, because of self-con- 
tempt herein, knowing how easy it is to speak syllables which 
enshrine the Deity without feeling their music in the very heart. 

Frivolousness will ruin any life. No frivolousness succeeds 
in any great enterprise. No frivolous man succeeds in busi- 
ness of a commercial kind. Business is not a trick or an 
amusement, it is hard work, hard study, daily coirsideration, in- 
cessant planning, wakefulness that ought never to sleep. If so for 
a corruptible crown, what for an incorruptible .? The danger is 
that we make light of the gospel because of our disregard for the 
manner in which it is spoken. Were we anxious about the vital 



HUMAN FRIVOLITY. 


131 


tnalkr we should not care how it was uttered. All mere study ol 
manner, and way of putting familiar truth, is an accommodation 
to the frivolity of the age. When we are told to make our scr. 
vices more interesting, our music more lively, our preaching more 
animated, we are but told to stoop to the frivolity of the time, that 
we may entrap a truant attention and arrest a wandering mind. 
Given, an anxious people, hungering and thirsting after righteous- 
ness, knocking at the church door, saying, “ Open to me the gates 
of righteousness, I* will enter in and be glad ; this is the day the 
Lord hath made,” we need not study any mechanical arrange- 
ments, or urge ourselves to any unusual animation of manner : 
the urgency of our desire, the purity and nobleness of our sympa- 
thy would supply all the conditions required by the God of the 
feast, for the pouring out of heaven’s best wine and the prepara- 
tion of all the fatlings of the heavens for the satisfaction of our 
hunger. God makes all the universe contribute to the soul’s 
growth. ‘ ‘ My oxen and my fatlings are killed and ready, there- 
fore come to the marriage. ” He keeps back nothing from the 
soul, he plucks the highest grapes in the vineyards of heaven for 
the soul, he seeks out the goodliest and choicest of his possessions 
and treasures that the soul may be satisfied : he has kept back 
nothing : last of all he sent his Son, saying, ” They will reverence 
my Son. ’ ’ In that fact see the symbol of all that can be crowded 
into the suggestion that God withholds no good thing that can 
minister to the soul’s development, and the soul’s growth in truth 
and love and grace. 

Nor does the human condition in relation to the divine offer 
conclude itself under the limitation of mere frivolities. You can- 
not stop at frivolity. Light-mindedness in this matter does not 
complete itself. “ The remnant took his servants and entreated 
them spitefully and slew them.” This is true frivolity. Frivolity 
is followed by rebellion, blasphemy, high crime and misdemeanour 
before the eye of heaven. You who laugh to-day may slay to- 
morrow, we who do make but gibes and sneers in relation to the 
gospel offers now, will by^and-by sit with the scornful and in delib- 
erate blasphemy mock the King of the feast. Easy is the descent 
towards this deep pit of rebellion, hard-heartedness, and utter 
defiance of divine goodness. To defy the good — there might be 
some courage of a wild kind in defying /£?zr;^r, in setting oneself 



132 


MATTHEW XXII, 1-14. 


in defiant attitude against thtmderholis, but to defy goodness, to 
mock an offer of hospiialiiy, to scorn the call to a divine delight — 
let a man once become frivolous in that direction, and the whole 
substance of his character will be depleted of everything that can 
be ennobled, and it will speedily sink in irremediable viciousness 
and baseness. Call it not a light thing to laugh at sacred words 
and religious opportunities and engagements : it may seem at the 
time to be of small account, but it is an indication of character, it 
is the beginning of a descent which multiplies Its own momentum, 
and he who but laughs fluently and lightly to day at the preacher's 
earnestness may in an immeasurably short space of time be 
reckoned with the scorners, and be the chief companion of fools. 
And when the king came in to see the guests, he saw there a 
man w^hich had not on a wedding garment, and he asked him how 
this came to be, and the man was speechless, and the king ordered 
him out into punishment. We must not go into the feast accord* 
ing to our own ivqy : there is an appointed road and an appointed 
method and scheme, and we must not attempt rudeness as an 
originality, w'e must not offend fhe fitness of things. We ourselves 
know the meaning of this in the lower ranges of architecture, 
painting, and music. A crooked pillar Avould instantly attract 
every eye and awaken every attention, and might probably arouse 
a suspicion of danger in many minds. Who could bear to look 
upon a crooked pillar supporting a roof Who would not run 
asvay from it A pillar has no right to be crooked, so to say : its 
usefulness is in its uprighhtess : in any other form it might suggest 
\veakness and danger. So there are eyes that are trained to the in- 
stantaneous criticism of colour, that would be pained if they saw 
aught of discord or di.sharmony in the relation of hues, others could 
look on without surprise or trouble or conscious discord. If it 
be so in such little affairs as these, why not in the higher relations 
and the broader kingdoms ? When the king’s eye rests upon the 
whole feast, he instantly detects aught of disharmony, want of 
obedience to the fitness of things and the genius of the place. The 
Oriental prince was accounted rich and noble in proportion as he 
piled up in his wardrobes it may be thousands of robes for wedding 
feasts and gala occasions. It w^as his business to supply the guests 
with garments. So with regard to this great feast in his kingdom ; 
he who finds the feast, finds the robe,, and if we go in to his ban- 


THE MANY AND THE FEW. 


m 

quet we must go in clothed with his garments ; there must be 
nothing of our own in that gorgeous and grand delight. Herein 
we are all to blame ; man must have part of himself vi\ it : he will 
do something towards contributing to the completion of God’s 
purpose. Know ye, sons of men, that the feast is ready and the 
robe is ready, and neither is yours, both are the gifts of God, and 
we are asked to accept them now. 

Many are called, but few are chosen. Many are named, but few 
are real. Of what avail, asks a Puritan writer, that you call your 
ship Invincible if the tiniest gun that ever was levelled against it 
smote its sides and crumbled it into small dust.? It is cvr/Zt'ff' but 
not chosen, named but not real, called a guest, but not a guest in 
heart. Your names are nothing, though given by your ancestors, 
though named at the baptismal font or in the river of baptismal 
water, though changed to indicate promotion and ascent in the 
social scale. Of what avail is it to call a man rich if he be poor 
in heart —magnificent in station if he be base in purpose and dis- 
position .? Do not be frightened by this text as if God called a 
thousand men to him, then took out a certain number of' the 
thousand and sent all the rest away. This is not the teaching of 
the divine gospel : read it thus : — Many are called, but few 
choose ; many are invited, but few come ; many are named, but 
few are real. Of what account is it to call a base metal silver .? 
Any acid dropped upon it will at once reveal the baseness of the 
compound. The face is silver, the coating is real, but skin deep 
lies the pewter, the mean lead, the comparatively worthless iron. 
Many are called, but few are real ; many are in the building, few 
in the church ; many read the Book, few peruse the rmlaiion. 


SELECTED NOTES. 

Adam Clarke says : “ Among the Mohammedans, refusal to come to a 
marriage feast, when invited, is considered a breach of the law of God. 
Any one that shall be invited to a dinner, and does not accept the invita- 
tion, disobeys God and his messenger : and any one who comes un- 
invited, you may say is a thief and returns a plunderer.” 

” By the oxen understand the fathers of the Old Testament, by the 
fadings understand the fathers of the New Testament ; for they did smite 


134 


MATTHEW XXIL 1-14. 


with the horn their enemies, and these mounted up aloft by the wings of 
heavenly contemplation.” — {Gregory.') "Oxen are strong, and failings 
are sweet and pleasant ; hereby are set forth the oracles of God, which do 
both strengthen and delight those that feed upon them." ■~>{Origen.) 
‘ ‘ They that excuse themselves by the occupying of a farm are the com- 
mon people of the Jews, the other the priests and ministers about the 
temple.” — {Chtysostom.) 



LXXXI 


PRAYER. 

Almighty Goh, do thou, write thy law upon our heart, and give us a 
disposition towards obedience, so that every word which thou hast spoken 
may become the rule of our conduct. To this end do thou grant us, 
through Jesus Christ our Lord and Priest, the continual ministry of the 
Holy Ghost, to enlighten the mind, to sanctify the will, to subdue and 
control the whole heart, so that there may be no disobedience or rebellion 
in us, but a quiet and loving delight in thy sacred word. We thank thee 
that thou hast addressed a speech to every heart : thou has left none out 
of the number to which thou hast spoken ; may each hear the word thou 
hast sent to it in particular, and answer it with a readiness of joy and 
thankfulness — then shall our life spread itself out in beauty before thee, 
and shall receive the showers of thy blessing and answer them with grow- 
ing fruitfulness. 

Thy Son Jesus Christ hath revealed thee unto us ; he is our Lord and 
Saviour, he made atonement for our sins, and his blood is the answer to 
thy law. We rejoice in the revelation of thy person which he has made 
unto us, now we pray for the healthful influences of thy Spirit, that 
we may read that revelation deeply and truly, and receive it into our 
hearts with all joyfulness, and manifest it unto the world according to 
our opportunity and power. We have come up to thine house that we 
may make mention of thy lovingkindness : surely thy mercies shall not 
lie forgotten in unthankfulness — we will preserve the memory of them, 
and in the rehearsal of all thou hast done for us in the years that are now 
gone, will we And the inspiration and the comfort we need for the days 
that are yet to come. We live in thy presence, thy goodness towards us 
is the sanctuary in which our souls dwell with the quietness of infinite 
security. Thou didst deliver us from the paw of the lion and from the 
paw of the bear : thou didst enable us to overcome the uncircumcised 
Philistine in the valley, and on the hill thy light has been round about us 
like a promise, and in all the winds that have blown around our life, we 
have heard the sound of thine own going. Therefore do we look onward 
to the unknown time, with the inspiration of gratitude, and the confidence 
of tender love. Thou wilt not bring down the grey hairs of thy servants 
with sorrow to the grave, thou wilt yet interpose in every crisis and diffi- 
culty, out of darkness thou wilt bring light, and thou wilt write songs for 
the night season. Give us confidence in these truths and hopes, yea 
establish us and build us upon them as upon rocks that cannot be shaken. 



MATTHEW XXIL 15-46. 


136 


May our whole life rise upon thee like a temple towards the Heavens^ 
complete and beautiful and resonant with thy praise. 

Thou hast been mindful of us : we should be witnesses against our- 
selves if we denied thy care or questioned thy providence. Every day 
uttereth speech to us concerning thy love. Wherein we have done wrong 
thou wilt come to us with infinite forgiveness. Where sin abounds grace 
shall, through Christ Jesus the Lord, much more abound, so that the little- 
ness of the one shall not be thought of because of the greatness of the 
other. Ry grace are we saved, by blood are we cleansed, by the precious 
blood of Christ are we redeemed. We know our ransom price, and we 
knovv thou hast not paid it in vain — thou wilt surely redeem us utterly, 
and bring us with completeness out of the snare of him who would 
entangle us, and out of the wilderness of despair and loneliness. Our 
hope is in Christ, our confidence is in God, our inspiration is from the 
Holy Ghost 

Thou knowest our life in its entireness : how few its days, how small 
its strength, how easily blown out its best hopes, and how soon blighted 
its noblest ambitions. Thou hast dug a grave in the garden, thou hast 
hidden a pit under the hearthstone, there is poison in the cup out of which 
we drink our life, and our whole course lies through thorns and thickets 
and most difficult places. Yet surely our extremity will be the opportu- 
nity of God, and because of the supreme difficulty of the road shall be the 
fulness and the tenderness of the ministry which waits upon us. 

We now lovingly put ourselves into thine hands, to be conducted as 
thou wilt through all difficulties and snares. Disappoint us if it be for our 
souls’ health that we should be stung and wounded and have sudden night 
descending upon our brightest days. Do thou hunger us and impoverish 
us and give us pain continually if it can be only through this process that 
we may be saved. Not our will but thine be done, only take not thy 
Holy Spirit from us. 

Regard us in our special relationships, and according to our necessity 
let the blessing of the Most High God come to us this day. Preserve the 
little one that he may become a strong man, speak to the aged that he 
may renew his youth in the immortal hope of fellowship with the angels 
and with the spirits of the just made perfect. Address the busy man who 
is seeking his fortune in the dust, and excite in his soul a hunger which 
the bread of life alone can satisfy. Tell the afflicted that the time of 
weakness is but for a moment, and the time of immortal health is as the 
duration of God, Regard all who rule over us in the kingdom, preserve 
the wise and the strong for many years, that they may surpass themselves 
in the nobleness of their patriotism and their trust in the God of nations. 

Be with all for whom we ought to pray and for whom it is our loving 
delight to intercede. For the absent, for the travelling, for those who are 
in danger, in weakness, in peculiar sorrow, in sharp agony. Be with 
those who are going through their highest joys, and with those who are 
far out in the deep waters of peculiar trouble. Sanctify all varieties of 



THE TEXT. 


137 


discipline and training through which we pass, and at last, washed in the 
blood of the everlasting covenant, sanctified and inspired by God the 
Holy Ghost, may we take our place in the city whose hills are light, 
whose walls are jasper, whose streets are gold. Amen. 

Matthew xxii. 16-46. 

15. Then went the Pharisees, and took counsel how they might 
entangle (ensnare) him in his talk. 

16. And they sent out unto him their disciples with the Herodians 
(advocates of national submission to the emperor), saying, Master, we 
know that thou art true, and teachest the way of God in truth, neither 
carest thou for any man : for thou regardest not the person of men. 

17. Tell us therefore, What thinkest thou? Is it lawful to give tribute 

unto Catsar, or not ? • 

18. But Jesus perceived their wickedness, and said, Why tempt ye me, 
ye hypocrites ? 

ic). Shew me the tribute money (the denarius, which was in common 
circulation). And they brought unto him a penny. 

20. And he saith unto them, Whose is this image and superscription ? 

■ 21. They say unto him, Cmsar’s. Then saith he unto them, Render 
therefore unto Csesar the things which are Ccesar’s *, and unto God the 
things that are God’s. 

22. When they had heard these words, they marvelled, and left him, 
and went their way. 

23. The same day came to him the Sadducees (largely the upper classes 
of the priesthood), which say that there is no resurrection, and asked him. 

24. Saying, Master, Moses said, If a man die, having no children, his 
brother shall marry his wife, and raise up seed unto his brother. 

25. Now there were with us seven brethren : and the first, when he 
had married a wife, deceased, and having no issue, left his wife unto his 
brother : 

26. Likewise the second also, and the third, unto the seventh. 

27. And last of all the woman died also. 

28. Therefore in the resurrection whose wife shall she be of the seven ? 
for all had her. 

29. Jesus answered and said unto them, Ye do err (a less stern tone 
than that in which the Pharisees were accosted), not knowing the script- 
ures, nor the power of God. 

30. For in the resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in mar- 
riage, but are as the angels of God in heaven. 

31. But as touching the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read 
that which was spoken unto you by God, saying, 

32. I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of 
Jacob ? God is not the God of the dead, hut of the living. 



138 


MA TTHEW XXIL 1 5-46. 


33. And when the midtitude heard this, they were astonished at his 
doctrine (teaching). 

34. But when the Pharisees had heard that he had put the Sadducees to 
silence, they were gathered together. 

35. Then one of them, which was a lawyer, asked him a question, 
tempting him, and saying," 

36. Master, which (what kind) is the great commandment in the law ? 
(The meaning of this question was, whether anything were more perfect 
than the law, because he taught a new kind of doctrine, whereby’the ex- 
pounders of the law held themselves to be disgraced). 

37. Jesus said unto him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy 
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. 

38. This is the first and great commandment. 

39. And the second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy neighbour as 
thyself. 

40. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets. 

41. While the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them, 

42. Saying, What think ye of Christ ? whose son is he ? They say unto 
him. The son of David. 

43. He saith unto them, How then doth David in spirit call him Lord, 
saying, 

44. The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till I 
make thine enemies thy footstool ? 

45. If David then call him Lord, how is he his son ? 

46. And no man was able to answer him a word, neither durst any man 
from that day forth ask him any more questions. 

TEMPTING QUESTIONS AND DIVINE 
ANSWERS. 

Y OU will notice that the attacks which -were made upon the 
Saviour were prepared. There is evidence everywhere of. 
premeditation, arrangement, concert, so that there might be no 
weakness on the part of those w'ho tvere about to approach the 
great and marvellous Teacher. No notice was sent of the ques- 
tions : the preparation was complete on the side of the interroga- 
tors without Jesus Christ having any intimation that an attack was 
about to be made upon him. So far the advantage was upon the 
side of the questioners. They talked the whole matter over, they 
proposed and re-arranged and amended, and then settled the 
terms : having done so, they went with unanimous purpose to 
ensnare the Speaker. 

Not only so, the questions were subtly adapted to the then state 



PREPARED ATTACKS. 


139 


of the Speaker’s mind. We have just seen that he was uttering 
parables of judgment in place of parables of illustration. His para- 
bolical tone had changed completely. In the thirteenth chapter 
of this gospel, he spoke, as we have repeatedly said, a w'hole pict- 
ure gallery of beauties into existence. Since the time of his revela- 
tion of his personality to his disciples, he has been speaking para- 
bles of fire, judgment, anathema, fraught wfith most searching and 
terrible penal criticism. The people round about him, therefore, 
had supposed that he was excised, and knowing what they them- 
selves were when under excitement, they supposed they would catch 
this marvellous Speaker at a great disadvantage ; he had lost his 
balance, he was off his guard, he was goaded into an unusual 
strain of adjuration, and noNv in this changed temper of his mind, 
they w'ould very likely be able to ensnare him in his speech, and 
so to accomplish their own malign purpose. 

Still further, the attacks were not inspired by love of truth or by 
an.xiety to know God’s mind upon this or that subject, but by 
hatred of the Man. Hence we have the most unusual combina- 
tions of parties, hence we have the horse and the ass yoked together 
in one team, hence we have colours that ought never to have been 
brought into juxtaposition, stitched together, hence we have con- 
trasts which under other circumstances would be accounted anom- 
alies and would evoke destructive criticism, — but any union will 
do where such a Man’s life is to be taken ! 

In the gospel by Luke, we read that these persons approached 
Christ feigning themselves to be just men, painting their faces with 
the colours of justness, borrowing clothes of righteousness and 
respectability, assuming with fatal skill the very tone of earnest- 
ness, Yet under all this feigning and similitude and hypocrisy, 
their aim was not to inquire about truth, its foundations and re- 
sponsibilities and issues, but to strike with a dart the life of an ex- 
cited Man, 

This point is the one which brings its severe lesson to us. Here- 
in we find the reality of the inspiration of the attacks which are 
made upon Christianity When men go forward to assail 
the Book, why do they exhibit so much anxiety to dispute its claim 
and invalidate its integrity and enfeeble its hold upon the attention 
of mankind .? Judging by history, it is no whit uncharitable to 
suggest that they are not so anxious about its literary discrepancies 


140 MATTHEW XXIL n- 

and incoherencies and difficulties, as that they hate its imraUtics. 
It would be worth the while of any number of men to pay ten 
thousand pounds down to-day on any counter, if they could buy 
themselves off from the moral discipline of the Scriptures, Such an 
investment would be the beginning of their fortune from a merely 
secular point of view. The rope w-ould be broken, the tether 
would be snapped, the chain that binds them would give way at 
its strongest link, and men would be free to do what they pleased. 
What wonder then if oftentimes they should shape themselves into 
little deputations and go in twos and threes for the purpose of ask- 
ing questions about the literary part of the Bible, when the real 
heart and core of their purpose is to rid themselves of its moral 
rule ? 

How can I be charged with uncharitableness in making such a 
suggestion, when I have before me Pharisees and lierodians feign- 
ing themselves to be just persons, who go to ask a question about 
the tribute money, not that they care either for the Cmsar or the 
Jew in this or that particular, but that they want to ensnare an ex- 
cited Man in his fluent and vehement eloquence ? Let every man 
search himself in this matter. What if we go to the Bible for the 
purpose of propounding difficulties and asking religious questions, 
and take upon us the air of injured critics and anxious pilgrim.s, 
having but one supreme purpose, and that to find out the literal 
word and meaning of God, and in reality we want to rid ourselves 
of the huniiliaimis of the Book ? The Book takes no note of king 
or peasant, gentle or simple, rich or poor, but judges ever}'- man 
on the broad basis of manhood and sinfulnes.s and dishonoured 
obligation, and commands every man to his knees, to put his 
mouth in the dust and to say, “ Unclean, unclean,’' What if we 
want to escape its humiliations, under the mean pretence of want- 
ing to rearrange its translation, and revise its literature, and throw 
into new arrangements that which is historical, chronological, and 
of antiquarian interest ? Search, your heart in this matter, say why 
you do go to the Book or to Christ. Do you feign to be just men 
when in reality you, want to put your knife through the Bible’s 
morality and to rid yourselves of the daily di.scipline of its abase- 
ments and humiliations ? Be severe with yourself on this matter ; 
do not play the fool to yourself, and never lose the dignity and the 
restfulness of your self-respect. 



THE ANSWERS OF CHRIST. 141 

So much for the attacks which were made upon Jesus Christ. 
Now let us turn and look at the which he made to the 

onslaughts. Note in the first place that Jesus Christ’s answers 
were exkmporaTieous, and herein they stand in contrast to the first 
point made, that the attacks of the enemy were premeditated and 
arranged. Speaking from x purely human point of view, the as- 
sailants knew by heart every word they were going to say, but 
Jesus Christ had no knowledge or intimation of the questions that 
w'cre about to be put to him. , His answers therefore were not pre- 
pared, studied, arranged, and calculated as to the force and value 
of words. Herein an argument begins, It surely cannot be an 
easy thing to answer the supreme intellects of the age, instantane- 
ously, when they put knotty questions, yet 7 /«y is- the very thing 
Jesus Christ does. He never says, “ The question is a novel one, 
I must consider it. ” We have seen old judges upon the English 
bench posed by novel suggestions or constructions of the law, and 
the hoary and learned men have had to ask to be permitted to 
consult some brother judge because of the novelty of the situation. 
This is wise on the part of all merely human critics, because no 
man is all men, and no man knows or can know so much as all 
men know. Consultation, therefore, and comparison of men’s 
thoughts is not only desirable but just and right in all merely 
human consultations and inquiries. But here is a man who con- 
sults nobody, whq asks for no time to think, who answers with the 
suddenness and the brilliance of lightning. Touch him, and you 
are healed, if the touch be that of faith. Speak to him, and you 
evoke a revelation ; pray to him, and the whole firmament widens 
into a great answer to your request, wherein it is just and proper. 
But never was he to be allowed to consult the authorities or to 
take into his confidence the learned men of his da3^ He drew from 
the quiver of his own heart every arrow that he rec[uired. From 
the fulness of his grace he drew every gospel adapted to his age, — ■ 
from the infiniteness of his own sufficiency he satisfied the hunger 
of the world. 

But an answer may be extemporaneous and notliing more. It 
may be as instant as lightning, and yet there mu)' he nothing in it 
-but words. But in this case we have the answers before us, and 
with those answers open to our criticism we nia}^ surely pronounce 



142 


MATTHEW XXIL 15-46. 


them to be inldkctmlly acute. Sit down in your quietest leisure, 
when your head is coolest and j'our mind is steadiest, and try to 
amend any answer that is here given. Take paper and pen and 
ink, and in the mood of mind at which you are at your veiy’- best, 
write out a thousand possible answers to the attacks of the Phari- 
sees and Plerodians, the Sadducees and the Lawyers. Rearrange 
your replies, pick out the choicest English in which to express 
them, and when you have done, you will find that you cannot 
amend in one line or tone or hue the answers which are here 
given, perfect in wit, covering the whole case, silencing with gags 
— for that is the true rendering of the speechlessness of the assail- 
ants — those who made the attack. He put gags in their mouths, 
and forced them into silence. The dumbness was reluctant, but 
It was not to be broken through. 

Sometimes we think only of Jesus Christ as a good man, kind- 
hearted, full of love, always trying to make the world better, yea 
even to save the world. All that is right, but we ought sometimes 
to consider the simple intellectual force and majesty of this unique 
mind. Christ had a great heart— true — but do not therefore dis- 
parage his mind. It suits the purpose of some persons to regard 
Jesus Christ as morally noble, but intellectually feeble. Wherein 
is the intellectual feebleness shown ? Certainly not in this 
instance. The answer about the tribute money was an answer 
surprising and conclusive as a revelation from heaven. There was 
nothing else to be said ; no man could add a word to it without 
spoiling its infinite simplicity, no mind can suggest a new turn to 
the phrase without trying to bend the sky into a completer circle. 

Not only so— for in that he might simply have been the greater 
wit of the two— his answers were profoundly Scriptural. 1 akc the 
instance of the resurrection of the dead. What was his reply ? 
Was there any shuffling here, or any disposition to evade the 
difficulty ? He said, in effect, “ Sadducees, you are perfectly 
right from your point of view. The anecdote is exactly as you 
have related it ; I myself knew all the circumstances of the case — ■ 
a very surprising instance indeed, rarely to be met with, and from 
your point of view it must really shape itself into, something like a 
fatal argument. But, gentlemen, where you get wrong is in your 
foundation. You have nothing to stand upon but a handful of 
sand : I take it away and clown you drop— the whole fabric, anec- 



OLD TRUTHS IN A NEW LIGHT. 143 

dote, historians, and critics, and all. Ye do err, not knowing the 
Scriptures and the power of God. You omit from your calcula- 
tion the two great factors, you are perplexed by details, you rest 
upon no infinite rock. ” And they all were gagged. When the 
multitude heard this, they were astonished at his doctrine, or 
astonished at his teaching. Not so much at the substance as in 
the way in which he put old truths and avowed revelations, 
and under his setting these old things shone with a new light. 
Herein is the greatness of all true teaching — not to be inventing 
new theories and hypotheses, but so to set the old truth as to give 
it modern force, so to interpret the eternal as to make it a gospel 
to the dying tirme. 

Poor Sadducees ! I pity the Pharisees about their penny, and 
the Sadducees about their one little anecdote. Both parties seem 
to have been deprived of their one ewe lamb. It is sad to see how 
these little critics who suppose they had a case against Christ, have 
the case taken right out of their hands and turned to the advan- 
tage of the other side. I never knew a critic go away from Christ 
otherwise than wdth a slouching gait and with a kind of unconfess- 
ed wish that he had never made such a fool of himself as to go 
and touch that burning mountain. 

Do not let us be misled by little cases that occur, by parochial 
anecdotes and by local circumstances that appear to contravene the 
infinite revelation of God. Let your circumstances go down and 
accommodate themselves to the eternal. Woe to the peace of any 
man who lives in mere details. 

Plow did Jesus know all these Scriptures ? He himself wrote 
them. The Scriptures were quoted from him, he did not quote 
from the Scriptures, He only quotes himself, and quotes himself 
with the emphasis which the writer of any deep literature alone can 
give to his own words. 

I must add that the answers were cotnpleie. From our point of 
view we cannot suggest a solitary deficiency in the replies. He 
does not evade the question, but addresses himself honestly, 
morally, to the difficulty that was put before him. A lawyer 
thought he could put a case that might puzzle this singular 
T'eacher. “ Which is the great, commandment of the law.?” 
JesuvS answered, “ Thou shalt love,” That must have been a sur- 



144 


MATTHEW A'-AY/. 15-46. 


prise to any man who was nothing but a lawyer — thou shalt love. 
It does not read like a legal phrase — thou shalt love. And yet Jesus 
says, “ I did not invent that expression : you will find it in the 
law" — and he goes to the very chapter with w^hich he himself; 
seems to have been peculiarly familiarj for in the Temptation in 
the wilderness, two of his quotations were out of that very self- 
same chapter. And now when the lawyer comes to him, prob- 
ably an emissary of an old tempter, he answers him out of the same 
chapter. Wonderful things you will find in any chapter of the 
Bible if you dig for them as for hidden treasure, and search it as 
for surprises of incalculable value. Let the word of Christ dwell 
in you richly. What can be a completer answer to the inquiry of 
the lawyer than “ Thou, shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy 
heart’’ ? and to accommodate himself still further to the lawyer’s 
possible condition, he says, ‘ ‘ There is another commandment 
very nearly as great," and looking at him like a judgment, search- 
ing him through and through like a fire, he said, ‘ ‘ Thou shalt 
love thy neighbour as thyself.” If a lawyer can do that, I know 
not what he cannot do. 

We too send deputations to Christ, send our Criiicism to him, 
and we say in effect, “ Jesus, son of David, behold the docu- 
ment : we find that the date in this place does not accord with the 
date in that place ; we find that one Evangelist relates a circum- 
stance in one way, and another evaii^clist relates the same circum- 
stance in another way. Now what arc wc to do ?” And instantly 
he says, “You are not saved by the literary cohcrGncie.s of the 
Book, but by its moral conshlency. Look for its consistency in its 
consistent demands for righteousness and truth and purity and 
honour.” Then our Criticism coming away from him, we send 
up our Curiosity, and curiosity, feigning itself to be very reverent 
and profoundly inquisitive in a right .spirit, says, “ Jesus, why not 
tell us more about heaven and hell, about the invisible world 
generally?” and i instantly he answers, “I have told you enough 
for ‘life, conduct, discipline, sanctification ; inse what you do 
know, and he that is faithful in little, shall afterwards be appointed 
ruler over many cities. ” Then we send up to him our Vulgarity, 
and the vulgarity says to him broadly, “Why is there so much 
mystery about this Book, why not make things much /towrd" 



“ IVJIAT THINK YE OF THE C'HR/ST?" 


145 


and he answers, “ The mystery is in yourself : there is no mystery 
in the Book that has not its counterpart in the mystery of your 
own psychology; are the mystery, and until you recognise 
that fact, you will never rise to the occasion demanded of you as 
true students of the Book, which is not an, invention apart from 
mankind, b.ut a revelation to huvian nature as it is now consti- 
tuted.” 

The questions are over, the assailants are quiet “ Now,” says 
Jesus, “ if you do want to ask a question that is a real difficulty 
from your point of. view, I will put it into your possession : you 
shall have a really hard and deep question. Now, 'vhat think ye 
of the Christ.?” Not— “ What think ye of me as the Christ?” 
but — “What think ye .of the Christ that is promised jn your 
books? Whose son is he?” And they instantly answer like a 
number of children who had learned the Catechism, “ The son of 
David.” “ Now how then doth David in spirit call him Lord ? 
If David call him Lord, how is he his son ?” A difficulty indeed 
to the literal intellect, a difficulty to those who live in pen and ink, 
a difficulty to those who suppose there is no multiplication beyond 
what is literally given in the multiplication table, — yet no diffi- 
culty at all to the rmerent imagination, YasX higher and sublimer 
life that embraces the whole revelation of God in its noblest sug- 
gestiveness. If the Christ were only the son of David, he could 
never be David’s Lord : tht!!^fact that David sets lordship above 
sonship suggests that this Man is W^onderful, Emmanuel, God 
w'ith us, a ladder with the foot on the earth, with the head bathed 
in the glad heavens. Great is the mystery of godliness, God 
manifest in the flesh. ‘ ‘ Pharisees, Herodians, Sadducees, Law- 
yers,” said he, “do not ti’ouble yourselves about the tribute 
money, and questions of succession in family relationships: do 
not trouble yourselves with the merely numerical relationships of 
the points of the law, but do ask questions, grand questions, 
massive, noble questions, get up into the higher region of think- 
ing, and there learn how possible it is for reason to blossom into 
faith, and for the hard, literal intellect to bow down in tender 
homage before the infinite God.” 

Such are the infinite retorts of Christ. Be sure, when you go to 
him with a question, that it is neither little nor irreverent. 



146 


MATTHEW XXIL 


• SELECTED NOTES. 

Verse 21. — "And he said unto ike?n, Render therefore unto Ccesar the 
things ivhicfi be Cessar's, and unto God the things which be God's, ” 

Render.— A. clear acknowledgment of the divine authority of human 
government. 

1. Though they went to pay Ceesar’s ttibute^ they were not to adopt 
Caesar’s religion. 

The paying earthly tribute does not defraud the Lord’s service. 

“ Fear God, honour the king.” i Peter ii, 17, 

” Curse not the king, no not in thy thought.” Eccles. x. 20. 

” Thou shalt not speak evil of the ruler of thy people.” Acts xxiii. 5. 

” The wicked are not afraid to speak evil of dignities.” 3 Peter ii. 10. 

2. Obedience to the laws, “ Let every soul be subject to the higher 
powers.” Rom, xiii. I. 

” Use not your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness.” i Peter ii. 16. 

“ License they mean, when liberty they cry.” Milton. 

There are times when resistance becomes a virtue. Psalm cxlix. 8, q. 



LXXXIL 


PRAYER. 

Almighty God, thou givest the Holy Spirit unto men, that they may 
be enlightened and sanctified and made like thyself. If men being evil 
know how to give good gifts unto their children, how much more wiU our 
Father which is in Heaven give the Holy Spirit unto them that ask him. 
We come to ask for the outpouring of the Holy Ghost upon the Church ®f 
the redeemed, bought not with corruptible things as silver and gold, but 
with the precious blood of the Lamb of God. He promised us another 
Paraclete, that should abide with the Church forever, even the Holy 
Spirit that should lead men into all truth, making them quiet with divine 
peace, beautiful with divine holiness, inspiring them every day with the 
love of truth and with the spirit of devotion to the highest service of 
mankind. We now look for the pentecost, we are gathered together with 
one accord in one place ; withhold not thou the gift for which we have 
come, but multiply it unto every one of us— the great gift of thy love. 
Holy Spirit, baptize us as with fire. Spirit of the living God, descend upon 
us, consuming all evil, encouraging all goodness, strengthening within us 
every vow that' is made with an honest purpose and with a good hope, 
and granting unto us such communications of divine grace as shall give 
us nourishment and comfort i<|^the day of trial and distress. 

Withhold not thy Spirit from us, grant him unto us in such measure as 
we are able to receive the gift, and may we prove that the Spirit has been 
given unto us by the newness of our speech, by the nobleness of our be- 
haviour, and by such manifestations as shall put to silence the gainsaying 
of foolish men. . Thou dost not keep back from those who seek it, this 
great gift of the Holy Spirit : we pray for it with one consent, and look 
for it with one eager expectation. Give this unto us, and behold we shall 
be made anew, we shall be born again, we shall enter into thy service with 
a new consecration, our life shall be made glad by a new hope, and all 
the outgoing of life shall be in the direction of Christ’s own beneficence. 

We bless thee for the Saviour, who promised this Holy Spirit : he is 
our one Priest and Lord and King, the only wise God, who only hath 
immortality. Potentate over all, the Lamb slain from the foundation of 
the world the Saviour of all men. May we read his rharacter more 
clearly, apprehend his purpose more completely, and live in his spirit 
with more entireness of sympathy. We would grow in grace and in the 
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ ; we would be no more children, 


148 


MATTHEW XXIII. 


tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine, but men, strong, simple, 
true in heart, honest in purpose, ever striving with all the devotion of 
love, to become the sons of God in very deed, that by the manifestation 
of good purpose and good work, we may help to overthrow him who is 
the evil one. Hear us in these desires, and cause thine answers to be 
multiplied unto us that we may rejoice in the Lord and have renewal of 
every sacred hope. 

We bless thee for all thy patience, tenderness, and continual goodness 
of intention towards us. The goodness of God should lead us to repen- 
tance, yet do we take thy gilts and set our feet upon them, nor do we 
understand their value— yea, we have trampled under foot the blood of 
the everlasting covenant. God be merciful unto us sinners, and give us 
to feel that all the dispensations of providence are meant to lead us up to 
the completer dispensation of grace. In thy goodness may we see thy 
mercy, in thy mercy' may we behold thy love of thine own image in every 
human creature ; thus may we be led to the cross, which gathers up in 
one ineffable expression of tenderness the infinite love of thine heart. 

Thou hast led us by ways that we knew not, but all thy leading has 
been good. When thou hast made us poor we have been rich, when the 
darkness has been of thy sending, it has been full of stars, when thou 
hast brought us low thou hast spoken unto us the gospel of future exalta- 
tion. Wherein we have brought all mischief and distress upon ourselves, 
we would mourn the sin which caused the grief, and seek in one unani- 
mous prayer the forgiveness which it is thine alone to exercise. Thou 
knowest each life, its pain, its want, its heavy load, the aching of every 
heart, the tears that blind our eyes, the sudden darkness that fulls upon 
our way — regard us in thy tender pity, let the messages of thy truth to us 
be according to the strain that is put upon’ us. Regard with Fatherly 
tenderness all for whom we ought to ^ay— the sick, the dying, the 
hearts that are ill at ease — those who are travelling for the good of their 
health or for the extension of honourable commerce ; the young who are 
full of blessedness and new hope and a song of gladness they never sung 
before ; the prodigal, the wanderer far beyond any prayer of ours, lying 
as it were barely within the sweep of thine own infinite love, bring home 
and restore to sonship. 

The Lord hear us, the God of Jacob put around us his everlasting arms, 
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ comfort us with some new 
degree of grace. Amen. 

Matthew xxiii. 

1. Then spake Jesus to the multitudCj and to his disciples, 

2. Saying, The scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses’ seat ; 

3. All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do ; » 
but do not ye after their works ; for they say, and do not. 

4. For they bind heavy burdens and grievous to be borne, and lay them 



149 


I 

THE TEXT. 


on men’s shoulders ; but they themselves will not move them with one of 
their fingers. 

5. But all their works they do for to be seen of men : they make broad 
their phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their garments, 

6. And love the uppermost rooms (first places) at feasts, and the chief 
seats in the synagogues (Jerusalem end), 

7. And greetings in the markets, and to be called of men. Rabbi, Rabbi. 

8 . But be not ye called Rabbi : for one is your Master, even Christ ; 
and all ye are brethren. 

9. And call no man your father upon the earth : for one is your Father, 
which is in heaven. 

10. Neither be ye called masters (directors of conscience) : for one is 
your Master, even Christ. 

11. But he that is greatest among you shall be your servant. 

12. And whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased ; and he that 
shall humble himself shall be exalted. 

13. But woe unto (for) you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites ! for ye 
shut up the kingdom of heaven against men ; for ye neither go in your- 
selves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in. 

14. Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites ! for ye devour 
widows’ houses, and fora pretence make long piayer : therefore ye shall 
receive the greater damnation. 

15. Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites ! for ye compass 
sea and land to make one proselyte (proselytes were regarded as the lep- 
rosy of Israel, and hindered the coming of the Messiah), and when he is 
made, ye make him twofold more the child of hell (worthy of hell) than 
yourselves. 

16. Woe unto you, ye blind guides, which say, Whosoever shall swear 
by the temple, it is nothing ; but whosoever shall swear by the gold of 
the temple, he is a debtor-! 

17. Ye fools and blind : for whether is greater, the gold, or the temple 
that sanctifieth the gold ? 

18. And, Whosoever shall swear by the altar, it is nothing ; but who- 
soever sweareth by the gift that is upon it, he is guilty. 

19. Ye fools and blind : for whether is greater, the gift, or the altar that 
sanctifieth the gift ? 

20. Whoso therefore shall swear by the altar, sweareth by it, and by 
all things thereon. 

21. And whoso shall swear by the temple, sweareth by it, and by him 
that dwelleth therein. 

22. And he that shall swear by heaven, sweareth by the throne of God, 
and by him that sitteth thereon. 

23. Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites ! for ye pay tithe 
• of mint and anise and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of 

the law, judgment, mercy, and faith ; these ought ye to have done, and 
not to leave the other undone. 



150 


MATTHEW XXIII. 


24, Ye blind guides, which strain at (out) a goat, and swallow a camel 
{an unclean beast, Lev. xi. 4). 

25. Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites ! for ye make 
clean the outside of the cup and of the platter, but within they are full of 
extortion and excess. 

6. Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse first that which is within the cup, and 
platter, that the outside of them may be clean also. 

27. Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites ! for ye are like 
unto whited sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are 
within full of dead men’s bones, and of all uncleanness. 

28. Even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within 
ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity. 

29. Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites ! because ye build 
the tombs of the prophets (four of which were then visible at the base of. 
the Mount of Olives), and garnish the sepulchres of the righteous (actions 
good in themselves become wrong in the hands of hypocrites). 

30. And say, If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not 
have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets. 

31. Wherefore ye be witnesses unto yourselves, that ye are the children 
of them which killed the prophets. 

32. Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers. 

33. Ye serpents, ye generation (brood or progeny) of vipers, how can 
ye escape the damnation of hell ? 

34. Wherefore, behold, I send unto you prophets, and wise men, and 
scribes : and some of them ye shall kill and crucify ; and some of them 
shall ye scourge in your synagogues, and persecute them from city to 
city; 

35. That upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the 
earth, from the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias son 
of Barachias, whom ye slew between the temole and the altar. 

36. Verily I say unto you, All these things shall come upon this genera- 
tion. 

37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killestthe prophets, and stonest 
them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy chil- 
dren together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and 
ye would not I 

38. Behold, your house is left unto you desolate. 

39. For I say unto you, Ye shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall say, 
Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord. 



NOT A MERE DESTRUCTIONIST. 


iSi 


A FOURFOLD ASPECT OF CHRIST. 

J ESUS CHRIST had just received a deputation of the Pharisees 
and the Herodians. The same day he had received a deputa- 
tion of SadduceeSj and the same day it would appear he had 
answered a tempting question put to him by a lawyer, “Master, 
which is the great commandment in the law ?“ We have seen 
that Jesus Christ utterly humiliated all the men that came to him 
with questions that were meant to tempt him and to ensnare him 
in his talk. Pie inflicted upon them the most desperate chastise- 
ment. According to the statement of the text, he gagged them. 
We read, “ he put them to silence,” literally he put the gag in 
their mouths, and made them quiet because they could not answ'er 
his great expositions. 

It might be thought, therefore, that he had cleanly swept out 
the whole church of his time, had dismantled it and had visited it 
with complete and perpetual disinheritance, so that he stood before 
his age as a mere image-breaker, an iconoclast, a man who smote 
all existing things of a religious kind, and poured upon them and 
upon their teachers all manner of severe and destructive contempt. 
Yet how he spreads himself over the whole occasion ; he will not 
allow that inference to be drawn ; knowing that in every crowd 
there is a preponderance of foolish and unreasonable men, he in- 
stantly takes up an affirmative and constructive attitude, and says, 
ere the great throngs break up, ‘ ‘ Whatsoever the scribes and 
Pharisees bid you observe, that observe and do : but do not ye 
after their works, for they say and do not,” Still he is consistent 
with himself : not one good word will he bestow upon the scribes 
and Pharisees as such, but he says the law must not suffer because 
its interpreters are weak or vile men. The law is an eternal quan- 
tity, a perpetual dignity that can never be impaired even by the 
vilest behaviour of those who interpret it and enforce it ; that law 
must stand. 

You will see therefore that he was not a mere dedrudionisf : it 
was not Christ’s purpose to dishonour the law or to enfeeble its ap- 
plication in any sense. : He is saying in these latter chapters of the 
gospel, precisely what he said in ' the sennon on the mount, 
“ Think not that I am come to destroy the law and the prophets : 
I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil. Till heaven and earth 



152 


MA TTHE W XX I 11. 


pass away, one jot or one tittle of the law shall in no wise pass 
away.” Yet he rebukes with no stinted reproach those who had 
fallen below the dignity and holiness of their sacred vocation. 
The line he draws is broad, palpable, never to be confused indeed, 
and in drawing that line he displayed, if we naay speak humanly 
of him, one of the finest qualities of his spirit and character. 

He did more. This was not local talk, this was not a speech 
spoken to a few people now dead and gone. In this exhortation 
Christ touches and refutes a sophism that has found its utterance 
in a// of civilized history. What is that sophism .? That if a 
man shall do anything bad, everything good that he touches is to 
be condemned along with himself. Is not that the sophism of to- 
day? A man who reads the Bible has been found to do some- 
thing wrong .* instantly there are persons who say, “ This comes 
of your Bible-reading, then no more Bible-reading for me.’' 
Such is the witless assault that is made on the eternal Book ! The 
Bible reader Vi bad, therefore the Bible is bad — such the dishonest 
logic, the corrupt and consciously corrupt reasoning of men who 
want to escape Bible morality and Bible discipline. 

A man who goes to church has been found to defraud his credi- 
tors, to speak profane words, to do some deed accounted bad by 
social critics, be that deed what it may, and instantly the criticism 
falls upon the church within whose walls no bad man ever heard 
one word of encouragement. Put it to yourselves and say whether 
we may not have sometimes been tempted to say, ‘ ‘ If these are 
your Christians, no more Christians for us. ’ ’ Observe the vacant 
reasoning, the poor, incoherent, insane form of argument, without 
the substance or the power thereof. You have found a countefeit 
coin, and therefore you give up the currency of the realm. Some 
man has forged the signature of another, and therefore you will 
not believe a single letter which your child writes to you. There 
is falsehood, therefore there is no truth. Who would accept state- 
ments so palpably and intolerably absurd ? Yet these statements 
are considered sufficient to pick up sharp stones and throw at the 
mouth of the Son of God ; when he speaks the great gospel of 
truth and love and redemption, any fist will do to smite that 
mouth, any staff will do to strike that Teacher. It is because we 
want to strike him dumb that we avail ourselves of arguments so 
unsound as to be not lies only but blasphemies. 



153 


CHRISTS RELATION TO TRUTH. 

It may have been so in your house — let me localise the appeal, 
yea personalize it, after the manner of the Master in this very 
chapter. When the one professing Christian in your house — there 
is but one, poor speckled bird — did something wrong, through 
that wrong-doer you sought to thrust a dagger into his Master’s 
heart. Remember your taunt, your bitter sneer, your ungener- 
ous and ignoble word ; it was not the individual before you that 
you wounded only, but through that individual you sought to put 
your sword’s sharp point into the heart of the Son of God. 

Let us now — passing from this part of the subject-look at' 
Christ as the centre of the great multitude of scribes and Pharisees 
whom he addressed in the eloquent maledictions which are recorded 
in this chapter. It may assist the imagination and may bring the 
whole scene with its moral suggestions more vividly around us, if 
we think of Christ standing lo-day in any Christian community, 
surrounded by men who have been pilaying falsely with his name. 
The scribes and Pharisees were present : he was not hurling male- 
dictions upon the absent. When did Jesus Christ ever address per- 
sons who were not actually before him t See the great throng of 
false men, scribes, Pharisees, hypocrites, blind leaders of the 
blind, all around him, and then hear this terrible speech. It was 
a day of judgment in very deed. There was great lightning and 
thunder that day, the earth palpitated to the resounding eloquence, 
and the heavens vibrated as the eloquent tones fell from the lips 
divine. The men could not run away, he fastened them to the 
earth : they could not lift their fingers to put into their ears, for 
he held them down, and that dajTie spoke as he had never spoken 
before in fulness and breadth and fierceness of moral indignation. 
The men were fascinated, spellbound —a subtle wizardry held 
them fast in positions from which they would most gladly have ex- 
tricated themselves, but not until lie who was the Master willed 
it, were they permitted to lift a foot from the ground and to pass 
away to their occupations and their homes. 

Plearing Christ’s great speech, what do we learn about him ? 
We see in him a devotion to truth which clothed him with sublimest 
fearlessness. Plow he talks, how he insults the men, how he 
beards them, how he lays his great grip upon them and shakes 
them, and they cannot answer him a w^ord. What is the explana- 


MATTHEW XXHl 


IS4 

tion of this mighty mastery over the leading spirits of his time ? Ts 
he speaking resentfully ? No, for the men who speak resentfully 
are weak ; strong only for one little moment, but it is a strength 
of desperation, to be succeeded by most pitiful reaction. Account 
for that fearlessness. You will find no suggestion that covers the 
whole occasion but the suggestion now named — devotion to truth, 
so complete, so profound, as to lift the man above all fear. See 
if there be not a deep philosophy in that fact. Men are not con- 
tinuously and coherently strong except in proportion to their de- 
votion to truth : such men are sublimated by their devotion, they 
are lifted up into a new and larger self-hood : it is no longer they 
that speak, but God that speaketh in them. The action is not to 
be measured by their personality, they stand as representatives of 
the majesty and grandeur of truth, they are the heroic expressions 
of a heroic principle. You will only be strong in proportion as 
the truth — not some side, point, or aspect of it, but ihe truth — is in 
you. 

' How is it that we have s.o much breaking down in Christian testi- 
mony,. so much ambiguity and equivocation and uncertainty? 
How is it that we have so much paltering with vow and oath and 
high resolution ? Simply because the complete truth is not in us, 
or our devotion to truth is merely to some side or aspect of it. 
Jesus Christ could say that he was Himself the truth. The Truth 
never blushed, never stammered, never apologised, never asked for 
leave to be. The tone of truth cannot change, it is royal, com- 
manding : if audacious, simply because complete and infallible. 
We should be on our guard lest we seize only some pints of truth, 
and take, as we sometimes ignorantly phrase it, our stand upon 
particular doctrines. There are no particular doctrines, in the 
sense of separate and isolated doctrines, in truth. Truth is one. 
We call the bigot ^ strong man simply because he is a narrow one 
and moves in a special direction, and we call the devotee of truth 
sometimes a latitudinarian, because he does not live under a ceil- 
ing but under a sky ; he is not bounded by walls ecclesiastical, 
but by the infinite horizon drawn by the infinite hand. 

Do not be strong on particular doctrines and seek to develop 
special virtues, and to have pet graces : live in truth, the whole 
truth, and nothing but the truth. When we touch that high region 
of perfect devotion to complete truth, we shall not know what fear 



155 


CHRISTAS INSIGHT INTO TRUTH. 

is. 'rhis is the victor}’’ that overcometh the world, even our faith. 
The true man does not know when the clouds gather or -when the 
storm roars around him ; he says the storm will cry itself to rest, 
the tornado will blow itself out in silence, and ‘ ‘ truth must stand 
when all things fail,” 

Looking at Jesus Christ again, standing in the midst of that 
great seething multitude of scribes, Pharisec-s, hypocrites, and blind 
teachers, I see in him an insight into truth which gave him infinite 
pre-eminence as a Teacher. How he destroy s the sophisms of the 
blind men ! He says, ” Ye blind guides which say, Whosoever 
shall swear by the temple, it is nothing; but whosoever shall 
swear by the gold of the temple, he is a debtor ! Ye fools and 
blind ; for whether is greater, the gold, or the temple that sancti- 
fieth the gold ? And, Whosoever shall swear by the altar, it is 
nothing ; but whosoever sweareth by the gift that is upon it, he is 
guilty. Ye fools and blind : for whether is greater, the gift, or 
the altar that sanctifieth the gift ?” 

His all-piercing insight into truth lifts him above all competing 
teachers. Here we see somewhat of his intellectual breadth and 
grandeur coupled with a moral indignation, that becomes impa- 
tient in the veiy tones which it utters. How he must have said 
these words ; again and again are they repeated : “Ye fools and 
blind, how is it that you do not see the right relation and propor- 
tion of things How is it that you mistake the near for the greats 
t'';e temporal for the eternal ? What has become of your common 
.sense, or ordinaiy' natural reason, that you set all things in a row 
without attention to perspective and distance and light and shadow 
rnd expressive and interpreting colour.? What has fallen upon 
you, what dementation is this, what sudden insanity, what moral 
oblicpiity .? Why, you have lost the first conception of truth, and 
you have betaken yourselves to metaphysical quibbles and puzzles 
unworthy of the intellect with which God endowed you.” 

This is the inevitable course of wrong thinking in religious 
matters. Men make vain distinctions, they create a .series of 
puzzles, they have so much leisure that it becomes a temptation to 
them. This is the danger of the church to- day. We are so over- 
fed with gospel, we' are so churched and preached to death, that 
men are now beginning to turn into mechanical puzzles the im- 


56 


MATTHEW XXni. 

measurable, impalpable, infinite truth of God. We are now 
creating sects, schools, denominations, and so-called churches and 
communions. I would God that some fire of persecution should 
break out amongst us to force us back to great principles, to a 
proper distinction between the temple and the gold, the altar and 
the gift, that we may not be inverting things and putting them into 
false relations and proportions. If the wolf would come back, 
the old grey wolf that barked at our heroic fathers, watched for 
them, showed its gleaming teeth whenever they came in sight, 
sprang upon them, sucked their blood— we should get back to 
right ideas of inspiration, truth, prayer, missions, evangelisation, 
and should cease the small talk about mechanism and line distinc- 
tions and theMistribution of labour— so diffuse as to lose its inten- 
sity and divest itself of the force that makes wicked kingdoms 
tremble. 

What is our insight into truth } Do we sec it — the word that 
Amos saw We have only heard it in trembling and fading 
echoes. The word that Hosea saWy that sight turns a poor man 
into a rich one, that sight turns a herdman into a prophet, that 
sight marks the critical point in all human history. Blessed are 
the pure in heart, for they shall , . . SEE God. 

Let us consider — are we wood-splitters, are we puzzle-makers in 
the church, or are we inspired men ? Are we the frightened, the 
timid, the conventional, and those who live only on the surface ? 
The church has lost inspiratim. The church- poor, poor fool — 
she has allowed every thief to take from her what he liked. The 
felon has taken from her miracles and tongues and prophesyings 
and gifts of healing, and inspiration and Christ — except as a great 
historical genius — and the cross, except as it represents a heroic 
but vain sentiment. And the felon is now cozening her with a 
view of lifting off her GOD. Poor church! Only insight into 
truth will bring back her possessions. 

Do not be clever on points : do not give yourselves to a kind 
of nisi prills sharpness. If Burke was right when he said that no 
man understood the English constitution so little as a merely nisi 
prius lawyer, surely we are giving legitimate extension to the truth 
when we say that no man understands Christ so little as the man 
who makes sects in his name. Christ is not here, nor there, nor 
yonder, he is not to be localised, he is the breath, the life of all 



THE ELOQUENT MALEDICTIONS. • 


157 


things. There be men who say, ‘ Lo, Christ is here, and lo, 
Christ is there,” and if another man should arise amongst us to 
say, “ Christ is everywhere — Christ is in Hindooisin, Chri.st was in 
the Pagan philosophy, Christ has been in every civilisation that 
has rolled its paiticular course over all languages and nations, ' ’ lie 
would be accounted latitudinarian. Be it mine to see in every 
flower a child of the sun, and in every noble deed and heroic im- 
pulse an inspiration of the Son of God. 

Looking again at that wondrous Speaker as he fastens his hear- 
ers around him, I see in him a grasp of iruth which enabled him io 
represent its continuity ihrotigh the ages. Observe how he goes back- 
ward and how he goes forward. He says, “ Ye .say, if we had 
been in the days of our fathers we would not have been partakers 
with them in the blood of the prophets. Ye would — ye serpents, 
ye generation of vipers, ye would! Do you suppose that this kind 
of conduct depends on climate, on particular details of time and 
space 1 If you had lived in the days of Zacharias you would have 
killed him on the very spot where he fell under your fathers’ 
hand. Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, ye progeny of hell, 
ye would!" So does he grasp the truth ! He would have pleased 
the people better if he had said, “You would not have done 
what your fathers did, you are much better men, much nobler and 
kinder persons : it would never have occurred to you surely to 
have imbrued your hands in the righteous blood of Abel : it would 
never have occurred to your refined sentiment to have had any- 
thing to do murderously with Zacharias the son of Barachias.” 
He might have bought himself a cheap popularity by such vulgar 
lies, but looking at them, piercing them, seeing all history in one 
grand continuity, he said, ‘ ‘ Ye blind guides, evil never changes ; 
a serpent is always a serpent : you have the serpent spirit in you, 
and until you are born again you would have done just what your 
fathers did. Fill up the measure of their iniquity — they filled the 
cup nearly to the brim, pour it full up, till the drops fall on your 
feet, and when your mission is fulfilled, God will find a place for 
you in his Gehenna. ” 

We have then to deal with a Man who knows all things, who is 
not to be betrayed into small sophisms and into narrow deductions, 
Avho looks around the horizon. What think ye of the Christ — of 



158 • MATTHEW :XXni 

his eloquence.^ How it rolls and, scorches like floods of lava. 
We teach our boys at school the Philippics of Demosthenes, and 
say, “Look at his interrogations ; the mark of interrogation is 
the chief point of punctuation , upon his eloquent pages. How 
he hurls his questions, how every question sharpens itself like a 
dagger that is seeking the blood of the accused one.” There is 
nothing, by the common consent of men who are entitled to 
judge upon the matter, in all eloquence, ancient or modern, to 
compare, for grandeur of malediction, for moral nobleness, for 
intellectual insight, with the eloquence of this denunciation of 
Christ’s. 

Then I see in it, last of all, an experience of truth, which made 
Christ ike greatest of evangelists. He would not conclude with ob- 
jurgation. The truth does not make him stiff, imperious, self-in- 
volved ; his love of the truth, his experience of it in his own heart, 
is such that he wants every living man to feel it as he does. “ O 
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest 
them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered 
thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under 
her wings !” Why ? Because he would have all men know the 
truth as he knew it, feel the truth as he felt it, enjoy the truth as 
he enjoyed it. That is the secret of evangelisation. Tell me to 
go and propagate a community, a sect, a denomination, and I 
may probably tire on the road. There are inspirations that will 
last but for a period of days. Let me on the other hand feel in 
my heart that men are dying for want of the gospel of Christ, let 
me feel what it is to enjoy the grace of Christ in my own heart, 
let me really feel that Christ can be one with me, in purpose and 
sympathy and desire, and then the rest will come. 

No words suggest themselves to me sharp enough, terrible 
enough, w'ith which to condemn and. blast the sophism which is 
being taught by some men to-day, namely, that if we could offer 
more money, more young men would come forward and offer 
themselves to the service of the Son of God. I can find no words 
that will enable me to smite that- awdul blasphemy as it ought to be 
struck. We hear it from our Christian platforms that if our 
churches could offer larger incomes we should have what is called 
a better class of young men coming for^vard to give themselves to 



159 


A GOD -INSPIRED MINISTRY. 

the ministry. God forbid ! God’s own damnation fall upon any 
man who touches this ministry that he may live by it That is hov/ 
the poor church is being divested, impoverished, depleted, ruined 
— a young man considering whether he will take this sum of 
money to preach Christ or that sum of money to follow a commer- 
cial pursuit — debating or betraying. If he would turn to the pul- 
pit, my prayer would be that God might strike him dumb on the 
road, and blind and deaf, and lay his hand upon him like a bur- 
den. A man must say, “ Woe is me if I preach not the gospel, 
necessity is laid Upon me to preach the gospel, ’ ’ but we are 7nak- 
ing ministers now, tempting them, encouraging them to come for- 
ward. Let a man be driven forward, thrust out, impelled. It is not 
permitted to us to boast or to glorify oneself, but it is permitted to 
a man to glorify God in any impulse which may have driven him 
forward to this work. 



•LXXXIII. 


PRAYER. 

Almighty God, we are here still, even in thine house, and in the most 
holy place upon the earth, even the sanctuary of God, because of thy ten- 
der mercy and thy lovingkindness towards us. This is the crown and 
the sum thereof : thou hast no other love to show us here and now, than 
in the house and in the cross of thy Son Jesus Christ. This is the very 
sun of thy glory, the full outshining of thy grace and wisdom, and no 
other light can we now have than that which is the grace of Christ Jesus. 
We stand in that grace, it is our comfort, our strength, our one hope ; 
without it our life has no light, no music, no outlook — with it we have 
new Heavens and a new earth ; every day and every breath we draw is a 
promise that we shall soon see the broader revelation. 

Thou hast brought us up out of the valley of th§ week and set out feet 
upon a high hill, where the wind is pure, and whence we see all the blue- 
ness of the summer sky, and hear voices fliat are not heard in other 
places. This is none other than the house of God, and this is the gate of 
heaven : the angels are not far away, and the harpers harping with their 
harps are just behind the translucent cloud. We have come to the gen- 
eral assembly and church of the firstborn, written in heaven : to-day our 
aspirations are realised in a great gladness, we see the invisible, we touch 
the impalpable, we are cldse to God ; behold here we see the shining of 
thy garments, as thou dost stand backward towards us, for now could we 
not bear the intolerable shining of thy face. Make thy goodness pass be- 
fore us, and that will be pledge enough that thy glory will follow. May 
we see thee in every blooming flower, hear thee in every trill that makes 
the woods alive, and feel thee near in every tender perfume of the garden. 
Give us a great conception of thyself, deliver us from all narrow views, 
and all superficial interpretations, save us from the poverty and the 
bondage of the mean letter, and lead us into the freedom of intelligent 
sympathy and the possession of glowing love. 

We bless thee for thy word— so grand, so tender, broad as a firmament 
and yet particular as a shining star, having a message to each heart, a spe- 
cial blessing for each needy life. We bless thee for the cross, that up- 
gathering and expression of the principle of sacrifice which is part of this 
wondrous scheme of thine, which is known by every root that brings 
forth its stem and blossom, and felt by every heart, but realised in all the 
glory of its meaning only in the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of 



THE TEXT. 


i6i 


me world. Help us to live in his. Spirit, to realise and enjoy with un- 
utterable gladness all the meaning and purpose oi the shedding of his 
blood. Whdn the tempter would drag us down, may we answer him with 
the lightning of the cross, and find our security in the wounded Son of 
God : he loved us, he gave himself for us, he spared not the blood of his 
heart, and we need it all. 

Let thy merciful visitation of us this morning be felt by every heart, so 
that there maybe no exclusion from thy blessing. May the hospitality of 
thine house offer itself to the poorest and meanest of us, to the man 
whose face is an anxiety and whose heart is a bitter torment to itself. 
Speak great hospitable words to the prodigal returned, tell him that there 
is no robe in thine house too good for his wearing. Kiss every little 
child, bless every one who is weary and ill at ease, deliver from per- 
plexity the soul whose embarrassments are too vexatious, and send light 
upon lives that have dipped down into great caverns of darkness. Lift us 
all above our fears, enable us to set our feet upon the neck of our spirit- 
ual enemies, and may we to-day enter, not only into the serenity, but into 
the triumph of faith. 

Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly. We listen for the rolling of thy 
chariot wheels — delay not on the road : thy whole creation groaneth and 
travaileth in pain together until now, for thy coming. O bridegroom of 
the earth, come : Saviour of the world, tarry not long behind— we are 
lost and weary and sic^ and bruised : we shall die presently if thou dost 
not come. But thou wilt not deny the voice of thine earth, thou wilt 
surely reply to her sighing, and there shall yet be gladness where there 
has been much woe. Amen. 

Matthew xsiv. 1-41. 

1. And Jesus went out, and departed from the temple : and his disci- 
ples came to him for to show him the buildings of the temple. 

2. And Jesus said unto them, See ye not all these things ? verily I say 
unto you, There shall not be left here one stone upon another, that shall 
not be thrown down. 

3. And as he sat upon the mount of Olives, the disciples came unto 
him privately, saying, Tell us, when shall these things be? and what 
shall be the sign of thy coming (thy presence), and of the end of the 
world (the age) ? 

4. And Jesus answered and said unto them, Take heed that no man 
deceive you. 

5. For many shall come in my name, saying, I am (the) Christ ; and 
shall deceive (seduce) many. 

6. And ye shall hear (be about to hear) of wars and rumours of wars : 
see that ye be not troubled : for all these things must come to pass, but 
the end is not yet. 

7. For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom : 


MATTHEW XXIV. i~4i. 


162 


and there shall be famines and pestilences, and earthquakes, in divers 
places. 

8. All these are the beginning of sorrows. 

9. Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you i 
and ye shall be hated of all nations for my name’s sake. 

10. And then shall many be offended, and shall betray one another, 
and shall hate one another. 

ir. And many false prophets shall rise, and, shall deceive many. 

12. And because iniquity (lawlessness) shall abound, the love of many 
shall wax cold. 

13. But he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved. 

14. And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world 
(Roman empire) for a witness unto all nations ; and then shall the end 
come. 

15. When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken 
of by Daniel the prophet, stand in the holy place (whoso readeth, let him 
understand :) 

16. Then let them which be in Judsea flee into the mountains ; 

17. Let him which is on the housetop not come down to take any thing 
out of his house ; 

18. Neither let him which is in the field return back to take his clothes 
(his cloak), 

19. And woe unto them that are with child, ancf to them that give suck 
in those days ! 

20. But pray ye that your flight be not in the winter, neither on the 
Sabbath day : 

21. For then shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the be* 
ginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be. 

22. And except those days should be shortened, there should no flesh 
be saved : but for the elect’s sake those days shall be shortened. 

23. Then if any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there ; 
believe it not. 

24. For there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall 
show great signs and wonders ; insomuch that, if it were possible, they 
shall deceive the very elect. 

25. Behold, I have told you before. 

26. Wherefore if they shall say unto you, Behold, he is in the desert ; 
go not forth : behold he is in the secret chambers ; believe it not. 

27. For as the lightning cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto 
the west ; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be. 

28. For wheresoever the carcase is, there will the eagles be gathered 
together. 

29. Immediately after the tribulation of those days shall the sun be 
darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall 
from heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken ; 

30. And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven : and 



NATURAL COMPARISONS. 


163 


then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of 
man coming In the clouds of heaven with power and great glory. 

31. And he shall send his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and 
they shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from one end of 
heaven to the other. 

32. Now learn a parable of the fig tree ; Where his branch is yet ten- 
der, and putteth forth leaves, ye know that summer is nigh : 

33. So likewise ye (the pronoun is emphatic), when ye shall see all 
these things, know that it is near, even at the doors. 

34. Verily I say unto you, This generation shall not pass, till all these 
things be fulfilled. 

35. Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass 
away. 

36. But of that day and hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels of 
heaven, but my Father only. 

37. But as the days of Noe were, so shall also the coming of the Son of 
man be. 

38. For as in the days that were before the flood they were eating and 
drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noe entered 
into the ark, 

39. And knew not until the flood came, and took them all away ; so 
shall also the coming of the Son of man be. 

40. Then shall two be in the field ; the' one shall be taken, and the 
other left. 

41. Two women shall be grinding at the mill (the lowest form of female 
labour) ; the one shall be taken, and the other left. 

THE EXCITING ELEMENT IN CHRIST’S 
MINISTRY. 

I MAGINE a river very broad and deep, rolling quietly and 
rhythmically for long miles, not a bubble upon the surface, nu 
noise, no tumult, a great, deep, strong, noble stream of water, and 
imagine that stream suddenly coming to a terrific precipice. 
What a cataract, what a roar and rush and tumult, what rainbow's 
made by the sun, what snowy veils and screens, what infinite w'iz- 
ardry of shape and sound and suggestion ! It does not look like 
the same water. ITbthing is so accommodating as w'ater ; it w'ill 
do anything, it will allow itself to be broken up into little drops 
that' shall sparkle like diamonds in the shining sun, and gather it- 
self into great masses and carry navies as if they were straw's driven 
by the wind. It will run through . gardens, it will come into 
houses dripping and dropping just to suit the capacity of your little 


164 


MATTHEW XXIV. 1-41. 


cup ; it will gather itself into infinite blackness in the heavens, and 
fall in daily baptism upon the thirsty earth. There is nothing so 
genial, yet so terrible, as water — unless, indeed, to be its mate and 
contrast, fire. 

It is even so with thbse speeches of Christ. Up to within a few 
chapters of the portion we have now read, the stream of his talk 
has rolled forward in infinite calmness and nobleness, having no 
end of suppressed power in it— but just recently it has come over a 
terrific precipice of rocks, and it has been rolling and dashing 
amongst us like a fierce cataract, so that some of us have hardly 
been able to recognise the grand, massive, eloquent Speaker, in 
the recent turmoil and rush of his enthusiasm, passion, and eager, 
burning consecration. Yet the Speaker is one and the same, 
master of all styles. Never man spake like this Man. No 
prophet could forecast his tone, or tell with certainty what course 
he would take in any argument, or what answer he w’ould make 
to any temptation. We are now amongst the parables of judg- 
ment, and are standing in what may be termed the very sanctuary 
of destruction and sacrifice. 

At this moment the idea of desiruciion is uppermost in the Sav- 
iour’s mind. The explanation is that his owm soul w'as sorrowful 
even unto death. When a man’s souli^ sorrowful, there is noth- 
ing being built up otiiside of it. The universe takes its hue and 
tone and meaning from the inner experience and consciousness of 
the observer. The cross is already shouldered, the nails are 
already half in the quivering hands, the blood is already begin- 
ning to trickle down the anxious face. So all things are dying 
around him : the temple is trembling, the heavens are gathering 
themselves up into a last agony, the old earth is pained at her 
heart and will presently give way. 

How exquisite was the correspondence between the inner and 
the outer in the life of Christ ! He saw things with his heart. 
When he nestled in his Father’s bosom, and felt all the serenity of 
that divine warmth, he said, “ Consider the lilies how they grow ; 
they toil not, they spin not ; yet I say unto you. That Solomon 
in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.” That was his 
view of nature and of life, as he laid his hand upon his Father’ s 
heart. W’hen he felt his Father’s arms strongly and warmly 



THE SPIRIT OF JUDGMEXT. 


i6s 

around him he said, “ Fear not, little flock ; it is your Father's 
good pleasure to give you the kingdom,” and the embrace was 
closer and closer between the Father and the Son. Now that 
Calvar}’- is in front, Golgotha, the place of skulls and bones, pre- 
ceded by Gethsemane and all tlsat Gethsemane means — even the 
temple, marble and gold, the choicest thing of its kind in all the 
earth, is reeling and trembling and will presently fall flat down, a 
mass and heap of shapeless stones, as if struck by every wind of 
heaven. True Man, real Heart, grand Soul, what wonder that 
he spake lightning to the hypocrites, and tore the visors from their 
face with a ruthless energy 1 They were so unlike himself : he 
fought them as men would fight beasts, or ghosts, or things that 
make the life afraid. 

And the disciples come in once more, with their usual good 
purpose, and with their usual feebleness. Worn and sad of heart, 
his life a great agony, every look a pain, every pulsation a dying, 
he was walking a\vay from the temple, and his disciples, well- 
meaning little children, really soft of heart and good-willed, came 
to him to show him the buildings of the temple. They thought it 
would strike his mind — as in the case of our social sorrows. They 
would show him something, jihey' would try to lure him from his 
brooding thought that had so much blood in it. Perhaps if they 
talked to him, he would forget his woe awhile. So like children 
that would show their toys to a boy distressed, they would show 
him the beautiful temple, they must touch its stones with a trem- 
bling reverence, and thus seek to charm him from his grief. He 
heard what they had to say, and said, “ Ye see these things 
“ Yea, Lord.” “ There shall not be left one stone upon another 
that shall not be thrown down. Do not comfort me with things 
that perish : do not meet an infinite agony of the heart with things 
that have the writing of condemnation upon their very faces. 
Your meaning is good, but the comfort you offer me is itself 
short-lived ; yea, presently a great sharp wind will blow' through all 
this temple fabric, and no two stones piled upon each other shall 
anyw'here be found.” 

Silence ensues. Jesus went to the mount of Olives, and when 
he was quiet a little, the disciples came to him to continue the 
conversation w'hich he had suddenly introduced. “ Tell us, wdien 
.shall these things be ? and W'hat shall be the sign of thy coming, 



i66 


MATTHEW XXIV 1 - 41 . 


and of the end of the world ?' ’ Curious yet. Not struck by what 
was going to happen immediately in the way of humiliation and 
death, always forgetting the cross, always forgetting the only 
things they ought to have remembered, persistently throwing the 
mind forward to glories and kingdoms and princedoms and 
masterships of various degree and name. He could not bind them 
down to the only thing he came to exemplify and glorify — the 
principle of self-sacrifice. Yet he answers them now with a thun- 
derstorm. Yet amid all that thunderstorm there are streaks of 
blue sky, outlooks upon silent and beautiful places that may be 
temple gates or the beginnings of infinite sanctuaries. Never was 
such a speech delivered by mortal lips, its thunder, its silence, its 
infinite energy, its instruction w'hich might have been whispered 
in the ear of trouble. It was his own speech in very deed, both 
in its intellectual capacity, in its moral tone, in its subtle simplic- 
ity, in its grand grasp of past, present, and future, in all that was 
awful in grandeur and all that was luring and tender in heaven's 
own beauty. 

What is the subject? The coming of Christ Hoiv will he 
comt—when shall these things be — what shall be the sign of thy 
coming ? “ Tell us," said the eag^r disciples, " something about 

it, that thou- hast not yet spoken to any human ear." They 
gather closely around him : emphatically they came to him pri- 
vately, and they clustered around him — they would almost have 
crushed him in their eager love and in the straining of their at- 
tention to hear every tone and whisper of that voice. " Tell us." 

How could he refuse? Twelve children overgrown, .twelve 
faithful yet fickle men, twelve hearts that had done all they could 
for him — it was indeed but little, still it was not underestimated 
by his all -appreciating love. Now surely they will draw from him 
all that is in his heart. How can he refuse ? We have seen him 
shake off deputations of other kinds, notably the people w'ho came 
about the tribute money, the Sadducees who came with a question 
about the resurrection, others who came tempting him — he so 
spake to them that they never came back again. The burnt child 
dreads the fire. But now these are his owm twelve, and they 
want to know all about it, and the place is propitious aad con- 
venient — the mount of Olives, nobody there but themselves — why 
should not the whole thirteen of them carry the same secret ? Yet 


CALLED TO WATCH. 


167: 

he tells them much, and keeps back the thing they wanted to 
know, yea, in the very midst of his speech he saith, “ No man 
knoweth the hour, no, not even I.” How he could know and 
not know, be and not be, contradict himself with violence and yet 
be the same, infinite in self-coherence and in self-harmony — fools 
can never understand it, only those who are elected, called, sancti- 
fied can enter into that mystery. He is going to tell us, but he will 
not. He makes a great speech and leaves us in utter ignorance 
of the one thing we desire to know. Yet he speaks the one word 
which it is only needful for a man to heed to be truly wise. 
“ Watch.” The watcher w’ins, the watcher reads, the watcher sees 
the coming day. Watch ! We have seen men w^atch for the sun 
rising from the point of the Righi — ^all were looking in one direc- 
tion, nobody looking otherwhere— -the sigh, the joy, the tears, 
the religious silence. So says the Son of man, “ You want to see 
me coming, to rejoice in my cloudless light, to behold the beauty 
of my kingdom — Watch. ’ ’ Let us regard this coming of Christ in 
any light— coming into the individual heart, coming among the 
nations of the earth, coining in the pomp and glory of His power 
and sovereignty. Regard the coming of Christ in any and mry 
sense, and let us see what we can learn from this eloquent exposi- 
tion of the case. 

Do we not learn first of all that the coming of Christ makes itself 
felt through all the space of life ? When he moves, he stirs the uni- 
verse. He cannot come or go as if nothing had happened. He 
was before all things, and by him all things consist, and in him 
all things are made. The clouds are the trailing of his garments, 
and on the wings of the wind he flies. What wonder then that 
when he comes there shall be stir, tumult, agitating, shaking, a 
pulsing through and through the whole life and economy of 
things ? Behold his deity in this very action. The earth would be 
extinguished in its» little cloud, and the nearest star would not 
know that the spark had gone out— so says the astronomer. But 
when the su7i, at which all lamps are lighted, withdraws, the uni- 
verse is enwrapped in impenetrable and intolerable night. Jesus 
Christ is the centre of all things, his life touches every point and 
tests every interest. Christ, cannot easily and quietly settle into a 
corrupt scheme and become, so to say', part and parcel of it. 
Whenever he moves, creation vibrates to his step. When he came 


MATTHE'IV XXiW i-4i- 


J68 


into tlie world Herod and all Jerusalem were troubled. Inquiry, 
iiu|uest, search, fear, curiosity, anticipation, hope, gladness — all 
tiiese conilicting emotions and ministries were set to work im- 
mediately : when he comes into the individual heart, old habits 
protest, old appetites cry out, the whole heaven and earth o£ the 
personal life are shaken, and they tremble under the tread of his 
corning. 

Do wc not also learn that the coming of Christ seems in its 
process to contradict its result? What harmony is there between a 
Christ that shall pacify all things and bring in sweet peace to reign 
as universal queen and all this tumult — wars, rumours of wars, 
nation rising against nation, kingdom against kingdom, famines, 
pestilences, earthquakes, and these are but the beginning of sor- 
rows ? Is there any relation between such phenomena and the in- 
coming of profound and universal and eternal peace ? The devil 
dies hard alwa}'s. The devil has made up his mind npt to quit us 
easily ; he will have the last pull. Remember the miracle in which 
Jesus Christ ordered the devil out of the sufferer, and the devil tore 
him and came out of him, but not without a final struggle, not 
without one more assault, not without upgathering his whole 
energy and seeking to kill him in the very act of leaving him. So 
it must be in the individual heart, in the national conscience, in the 
universal aspiration and feeling. Whenever Christ comes he comes 
by processes that seem to contradict the very idea of his coming. 

Is this your experience i Be not afraid, be not cast down by a 
great fear and sorrosv, lest Jesus Christ be not coming to you at 
all. Say you, “ I am only fighting, struggling, praying without 
an answer, knocking at a door that will not open, but I am still 
knocking — can this be right ? I have doubts, anxieties, tumults, 
that I dare not put into words," — is that your speech ? It reads 
as if part of this mightier eloquence — " Nation shall rise against 
nation — famines, pestilences, earthquakes, desolations, abomina- 
tions, great tribulations." Your little cross is cut out of this in- 
finite tree on which is hanging the Son of God. Let no man’s 
heart therefore fail him because he is now only in the tribulational 
period of this progress. The Son of God is coming, though at 
present it seems as if the Son of God \i2A forsaken the universe. 

Nothing happens in all this tumult thzt not foreseen. In 
the twenty-fifth verse Jesus Christ says, “ Behold, I have told you 


iVt; UNFORESEEN ElENl'S. lU) 

before.” There are no surprises lo Omniscience: uoUiiny hap- 
pens by accident in all the machinery and economy of the uuiveisc. 
The very hairs of your head are all numbered. There are no ac- 
cidents, in any lawless and incoherent sense of the term. All 
things work together for good to them that love God. jMv 
brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into divers trials, because 
out of the working of these trials shall come a complete and final 
peace. What knowledge of human nature is here revealed on the 
part of the Son of God. He knows the course of truth in the 
world, he knows precisely what every man will feel, how certain 
interests will be shocked, how evil habitudes must be displaced by 
violence, and how at the last there will be a fight between evil and 
good, devil and God, that shall seem to wreck the universe. God 
knows the whole scene down to Armageddon’s bloody field — it is 
before the Divine vision : not a soul, in all the holy army shall be 
lost, but when the night falls on the ghastly field, only evil shall be 
wounded and smitten with death. Hope on, live in watchfulness 
— ’tis not ours to lead, but quietly and loyally'- to follow. 

Now in view of these mar\’ellous circumstances, the inquiry 
becomes very natural — W7iy should the incoming of the Son of 
God be accompanied by commotion and tumult so tremendous ? 
Why not come like a dawning day, why not like the springing 
corn or the budding flower ? He does come exactly like these very 
things you have named. Like break of day — know ye what that 
means in the jungles where beasts congregate and vermin swarm in 
countless multitudes 1 Know ym that the shining of the sun upon 
some places is like a shower of darts 1 How the forsaken holes 
are sought by the wandering vermin, how eyes not made for much 
light flee away from the broadening day as from an enemy that 
will kill and spare not? And the springing corn —do not talk 
lightly about the springing corn as though it were aill ease. Thou 
fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened except it die. The 
springing corn is a springing out of corruption, life out of death, 
the mystery of germination, the central mystery of material things. 
The springing corn — how that sharp spike pierces the dust and 
comes up into the light, and how quietly it grows, say you ? So it 
does, but to what e7id does it grow ? See how the blade grows up 
into the ear, and how the full corn grows in the ear, and how the 
golden head is bent again towards the dust out of which it came, 



170 MATTHEW XXm i-\i: 

and how it stands there like a doomed sacrifice awaiting the priest’s 
knife that shall cut it down and grind it between the upper and 
the neither millstone, and bum it w'ith fire, and then give the 
world its bread. Is there no tumult, is there no pain, is there no 
agony there } He does come as break of day and as springing 
corn. 

And think ye that the diist of the earth has no history of sorrow 
and smiting and w'ounding and great pain .? How is the dust 
formed.? By terrible revolutions,, by shattering rains, by powder- 
ing w’inds ; the dust is, so to say, the sweat of the very rocks, the 
dust itself is the result of smiting, grinding, pulverising by proc- 
c.sses which, if the earth had been sensitive, would have meant 
sorrow, pain, bitterness, Golgotha, Calvary. The whole creation 
groaneth, and travaileth in pain together until now. 

And the spring comes through ,• the winter will hardly 

let it come, the great winter that you thought had gone, comes up 
ten days after the spring has had posse.ssion and says, “Retire,” 
blows upon the green young thing great breaths of ice, and 
sometimes it seems as if the spring must go away and never come 
again. Dear spring, sw^eet child, vernal beauty, truly thou hast a 
great fight to fight to get thy hold upon the earth. Spring wrestles 
with winter, fights him bravely, will have her way, and “ flings a 
primrose on the bank in pledge of victory.” 

So Christ will come. Let no man attempt to define the advent 
of Christ Let it take upon itself the smallest or the largest mean- 
ing— -it yill alwaj's imply shaking, distress, war, desolation, move- 
ment of the most terrific kind ; but over it all, under it all, round 
about it all, is the sweet promise that the whole earth shall be the 
garden of God, the old, old earth .shall have the best robe flung 
around its shoulders, and like a returned prodigal shall be set in 
its Father's house to go out no more for ever. We are part of 
the earth, and every man of us shall be saved — not a soul amongst 
us shall be lost. Flope on, fight on, pray on, and even thou, 
poor w^anderer, miserable self-torraentor, shut up with devils at 
night and fighting invisible foes all day— even thou shalt be on the 
right side of the door when the door is shut. 



LXXXIV. 


PRAYER. 

AtMiGHTY God, thou art always coming : behold Jesus Chrtst is born 
amongst us every day, every night the shepherds sing and hear tne song 
of the angels, and are filled with great joy because the delivering life has 
come into the world. May Christ be boro in us the hope of glory, and 
may he come to us with the light of every morning, and shine upon us ail 
the night long through every star. Enable us always to hear the footfall 
of thy coming, that we may always watch and be ready, and be found 
amongst those servants who are blessed because of their industry and 
t'igilance. 

Enable us to know the uncertainty of our life as vve surely know the 
liUleness of its span. So teach us to number our days that we may apply 
our hearts unto wisdom. May we know how to reckon our days well, 
with all soberness and accuracy, that we be not found amongst those fools 
who suppose they can never die. Enable us by the ministry of thy Holy 
Spirit, ever indwelling and ever working within us, to see life as it is, in 
its simplicity and mystery, in its immediate duty and its far-off anticipa- 
tions, in its tragedy of sin, in its need of divine help, and enable us, hav- 
ing seen all this, to avail ourselves of divine answers to the whole neces 
sity, and to live in thy truth and walk in the light of thy revelation. 
Teach us that greatest of all lessons, self-renunciation, utter, complete, 
joyous, triumphant trust in God. 

In thee we would live and move and have our being, not only by the 
necessity of nature, but by the compulsion and sweet constraint of sym- 
pathy and love. We have undertaken for ourselves, and behold a great 
failure is the result. We cannot touch the inner wound, we cannot heal 
the disease which consumes our life, but there is balm in Gilead, there is 
a Physician there, there is One w'ho is mighty to save, Jesus Christ of 
God, Emmanuel, Wonderful, Counsellor, the Prince of peace, known to 
us by many names expressing me love, and completing one grand capacity 
to deliver. We bless thee for Jesus Christ : we needed his name for our 
names are poor ivithout it ; we needed his presence as flowers need the 
sun. Thou hast not withheld him : by a great shining of love he fills the 
%vhole sky, and by infinite tenderness of grace, he re-lights the lamp of 
our hope day by day, so that we can look beyond death and the grave 
and all things terrible and feast our vision on the Paradise of God. 
Whilst we are here, make us quick to know thee well, clear-sighted that 



172 


MATTHEW XXIV, 42-51. 


we may see the inner meaning of thy word, and conscientious, that with 
all faithfulness of purpose and service we may do the immediate duty, 
and find in it a great reward. 

We commend one another tenderly to thy care. We find no fault with 
one another, for when we stand in thy presence, we are all guilty before 
God, but we pray for one another with all the desire and simplicity of 
eager love, that every one may have a blessing all his own, that there 
may fall upon us a common benediction, impartial as the glory which 
lights every corner of the earth. Pity our littlenesses : in the day of our 
feebleness and humiliation look not upon us with the scorn we cannot 
bear. Pardon our sin : when it is greatest, thy love is greatest ; where 
sin abounds, grace doth much more abound. Thou wilt have the heathen 
for thine inheritance and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy posses- 
sion, and thy blood shall take away the sin of the whole world. This is 
our joy, this our hope, and out of this glad prospect do we draw every 
song that our heart would sing. 

O Living One, cause death itself to die ; O thou in whose heart there is 
no purpose but of love to the children of men, drive out of our hearts all 
anger, wrath, bitterness, clamour, and selfishness, and make our spirits 
sanctuaries of thine own presence. 

We commend unto thy tender love all for whom we ought to pray — the 
old, who will soon become young again ; the young, who know nothing 
of the mystery and sadness of the world into which they have come ; the 
poor, to whom it is a hardship to live ; the rich, who have the responsi- 
bility of wealth ; the wayward and the wandering, the prodigal, who seems 
as if unable to come home again, the hard heart that even our love cannot 
soften. We pray for the sick and those that are ill at ease, for all who 
are housed in our hospitals and are there receiving the ministrations of 
science and Christian charity. We pray that thou wouldst make their bed 
in their affliction, comfort them in their manifold sorrows, and sanctify 
nnto them every visitation of thy purpose. Prosper thou all wise and 
•learned men who are searching into the causes and the remedies of dis- 
ease ; let a great light shine upon them in all their inquiries, and may the 
time come when disease shall be unknown because sin is no longer in the 
world. . 

The Lord give us this day sweet messages from Heaven : may we hear 
great voices, like rushing, mighty winds, and tender voices, the very 
whispers of God’s own love, so that according to our necessity all the 
revelation of Heaven may be adjusted. Make every preacher of the gos- 
pel to-day as a flame of fire, anoint him with an unction from the Holy 
One, and make the Christian pulpit this day vindicate itself as the supreme 
institution of the world for the education and inspiration and ennoble- 
ment of the human mind. To this end do thou make even our weakness 
a cause of strength, and make all thy preachers but instruments on which 
thou wilt discourse the music of the eternal decrees and the infinite love. 
Amen. " • 



CHRIST WILL COME. 


173 


Matthew xxiv. 42-51. 

42. Watch therefore : for ye know not what hour your Lord doth come. 

43. But know this, that if the goodinan of the house had known in 
what watch the thief 'would come, he would have watched, and would not 
have suffered his house to be broken up. 

44. Therefore be ye also ready : for in such an hour as ye think not the 
Son of man comelh. 

45. Who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his lord hath made 
rulef over his household, to give them meat in due season ? 

46. Blessed is that servant, whom his lord when he cometh shall find so 
doing. 

47. Verily I say unto you, That he shall make him ruler over all his 
goods. 

48. But if that evil servant shall say in his heart, My lord delayeth his 
coming ; 

49. And shall begin to smite his fellow-servants, and to eat and drink 
v'th the drunken ; 

50. The lord of that servant shall come in a day when he looketh not 
for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of, 

51. And shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the 
hypocrites : there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. 

THE TWO FUTURES. 

Y OU know that he tvill come, you do not know at what pre- 
cise hmir he will appear. The future is known, yet un- 
known. Consider what the future is. It touches the uttermost 
bound of time. If one might perpetrate a contradiction in terms, 
it is the horizon of eternity, the furthest away point in a line which 
has no limits. We are obliged thus to talk in self-contradictory 
speech when we would represent the great and grand things of 
creation. Number has to be set aside or talked of in terms that 
appear to be confusing, as the Three are One, and the One is 
Three. 

There are hw futures. This is a fact which is so often forgot- 
ten in the reasoning of mhn. There is a future, and a little 

one ; the great future in Tmagination holds court, the future 

of fancy and speculation, the unmapped land of dream and fancy 
and vision, where life is to be a miracle, and every day a keen sur- 
prise. That is the future which the poets have taken under their 
care, that is the future whose fimtament they have punctuated with 



174 


MATTHEW XXIV. 42-51. 


radiant stars ; but there is a IMe future in which Imagination has 
been supplanted by Anxtefy, the future that is just about to dawn, 
the near To-morrow, the Presently that makes weak men restless 
and strong men quiet in hopefulness. 

\Yith these tw'o futures we are well acquainted. The danger is 
that we confuse them in our view and reasoning, and should thus 
be talking about two totally different things in one and the same 
way. We have a future which w-e consign to Imagination r w'e 
have another future which we hand over to Anxiety, and anxiety 
often beats imagination, gets a firmer grip of some men than Im- 
agination can ever get ; men who take thought for io-morraw may 
take no thought for eternity : anxiety bars and limits and bounds 
them with prison boundaries and forces. Their anxiety is greater 
than their imagination because their selfishness is greater than their 
religion. Herein it is that so many persons get wrong. 

So we have two futures, the near and the distant, the future in 
which Anxiety plays its vexatious and harassing part, and the great 
future where Imagination revels and poetises and dreams ; and my 
difficulty, as a religious teacher, is this, that my scholars or pupils 
will so give way to little carking mean anxiety as to leave no space 
or time or opportunity for the consideration of that grand future 
which must come and bring with it all that we mean by the sweet 
pure name of Heaven. 

Let us see how Jesus Christ himself treated the question of the 
future. His action in relation to it was varied yet consistent, and, 
as usual, ^vas authoritatively instructive. In the first place Jesus 
Christ used the future as a source qfi inspiration, but it was not the 
little future of to-morrow, it was the great future of all lime unborn 
that he so used ; he often spoke of the Grand Future. “ Hereafter 
ye shall see heaven opened,” said ho. “ What thou knowest not 
now, thou shalt know hereafter. ” “I have many things to say 
unto you, but ye cannot bear them now%” “Fear not, little 
flock : it is your Father’s good pleasure to give you the kingdom. “ 
“ Pie that endurelh unto the end shall be saved.” “ When the 
Soir of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with 
him.” You do not wonder that a man who could project himself 
thus infinitely across the ages, should say, from the point of his 
final projection, “ Take no thought for the morrow, do not be the 
victims of anxiety ; have a future, but let it be a grand one, apoca- 



LIVING IN THE FUTURE. 


175 


lyptic in its possibility and colour and form and tone, worthy of 
the mind that dreams it ; and do not be the victims of anxiety and 
petty care and carking vexation. ” He provided for that particular 
element, so to say, of the human mind, which must take hold of 
the future, but as he saw that clement rising and asserting itself, 
he put within its grasp something worthy of its capacity. 

The New Testament is full of the same thought. What wonder 
that Jesus Christ said, “ I am not come to destroy the prophets'’ 
The world must live in its prophecies. To-day is too small a bound- 
ary for the soul : one world at a time was not enough for the 
soldier Alexander — ’tis not enough for a man in whom the divinity 
has come. The prophets lived in the sunny future, so did Christ 
set his little church under its warm rays, and bless it with the 
promise that the voice of the turtle should be one day heard above 
the roar of the storm. Our life is not to be locked up in the nar- 
row prison of one day. Among the riches of the church are not 
only things present but things to come. These things to come 
make up the mystery of glory which burns in the apocaly|3se. A 
nation is to be born in a day, the enemy of man, the old Abaddon 
is to be encoiled in chains that cannot be broken, the dead are to 
be raised incorruptible, death itself shall die, the grave-scars are to 
be rubbed out of the green earth, sorrow and sighing are to flee 
away, the whole creation, forgetting its grievous overthrow and its 
sharp pain, shall stand fast on eternal pillars and be beautiful as a 
palace built for God. 

Nor is this the poetry of speech ; it is the reality of fact. The 
word poetry is often misunderstood : it is the bhssoin of realiiy, the 
uppermost phase and culminating beauty of hard history and 
stern fact. Tell me — does he talk mere poetry, in the sense of 
talking only that which is visionary and impossilde, who takes a 
root or a .seed of a flower and says, “ Out of this shall come 
strength and .shapeliness, bud and blossom and fruit : birds shall 
sing in its branches and men shall lie down at noon beneath its 
cool shade — or out of this little seed shall come a flower, an 
apocalypse in itself, and the bee shall draw honey from its hidden 
cell”.? If we had never seen the outcome of root or seed we 
should say concerning such a man — “ Visionary, poetical, roman- 
tic, dreamy, utterly without practical sagacity and arithmetical and 
measurable aptitude in relation, to things of time and sense. ’ ’ But 



176 


MATTHEW XXIV. 42-51. 


the man is no mere poet in the sense of creating universes in words 
only ; rightly judged, the man who so speaks about root or seed 
is only an hisiorian by anticipation ; he is a reasoner, he is the 
prince of logicians. 

In viewing the future, therefore, do not be drawn away by the 
cry of poetry or romance. He is no visionary who sees in the seed 
time the prose out of which will come the poetry of harvest. On 
the other hand he would be the loose reasoner wiio sees seed only 
in the seed, wood only in the root, and did not see in the seed 
tvaving cornfields, and food for the lives of men. There shall be 
a handful of corn on the top of the mountains, the fruit thereof, 
the poeiry thereof, shall shake like Lebanon. Whis he only a word- 
painter who so spoke ? Credit him with the most penetrating 
vision and with that grand historical capacity w'hich sees all possi- 
bilities in the germ and seed of things. 

There is a poetry winch is the highest form of fact. If a man 
could have said in England two hundred years ago, that communi- 
cation with the ends of the earth would one day be a question of 
mere moments, and that according to the face of the clock men 
would be talking in New York about something w'hich had hap- 
pened in London actually before it liad taken place, he would have 
been regarded as the wildest of lunatics, without practical aptitude, 
one of the dreaming seers that you can make nothing of, a puzzle 
in providence, the very mystery of Omnipotence. Yet would he 
not in reality have been the severest of reasoners^ the most acute 
and penetrating of logiciajts We wiio have no faith discount 
and discredit the faith of other men. The passionless man can 
never understand passion, the literalist cannot follow the logic of 
prophecy, the moral Laplander can never be made to dream of 
the luxuriant Christian tropics. You cannot be more than you 
are. But do not therefore say that other men are no more gifted 
than yourselves. There are men to whom there has been no 
future in the sense of cloud and mystery and chaos, but to w'hom 
the future has given up its secret in many a fore-blessing rain, in 
man}’' a secret hint, in many a quiet night visit, in many a glow- 
ing dream, - 

Do not let us therefore measure others by. ourselves. We have 
to take our view of the future from Christ, and he regarded the 
future as an inspiration. It was his sanctuary of retreat : he lived 



LIVING IX IIKAVEX. 


i77 


in it, he projected himself beyond the fevered day, and lived in the 
calm eternity. We must do the same, or we shall be vexed and 
stung with details \vhich come and go with the fickle wind. 
Blessed is the future which is coming upon Christ's church, a day 
without a threatening cloud, an infinite paradise without one thorn 
or noxious plant, a home from which no child has wandered, a 
sweet heaven unvisited by sin and untroubled by pain. Such is 
the flower which comes out of the Christian seed, and he who 
foresees and foretells its coming is not a speaker of word.s but a 
prophet of facts. Therefore comfort one another with these words. 
If in this life only we have hope, we are of all men most miserable. 
We have reckoned this tvorkl at a cheap rate because of the power 
of an endless life. If there be no endless life, wc have done this 
world an injustice. Our light affliction, therefore, is but for a 
moment, while we look not at the things which are seen, but at 
the things which are not seen ; for the things which are seen are 
temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal. In pro- 
portion as we live in heaven are we masters of earth : just as we 
hide ourselves in the sanctuary of the great future and view all 
things from Christ’s standpoint are we at rest, and amid raging 
seas and rocking mountains our eyes look upon the river, the 
streams whereof make glad the city of God. Let us see to it that 
we follow Christ in this, namely, that. we do not live in the little 
future which is mastered by anxiety, but in the great future, which 
yields its riches to a reverent imagination. 

In the next place, Christ treated the future as unknoivn and yd 
well knmtm. “ Watch therefore : for ye know not what hour }'our 
Lord doth come. Therefore be ye also ready : for in such an 
hour as ye think not, the Son of man cometh. Of that day and 
hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels of heaven, but my 
Father only.” Here we have a quantity spoken of that is well 
known yet unknown, unknown yet well known. Have we any 
parallel to this in our lower courses of thinking and action ? Most 
assuredly we have. We know that io-inoi-raw will ,comc : tell me 
what will to-morrow hring with it — a -sullen face of cloud or a 
bright countenance of June light, blessing the lands that wait for 
it with all the benediction of summer ? We know the great fact 
that io-morrmu will dawn ; we know not what will be the incidents 
of the day, who shall live, who shall die, what controversies will 


178 


MATTHEW Xr/K 42-SI. 


be adjusted, what correspondence will turn our thoughts into new 
directions, and tax our energies with new claims. We know it — ■ 
we do not know it. 

So with the harvest : the harvest wall surely come, but will it be 
good or bad, early or late, .satisfying or disappointing ? Will it be 
well gathered or ill gathered .? The harvest is known, but the 
incidents of its quality and abundance no man can know^ with cer- 
tainty. And death wnll come. When .? Thank God we cannot 
tell. Who could face his duty, if he knew to a moment when 
and how he would die } The great future is revealed, the detailed 
future is mercifully kept back. Watch therefore — therefore be ye 
also read}'. That is all. 

So then from the parallels or analogies which are supplied by 
our own life I can understand in part Christs treatment of the 
future. The Lord will come ; great events will transpire, the 
trumpet shall sound and the elect shall be gathered together from 
the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other. The long- 
waiting earth shall receive her Lord — when P Of that day and 
hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels of heaven, but my 
Father only. There are some secrets w'hich can be at rest in oni}> 
one heart. 

And yet Jesus Christ viewed the future as having an immediate 
influence on the present, therefore he called for vigilance and readi- 
ness, and rebuked the men who w-ere so miscalculating the coming 
of the future that they did injury to their fellow -servants. He had 
such a knowledge of history that he was enabled to tell his age 
that in the days of Noah men were eating and drinking, marrying 
and giving in marriage, and knew not until the flood came in great 
blotches of black rain upon the hot streets, and the lightning 
flashed and the thunder rolled and the whole heaven became a 
deluge and the wicked were hast. “ So,” said he, “ it wall be 
about this coming of my own. Men will chaffer with one another, 
hold wordy controversy with one another in points tlicological and 
ecclesiastical, ^nd will speak about difficulties which a reverent 
heart QQsxXP, have subdued and dissolved, or be indulging in selfish 
appetite and desire until the great trumpet sound and the event 
transpire. Such was his grasp of the future, such his insight into 
its breadth and narrowmess ! 

We cannot improve though we might enlarge his lesson, when 



CHRIST'S RELIGION PRACTICAL. 


179 


he condensed his instruction into one word, ‘ ‘ Watch. ’ ’ A great 
expectation warms the heart, a grand dream helps us to bear the 
burden of the sweltering day, and noble thought ennobles the 
mind which entertains it. He who has only a wail in front of him 
is in a prison. He w'ho is bounded by a horizon has an infinite 
liberty. 

Now Christ comes into the region which we term practical, and 
in that region he says, “ Be ready : WATCH : be in the tower : 
be looking out : at any moment the crisis of creation may super- 
vene.” To work in this spirit is to work well. 

Jesus Christ was always practical, though oftentimes he said 
things which seemed to be of a visionary nature. He was practical 
when he told his church to take care of the poor and to visit the 
sick and bless the uiiblest and give joy to him who was sad of 
heart. Christianity has its own secularism as well as its own the- 
ology. To hear some persons talk one would imagine that Chris- 
tianity was only the latest phase of the theological imagination. 
Christianity has its hmiamiies as well as its divinities. There are 
two commandments in its infinite law, the love of God, the love 
of man. There is no religion under heaven so hard-working as 
Christianity : it never rests. Hindooism has its At HOme, Ma- 
hometanism makes no proselytes, Confucianism lets the world 
alone, but Christianity lets nobody alone. It is the working religion, 
the missionary religion, the energetic faith, the revolutionary force. 
Do give Christianity the Credit of being the hardest working relig- 
ion known amongst men. I do not mean merely hard-working in 
any ceremonial sense, but in the largest sense of beneficence, love, 
evangelisation, caring for everybody, never resting, until the last 
man is brought in. Not judging by majorities, but judging by 
individualities ; counting every man one, and reckoning that its 
work is unfinished till the last man is homed in the very heart of 
Christ. 

Our Chri.stianity is nothing if it be not thus practical. He only 
is the visionary theologian who is so lost in theolo^cal speculation 
as to neglect the ignorance, the disease, the poverty which are lying 
round about his very house and path. 


iSo MATTHEW XXIV. 42-51. 


“ This Gospel shall be preached for a vntness to all nations, and then shall 
the end be.” “That is the end of Jerusalem, before the destruction 
whereof the Gospel was preached throughout the world. Witness Paul, 
saying, Their sound hath gone out into all the earth ; and again. The 
Gospel is preached to every creature under heaven, so that ye may see it 
running from Jerusalem into Spain. And if one only apostle, Paul, 
spread the Gospel so far, what shall we think did all the rest ? And this 
was a great miracle for the convincing of the unbelieving Jews before 
their destruction, for the Gospel to be preached in all parts of the world, 
in twenty or thirty years at the most ; if this would not move them to be- 
lieve, nothing could.” — (Chrysostom). “This must not be understood 
as done by the apostles, for there are many barbarous nations of Africa 
amongst whom the Gospel was never yet preached, as we may gather by 
such as have been captives there. This therefore remaineth yet to be ac- 
complished ; and because it is a secret when the world shall be filled with 
the Gospel, it is a secret likewise when shall be the day of judgment, be- 
fore which this must be.” — (Augustine.) 



LXXXV. 


PRAYER. 

Almighty God, in Jesus Christ our Saviour, who alone bore our sin. 
and carried them away, do thou now hear our praise and our prayer. 
There are no silent hearts in thine house, no mouth is closed in dumb- 
ness, we are inspired with a sense of thankfulness, for we have nothing 
that ■we have not received, and vve are debtors all to the continual mercy 
of God. We stand in the mercy of. Christ, we breathe the love of Christ ; 
because Christ is our Head and Saviour and Lord, therefore do we appear 
in thy presence, the living to praise thee. We have no life of our own ; 
we are not our own, we are bought with a price, we are the ransomed of 
the Lord, we have been delivered by the right hand of his power and the 
right hand of his grace. Because of the cross of Christ we are what we 
are, to it we owe our every hope, as from it we draw our only consola- 
tion. Root us and ground us in Christ’s wisdom and Christ’s love, may 
we be no more children tossed to and fro, but men in understanding, 
strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus, wise with the wisdom which 
cometh down from above. 

Deliver us from all false reasoning, from all excuses that are worthless, 
from every snare that is laid for our feet, and as for the temptations 
which form part of our daily culture, enable us to answer them every one 
with the wisdom and grace of Christ. Give us some understanding of 
ourselves, that we may be no longer fools, but wise, buying up the time, 
redeeming every opportunity, seizing and magnifying every opening thou 
dost give to us, into wider liberties and nobler services. 

We would love thy word : we would, having found it, eat it, as men 
who are an hungered eat bread. To the end that we may understand thy 
word, grant us a continual baptism of the Holy Ghost. All things are 
plain to him that understandeth — do thou then light the lamp of our un- 
derstanding, and explain to our soul, the mysteries for which there are no 
fit words. Rebuke us in gentleness, reproach us not in thine indignation, 
for who can stand against thee when thou dost awaken to controversy ? 
Teach us by manifold experience, by gentle ministries, by incidents that 
convince the understanding, and show the heart the background and the 
outlook of things. With this wisdom we shall not err ; so fortified, we 
cannot be overthrown. To the Strong for strength we flee — pity our 
weakness and grant us thy power. 

Thou hast set us within a brief lifetime and called upon us to fulfil the 
obligations of stewardship. The time is so short, the enemy so strong, 



i 82 MATTHEW XXV. 


the temptations so many — there is but a step between time and eternity. 
Thou hast set things together in immediate and startling contrast ; we 
sleep in one world and awake in another ; we are dose to the invisible 
state, the dead are not far away, the great Heaven kindly stoops down to 
us that we may overhear its sweet melody, and the great deep pit opens, 
that we may see how terrible is the penalty of sin. May we be wise 
men, faithful stewards, beneficent servants, so that whether thou dost 
come through the wedding feast or as a Lord having charge of his house, 
or as the Judge of the nations, we may be ready to meet thee. Blessed 
are they who have been at the cross, for they can meet thee at the judg- 
ment seat. 

Comfort us according to the pain of our distress : let our tears plead 
with thee and let our infirmity be known in heaven as our strongest plea. 
Thou wilt not crush us, thou wilt not thunder upon us with thy great 
power, thou wilt not overcome us with the billows of the sea — thou wilt 
lead us by the brink of a river, the streams whereof make glad the city of 
God. Amen. 

Matthew xxv. 

1. Then shall the kingdom of heaven be likened unto ten virgins, which 
took their lamps (torches), and went forth to meet the bridegroom. 

2. And five of them were wise (prudent), and five were foolish. 

3. They that were foolish took their lamps, and took no oil with them : 

4. But the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps. 

5. While the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept. 

6. And at midnight there was a cry made. Behold, the bridegroom 
cometh : go ye out to meet him. 

7. Then all those virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps. 

8. And the foolish said unto the wise. Give us of your oil ; for our 
lamps are gone out (going out), 

9. But the wise answered, saying. Not so ; lest there be not enough for 
us and you ; but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for yourselves. 

ro. And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came ; and they that 
were ready went in with him to the marriage : and the door was shut. 

II. Afterward came also the other virgins, saying. Lord, Lord, open 
to us. 

12 But he answered and said, A^'erily, I say unto you, I know you not, 

13. Watch, therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour wherein 
the Son of man cometh. 

14. For the kingdom of heaven is as a man travelling into a far coun- 
try. who called his own servants, and delivered unto them his goods. 

15. And unto one he gave five talents, to another two, and to another 
one ; to every man according to his several ability ; and straightway took 
his journey. 


THE TEXT. 183 


16. Then he that had received the five talents went and traded 
(wrought, or was busy) with the same, and made them other five talents. 

17. And likewise he that had received two, he also gained other two. 

iS. But he that had received one went and digged in the earth, and hid 

his loid’s money. 

19. After a long time the lord of those servants cometh, and reckoneth 
with them. 

20. And so he that had received five talents came and brought other 
five talents, saying, Lord, thou deliveredst unto me five talents : behold, 

I have gained beside them five talents more. 

21. His lord said unto him. Well done, thou good and faithful servant : 
thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler (the word 
ruler is not in the Greek) over many things ; enter thou into the joy of 
thy lord. 

22. He also that had received two talents came and said. Lord, thou 
deliveredst unto me two talents : behold, I have gained two other talents 
beside them. 

33. His lord said unto him. Well done, good and faithful servant ; thou 
hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many 
things : enter thou into the joy of thy lord. 

24. Then he which had received the one talent came and said, Lord, I 

knew thee that thou art an hard man, reaping where thou hast not sown, 
and gathering where thou hast not strawed ; ’ 

25. And I was afraid, and went and hid thy talent in the earth; lo, 
there thou hast that is thine. 

26. His lord answered and said unto him, Thou wicked and slothful 
servant, thou knewest that I reap where I sowed not, and gather where I 
have not strawed : 

27. Thou Qughtest therefore to have put my money to the exchangers 
(bankers), and then at my coming I should have received mine own with 
usury (interest). 

23. Take therefore the talent from him, and give it unto him which 
hath ten talents. 

29. For unto every one that hath shall be given, and he shall have 
abundance : but from him that hath not shall be taken away even that 
which he hath. 

30. And cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness : there 
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. 

31. When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy 
angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory ; 

32. And before him shall be gathered all nations (all the Gentiles) : and 
he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth his 
sheep from the goats : 

33. And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the 

^left. i 

34. Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye 



r84 


MATTHEW XXV. 


blessed of my Father (who bebng to my Father), inherit the kingdom pre- 
pared for you from the foundation of the world : 

35. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat : I was thirsty, and 
ye gave me drink ; I was a stranger, and ye took me in ; 

36. Naked, and ye clothed me ; I was sick, and ye visited me (cared 
for ; from the same root as Episcopas) : I was in prison, and ye came 
unto me. 

37. Then shall the righteous answer, him, saying, Lord, when saw we 
thee an hungred, and fed thee ? or thirsty, and gave thee drink ? 

38. When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and 
clothed thee ? 

39. Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee ? 

40. And the King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto 
you, Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my 
brethren, ye have done it unto me. 

41. Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from 
me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his 
angels : 

42. For I was an hungred, and ye gave me no meat : I was thirsty, 
and ye gave me no drink : 

43. I was a stranger, and ye took me not In : naked, and ye clothed 
me not : sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not. 

44. Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we 
thee an hungred, or athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in 
prison, and did not minister unto thee ? 

45. Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily, I say unto you, Inas- 
much as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me. 

46. And these shall go away Into everlasting punishment : but the 
righteous into life eternal. 


THE PABABLE OF JUEG-MENT. 


I N this chapter the parables of judgment come to their natural 
and vivid conclusion. The twenty-fifth chapter is the 
twenty-fourth chapter in a new form. The twenty-fourth chapter 
is hardly in the style of tlie New Testament ; it might be taken from 
Ezekiel or Daniel so far as many of its figures and prophecies are 
concerned. AVars and rumours of wars, nation rising against nation 
and kingdom against kingdom, famines and pestilences and earth- 
quakes — surely these are words w^hich belong to the old prophets 
rather than to the gentle Prince of peace. Tribulation, darkening 
of the sun, the moon withholding her. j^ghtj the stars falling from 
Heaven, the powers of the heavens shaken, and all the tribes of 


♦ 


ONLY TWO CLASSES. 




the earth mourning in unutterable distress, and the Son of man 
coming in the clouds of Heaven with power and great glory, the 
angels trumpeting from the sky, and gathering the elect from the 
four winds, from one end of Heaven to the other — this is more 
like the sonorous eloquence of the ancient prophets than the 
speech of him who did not lift up his voice nor cause it to be 
heard in the streets. But we have surely come to another tone in 
this Man’s voice ; he has grown intenser lately. He began softly, 
with healings and beatitudes and gentlest speeches, such as might 
fall upon waiting and distressful hearts with infinite consolation, 
but latterly he has been speaking much of judgment and of wrath 
to come and of the final Heavens. We have seen a meaning in 
all this. As he neared the cross, he seemed also to near the 
judgment seat. 

In the twenty-fifth chapter we come back more to the earlier 
style. The great thunder-storm has darkened and passed away 
in infinite shocks and terrible apocalyptic visions and threatenings. 
Now see how blue the sky is right overhead, and how exquisitely 
dappled all the clouds that gather around the horizon, and hear 
how the birds sing, and dear, placid, radiant summer seems to be 
all round about our life. Yet quickly again clouds gloom the 
Heavens, and trumpetings are heard, but farther off, and even now 
the great judgment seat is planted, and the heathen are gathered 
from all Gentile lands to be sent upward or downward, according 
to their spirit. 

The chapter is really but one subject. The parables are three, 
the subject is one. In all the three forms of this truth you find 
that Christ recognizes in human life only two classes. He has not 
changed his estimate of human society since he delivered his ser- 
mon on the mount. In concluding and applying that most mar- 
vellous of all speeches, he had but the two classes before him 
W'hich he names in the first parable in tins chapter — the w'ise and 
the foolish. Mark the consistency of his view. Though he has 
been speaking these many months and looking at society from a 
variety of standpoints, yet he has not changed the distribution of 
classes which he recognized in the very first of his great and elabo- 
rate discourses. When he concluded he said, ‘ ‘ They that hear 
these sayings of mine and do them, shall be wise, and they that 
^ hear these sayings 'of mine and do them not, shall be foolish.” 


MATTHEW XXV. 


iS6 


And in this, one of his latest parables, he describes the ten virgins 
as being equally divided into precisely the same classes, ranged 
under the leadership of wisdom on the one hand, and folly on 
the other. And so in regard to these servants who had delivered 
unto them their Lord’s goods, there were but two classes, the care- 
ful and the unprofitable, the slothful and the productive ; and in 
the final parable, in which Gentile nations are called around his 
throne and separated into right hand and left hand classes, there 
is no third quantity, no shading off into this or that more striking 
colour. 

This makes our own standard of criticism very clear. Where 
are we — wise or foolish, profitable or unprofitable, beneficent or 
selfish } The metaphysician cannot trouble us here, we are not 
now in the region of hard, difficult words, we are face to face 
with the great problem of real character. Let every man judge 
himself. And in the whole of this judgment you will obseiwe a 
principle which we ourselves cannot but acknowledge to be right. 
There is no new principle of judgment introduced here, nothing 
that shocks our moral consciousness — the voice of the judge in 
every one of those cases is a voice which takes up and rounds into 
completeness the voice of every honest heart, the whole world 
over. You cannot construct Heaven out of doubtful materials. 
You may constitute an experimental society, an empirical attempt 
to .do things in some other way than they have ever been done 
before ; but a Heaven never can be built out of materials of 
uncertainty and doubtfulness, and that have about them all the 
unreliableness of unascertained qualities and forces. 

As business men, gather yourselves around these parables, and 
tell me if you have not here the simplest and strongest justice. 
How would you do under the same circumstances ? Take the in- 
stance of the unprofitable servant— to what was the reward in the 
case of those who had profited by their stewardship? It was 
given to industry, to faithfulness, to an honest attempt to make 
the best of life. If the men who had five talents and two talents 
respectively had said, “ We have worked night and day over this 
business and it has come to nothing,” their Heaven would have 
been just as sure as it was when they doubled the original dowry. 
If any man can say tO Christ at the lasj:, ” I have done my best, 
I have bought up the opportunities, I have endeavoured, with an 



BENEVOLENT EXERTIONS FRUITFUL. 


187 


honest heart, to work out my own salvation with fear and trem- 
bling, and behold the upshot of it is that I seem to be weaker now 
than I was at first — Lord, what shall I do ?” to such a speech 
Christ has but one answer. 

Do not take undue encouragement from that suggestion, 
because the speech itself is founded upon an impossibility. No 
man can do his best in the gospel sense of the term, and under 
evangelical conditions, without his exertions ending in honourable 
issues. This is not a speculation, this is not a tossing of the dice, 
all of which may come down blank ; this is not throwing seed 
upon barren ground that has in itself no force of germination or 
possibility of productiveness. In this, region everything tells : the 
out-putting of a hand may be a battle won, the purpose of an 
honest heart to make two grass blades grow where only one grew 
before, to lessen the sum total of human distre.ss, to mitigate the 
burden which crushes human life, is itself an inspiration from God 
and the very beginning of Fleaven. Do not, therefore, let us take 
too gloomy a view of the situation in wdrich we are placed. This 
is a soil that must grow according to that which is put into it. In 
the morning sow thy seed, in the evening withhold not thine hand, 
and Heaven shall be the blessed and final issue of the effort. 

And the unprofitable servant, was he not treated according to 
what we believe to be honest and sound principles Is not this 
the very law of your family "i Without it could society hold 
together in solid continuity and useful combination for one day } 
Jesus Christ showed the man how he might have done the best 
with his talent even in the event of his view being true. There is 
always an alternative from unproductivene.ss : it is not either pro- 
ductiveness along one line or non-productiveness along another. 
Jesus said to him in effect, “ You could not Avork as those two 
other servants have worked independently individually, wdth high 
resoluteness of will and determination to make the best of things 
— ^}'0u ought therefore to have worked in co-operation with other 
people. You could not go forth and work independently and 
alone, with heroic courage and indestructible chivalry, being all 
day long sustained by hopes the world could neither see nor mea- 
sure — you ought therefore to have joined some community of 
men, you ought to have been a partaker in some organized scheme 
of Christian benevolence. You could not go out and be a mis- 



MAITHEW A'XV. 


sionaiy in the far-away heathenism — you ought, therefore, to have 
given what I gave you to the church, to the collection made in 
the church, that so your money might have been turned to the 
highest advantage. That was the. right thing : it might have been 
you were called to be a missionary, but seeing you could not do 
that, you ought to have put my money to the bankers, who were 
collecting the money, and making the best use of it. If you could 
not be a worker by yourself you could be part of a larger whole. 

Christ will not have slothfulness nor unproductiveness. He 
will not have the benefits and conditions of heaven wasted and 
perverted. “Thou oughtest to have given my money to the 
bankers, to them who saX zX tha bancum or bench, and who took' 
it and used it and returned the interest w^hich they realized in the 
commercial use of it.” So in tHe great church. Some men can- 
not lead it, some men cannot stand alone : they are weak when 
they are left to themselves — they ought therefore to join the com- 
munity, to be part of a great confederation, to work together, if 
they have not the faculty of making an individual signature, and 
an individual mark in' the world's progress. 

And now we have in those three parables three different ways of 
stating the same truth. It is in forgetfulness of this fact that so 
many critics get wrong. Unless they see the same form of words, 
they cannot realise the fact that the very selfsame thing is meant. 
They say that Mark and John do not agree in their answer to a 
particular question of the most vital kind. I deny it. You say 
that you do not find in Matthew what you find in Luke with 
regard to certain high directions as to the culture of life and its 
destiny, I, for one, have not met with any contrariety of teach- 
ing upon any vital question with w'hich the New Testament con- 
cerns itself. I have seen that in the teaching of Christ there is no 
searching of his understanding, hefainteth not, neither is weary, to 
him it is as breathing to speak new parables, and as but the utter- 
ance of a V'ord to set the kingdom of Heaven in different angle.s, 
so that it may throw from its ever- varying face different light and 
colours. But a careful search into these three parables wall show 
us that we have precisely the same principles expressed in three 
very different forms. Truth must be so expressed because of the 
variety of mental constitution with which it has to deal. One of 
the parables does not belong to you, but the other may. With 


VARIETY OF APPEAL. 


189 

the first two you may seem to have little or no concern, but in the 
last you find yourself enclosed as in a circle that cannot be broken. 
And contrariwise you seem to have no part in the one or in the 
other, but in the remaining' one you find your judgment and your 
destiny. The kingdom of heaven is like a wedding-feast — hearts 
of a certain kind respond to the very tone in which the feast is 
announced. They love hospitality and the music of welcome and 
the excitement of preparation and the outlook of high festival and 
continual delight. Others are of a sterner type (d mind. The 
kingdom of heaven is a man travelling into a far country w'ho 
called his own servants and delivered unto them his goods — there 
the particular mind which they represent is arrested, it would con- 
sider the course taken by the man and by tlie servants, it would 
enter with singular zest and real concern into the unwinding of 
the whole economy. 

Others are of a still higher imagination, who can only be 
touched from remote distances and caught in vast schemes and 
propositions — here is something that will happen, when the Son 
of man shall come in his glory and all the holy angels with him — 
and when they gather to watch the issue of the event they are 
humbled and rebuked ; the imagination which was aglow at the 
beginning is abased at the end, for they find that he is going to 
settle destiny, not upon high poetical and imaginative principles, 
but on the giving and withholding bread and water from the hun- 
gry and the thirsty. 

Thus at every point he is Lord. Whatever the parable, he 
brings it to the same solid issue : he vexes and torments the very 
imagination which he inspires, and yet at the last he leads all 
minds into deep and complete rest. The Lord deals with men 
according to their peculiarities: one man is very rich, and he 
would enter into the kingdom of heaven, and he is told to unbur- 
den himself of all bis world'y goods. And one standing by and 
overhearing the direction says that Jesus Christ did not tell that 
man he must be born again. Did he not .? He put that speech 
into the only words that particular kind of man could understand. 
The world is not made up of philosophical Nicodcmuscs, who can 
understand metaphysical and occult expressions : he must change 
his language and his oratory according to the man who 'hears. 
To the young man he said, “ Sell all and give to the poor." He 


190 


MATTHEW XXV. 


could have understood no other speech. And the Christ who said 
to Nicodemus, “ Except a man be born again he cannot enter 
into the kingdom of heaven, " did not say that to some other man 
who applied to him, to the lawyer, for example, who asked what 
he must do to inherit eternal life — no, because every man is 
answered according to his own peculiar constitution, temperament, 
education, circumstances, and yet the answer is one and the same, 
through and through, from beginning to end, and that can only 
be ascertained and realised not by argument and by the bandying 
of words that come into sharp collision one with another, but by 
deep spiritual experience. There are many roads to the same end, 
there are many -ways winding up to the mountain top — let each 
man see that he is on the way he can travel best, and make the 
most of, and get along the quickest, and then at the top you will 
see men coming up from all sides of the mountain, and at the top 
forming themselves into one unanimous, harmonious, grateful 
assembly, with one song and one acclaim to him who made the 
mountain and all the ways which lead to its sunny and salubrious 
summit. Do let us understand that there is unity in variety and 
variety in unity, and that the simple light is most complex. 

How does the gospel then present itself to your mind — as a 
wedding feast ? Be ready for the Bridegroom when he comes. 
The only fact that you are entrusted with is the fact that he is 
coming : when he will come no man can foretell. And does the 
gospel strike some other of you as a stewardship, is life a great 
responsibility to you, is your daily question how to make the most 
of life ? Here is a parable which exactly represents your style of 
thinking and your plan and purpose of activity. What think ye 
of this parable ? The Lord searches into the conduct of his 
stewards, he wants to know what every man has been doing, he 
allows every man quietly to make his own speech, he does not 
read off the conduct of men as, if he were reading a l^ok ; he 
simply allow'S every man to tell his own tale. “ Which tale shall 
I tell ?" should be every man's urgent and daily question. Am 
I working hard, am I endeavouring to double my talents, am I 
making a good use of my opportunities — or am I taking life 
upon a narrow and selfish basis, do I suppose that to do nothing 
and to know nothing will lead at last to some kind of intermediate 
heaven? That sophism is broken with the lightning of God : it 


UNCONSCIOUS SERVICE. 191 

cannot be tolerated in the sanctuary : the know-nothing, the do- 
nothing, and the be-ndthing scheme of life can only end in outer 
darkness and in ineffable distress. 

It is right that it should be so. Who could live in any spirit of 
honesty and hopefulness, if he knew that in the outcome of all 
things it would be the same whether he had slept all the time or 
worked all the time, whether he had been economical of all oppor-. 
tunities, and thrifty, or whether he had been selfish, negligent, 
slothful, doing nothing to make the world better and brighter than 
it was when he came into it } We are moved to some grand in- 
spirations which we may not confess in theory. Every man has a 
theology by which his life is being moved, whether he can put 
that theology into a form of words or not. Analyse your con- 
duct, that at the very base and core of it you may have certain 
grand moral or theological aspirations, without which you can 
neither have hope nor rest. 

And is it so that at the last the Gentiles will be judged by the 
bread they have given and the water they have withheld } 
Observe, we read that the nations were gathered together before 
the Son of man. That expression is never used in the Holy 
Scriptures except with strict limitation to Gentile or heathen peo- 
ple — it is never u.sed as including the whole human family. But 
let us take it that it is just as it stands here, and the evangelical 
argument remains unimpaired, untouched. The righteous did 
not know that they had been doing all this, therefore it was not 
done for the purpose of securing some happy end ; the righteous 
liad wholly forgotten the beneficent activities which were attributed 
to them, therefore they had not been mere legalists trying to obey 
the letter of a law, and endeavouring to set up, by penance or 
gift, some claim to the ultimate mercy and clemency of heaven. 
They had been simply breathing a spirit, embodying an aspiration, 
setting ^ut in beautiful daily life that which was internal and vital • 
and part of their very nature, and had become such by ministries we 
call divine and spiritual. The others had no such spirit, they did 
not take life other than as a daily task, a daily burden, something 
to be got through. If they had been told that by giving a certain 
portion of meat to the poor every day, they could have had one 
heaven, why nothing could have been easier to them, but that 
which appears to be so very easy, may sometimes be found to be 


ig3 MATTHEW XXV. 

supremely difficult. The easiest things cannot be done with a 
slack hand : there is an ease which is the last passion in a very 
serere process. We know what this is in reading, writing, learn- 
ing, business of all kinds, inquiry, navigation, poetry, eloquence 
— everywhere there is a facility which seems as if it cost the doer 
or the speaker nothing, whereas it expresses the last point of long 
and complete culture. Do not imagine, therefore, that life is a 
mere question of giving and taking, without thpught, and without 
idea, and without purpose : you cannot be mechanically pious 
with any given issue, or with any hope of heaven. Piety is not a 
question of mechanics or arrangement, of doing this and not doing 
the other piety is not a question of abstaining from this and par- 
taking of the other— it is a spirit, a life, an invisible but supreme 
sovereignty of the soul, and he who enjoys the consciousness of 
that sovereignty does good and blushes to find it fame. He has 
no idea that all this is coming back to him in certain forms ; if he 
had, he would be a mere speculator and investor, a trickster in 
good doing, and that is a contradiction in terms — our good doing 
must be our breathing, it must be the habit and spirit of our life, 
and to be this, it must originate in the cross, take its inspiration 
from the cross, return for recreating and renewal day by day to 
the cross ; and doing so according to your nature and opportunity, 
you will find that all the parables speak the same thing, and that 
amid the infinite diversity of imaginative expression, there is the 
same central, substantial, eternal truth. 

x\nd then the end : the eternal life, the eternal punishment, I 
cannot describe either the one or the other : they are both away 
from me ; but this I know and can say, that the reward of good 
being and good doing is infinite, but the penalty of wickedness, 
be it what it may, is beyond the power of human language to 
express. I leave these definitions to be revealed by the event. 
No earnest man can trifle with words for the sake of ascertaining 
how far he may do evil and escape punishment. Punishment for 
sin is eternal upon earth : no man can outlive his sin in time — for 
ten or twenty years it appears to be forgotten, you have entered 
into new circumstances, surrounded yourself with new conditions, 
and are beginning to be glad. But yesternight in w'alking out, 
)'ou saw a face which you supposed to be dead, and instantly the 
brightness was taken out of your life-scene, and the rocks under 


G OD ' S FOR GIl 7LVFSS, 


193 


your feet began to shake, and the sin stood up before you as 
young as ever with an eye undimmed, and pierced you as with 
lightning. 

Sin carries eternal consequences with it There is only one luope 
then for you. What is that? Forgiveness. 'I'hank God for 
that sweet, great word. We may be forgiven. The little critic 
will still attempt to run after the consequences, and will busy him- 
self with the details of the question, but God is ready to forgive, 
and then you stand up and say, with all your .sins roundabout 
you, present to your memory, with the greater grace of God shin- 
ing upon )"ou, “ I was a bad man, I did what I ought not to have 
done ; I have confessed this to God, not in words only, but with 
all the emotion and passion of a penitent soul, and God, for 
Christ's sake, has forgiven me.” 

0 that w'e may know the mystery and the joy of forgiveness as 
we have known the pain and the shame of guilt. 



LXXXVI. 

PRAYER. 

Almighty God, we know thee by our love ; our hearts go out after 
thee in a great search, and come back with all thy grace glowing the soul 
and making the life new. We do not know thee by the mind, we cannot 
lay hold of thee by the senses, thou dost come secretly into the heart and 
speak to our meekness and love and modesty and waiting patience. 
Thou hast revealed thyself unto us in Jesus Christ, Son of man. Son of 
God, to us God the Son, bringing every secret of thy love to bear upon 
the necessity of our life, and redeeming us not with silver and gold, but 
with the precious blood of his own heart. We do not understand it, yet 
do we know it well : it is made plain to us by the agony of our heart : 
we see thy wonders through our tears, we hear thee best in the time of 
the silence of the night, thou dost shine upon us when all other lights are 
withdrawn. We feel after God, the heart goes out after thee in mute 
necessity, and yet in assurance that thou canst and will be found. This 
we know : we have tested it, and thou hast made us living witnesses of 
thy presence in our heart and life. 

We were as sheep going astray, but now we have returned to the Shep- 
herd and Bishop of our souls ; we had endeavoured to find for ourselves 
water in the wilderness, and behold we found none. We said we would 
smite the rocks and out of them would flow rivers of water ; we smote 
the rocks and there was no answering stream. We have tried the world 
and found it a great emptiness, we have seized eagerly every offered cup 
and found in it nothing but death— but we have come to Christ : he is 
bread and water, he is the soul’s one satisfaction, we rest in him, we find 
in him the centre of our security and the assurance of our peace as we 
find in him the peace that is everlasting and the completion of our broken 
nature. He is our Saviour, and we 'call him such ; thy Son and yet not 
ashamed to call us brethren, and we have fellowship with his heart, union 
with the inner spirit of his tenderest love, and because of this sympa- 
thetic intercourse we are lifted up into a new nature and intrusted with 
an infinite liberty and joy. 

Thou dost come to us in occasional hours, thou dost take us up into a 
mountain and transfigure us, ^hou dost even lift us above the mountain 
and hide us in' the luminous clouds, and there we hear sweet voices, 
grand with the music of old time, tremulous with answers to the present 
necessity. Send us down again from high raptures to willing service, to 



THE TEXT, 195 


patient endurance, to waiting, upon the helpless and the sick and comfort- 
ing those that are ill at ease. 

We commend one another with all confidence to thy tender care. 
Some need thee more than others, or so they say, and feel it, because of 
the urgency of the immediate pain : yet we all need thee equally, did we 
but know the case as it really is ; not one can breathe without thee, we 
lift our hand because of thine aim ightiness, and we sit down and rest 
because of thy peace. Yet where there is consciousness of immediate 
need, a great crying pain in the heart, that importunes the Heavens and 
would seize the kingdom by violence, let thine answer be such as shall 
give special comfort to special distress. 

Enable us to live our few days with all the simplicity of faith, with all 
the trust of immortal hope, and with all the delight of men who are as- 
sured that the very hairs of their head are all numbered and the lime of 
theirlife is kept in Heaven. Is there not an appointed time to men upon 
the earth? Can our grave be dug before the hour which is written in 
Heaven ? Is not every man immortal until his work is done > Give us 
this confidence, then shall we not be startled by accidents, and that which 
is a tragedy to the vain and the unprepared, will become the common- 
place in the infinite movement of thy beneficent providence. Yet thou 
dost send upon us events with suddenness that break us dfown. If the 
blow be sudden, let the grace be an equal surprise : where the shock is 
startling and distressful, let the healing follow immediately and be the 
greater miracle. 

Thou knowest who are in sorrow and great pain and who are made 
cold by bereavement and poor by the withdrawal of the choice life in 
whose smile the lesser lives all lay. O comfort those that mourn, and 
make our sorrows the roots of our joys. Amen. 

Matthew xjKvi. 1 - 5 . 

1. And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished all these sayings, he 
said unto his disciples, 

2. Ye know that after two days is the feast of the passover, and the 
Son of man is betrayed to be crucified. 

3. Then assembled together the chief priests, and the scribes, and the 
elders of the people, unto the palace of the high priest, who was called 
Caiaphas, 

4. And consulted that they might take Jesus by subtilty, and kill him. 

5. But they said, Not on the feast day, lest there be an uproar among 
the people. 



196 


A^rrTHEW XXVL 1-5. 


OOMPI^TENESS OF DIVINE TEACHING. 

' Jesus had finished all these sayings. ” Why not 

VV before .? Why not have broken off the eloquent dis- 
course midway, so that its latter music might never have been 
heard by the ages — why not .? Consider that question soberly and 
profoundly, and tell me, is there not an appointed time to man 
upon the earth, and can any great speech be interrupted until so 
much of it has been delivered as the ever watching and ever be- 
neficent God deems to be enough ? He punctuates our speeches ; 
if it is better that they should be broken off at an intermediate 
stop, so be it : if it is better that they should go on to a full period 
and be sphered and rounded in logical and rhetorical complete- 
ness, so let it be. Do not live the fool’s life and suppose that any 
man can kill you when he pleases. The very hairs of your head 
are all numbered ; not a sparrow falleth to the ground without 
your Fath^ Fear not, little flock, it is your Father’s good pleas- 
ure to give you the kingdom, is a sweet and gracious promise, 
which has its detailed application to every honest man and every 
faithful worker. 

Jesus Christ brings into his history this word finished more than 
once. In this instance he had finished the Sayings, When he 
offered his great priestly prayer, he said, “ I have finished the 
work thou didst give me to do.” When he bowed his sacred 
head upon the cross in the last intolerable agony, he said, ‘ ‘ It is 
finished.” Does he leave anything in an incomplete state ? Flas 
he left any star half-moulded, any planet without the last touch 
given to its infinite circumference ? He works well, I am per- 
suaded that he which hath begun a good work in you will con- 
tinue it until the day of redemption and completion. If we had 
begun, we might never have finished, but he who began the work 
is pledged to complete it, and the top stone .shall be brought on 
with shoutings of ” Grace-grace” unto it. Build with such 
stones as you are able to lift : do your little masonry as faithfully, 
as lovingly as you can, but he that buildeth all things is God. 

Here the office of the Teacher ceases, and here the office of tlic 
Priest \% about to begin. Correctly and deeply interpreted, the 



197 


CHRIST'S FINAL uSrDS. 


Teacher zvas the Priest, and the life was the death ; and the doc- 
trine was the atonement as well as the death. But for the sake of 
convenience, we divide the functions into Prophet, Priest, and 
King. The Prophet has closed ; the great solemn peroration, 
broad as thunder, has ceased ; he has just said, “ These shall go 
away into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life eter- 
nal. ’ ’ That was his last word, according to the history which is 
before us, and when he had spoken of life eternal, his lips closed. 
There was nothing more to be said of a doctrinal kind— -the 
function was to succeed the prophetical. What an air of repose 
there is about the statement. It reads like a great plan ; there is 
nothing hurried, nothing tumultuous— the uproar is on the out- 
side ; within, and specially in the central Man, there is ineffable 
peace. He speaks as one who came to his work from the sanc- 
tuary of eternity ; there is no flush upon his face that betokens 
surprise, the surprise was in others, to him life was a calm, grand 
revelation. 

How appropriate the last speech : from an artistic peint of view 
the completeness is simply marvellous. There could be nothing 
to say after the twenty-fifth chapter of Matthew. We often feel 
ourselves that after certain men have spoken for any other voice to 
attempt to make itself heard would be an anti-clima.x of an intol- 
erable kind. We know when the wisest' man of the assembly has 
spoken; he has reserved his judgment until other speeches have 
been made, and when he sits down, no other man could, with 
any regard to the fitness of things, presume to rise. What could 
have been said after the twenty-fifth chapiter ? The Son of man 
has come in his glory and all the holy angels with him, and he 
has sat upon the throne of his glory and conducted the arbitra- 
ment of the nations, and these have gone away to everlasting pun- 
ishment and the righteous into life eternal. After fha/, the only 
possible eloquence is — the CROSS ! 

Let us hear his final words before the great tragedy. Said he, 
in verse 2, “ Ye know that after two days is the feast of the pass- 
over, and the Son of man is betrayed to be crucified.’' He never 
made a more characteristic speech. Here you have the very /2t;ar/ 
of the man talking. Look at that word “ letrayed," and find the 
whole soul and purpose of Christ. To be hdrayed was the agony 
— to bo crucified was nothing to the man who would take such a 



mJItthbw XXVL 1-5. 


view of hirayal. It was the sin\\Q looked at, not the butchery. 
That sMch truth could be met by such falsehood killed him. We 
look at the outward and vulgar aspect of things, we cry around 
the cross of wood as we see the sacred blood trickling down the 
beam. ’Tis childish. When we are older and wiser we will cry 
over the beh-ayal. It is one of the impossibilities of ordinary his- 
tory : it would be a total, absolute, incredible impossiblity, if it 
did not take place in our own heart and in our own house day by 
day. That such purity, such truthfulness, such beneficence, 
should have made no deeper impression than thi.s, killed the Son 
of God!, The atonement was offered in Gethsemane, when he 
sweat, as it were, great drops of blood and said, “ Nevertheless, 
not ray will, but thine be done. ’ ’ Thcji he redeemed the world. 
The rest was commonplace, the killing, the slaughter, the mean 
revenge, the triumph of hypocrisy and priestism. 

All the great work in life is done in solitude, with the loved ones 
a few paces behind, wdth the dearest out of sight, with no one 
there but the soul and God. Win your , battle there, and other 
fighting becomes quite easy, and if you seem to fail in the other 
fighting, it is only as a seed fails that dies in the earth to repeat 
itself in manifold productiveness and utility. 

Jesus Christ always took the spiritual view of an action. He 
did not ask to be spared the nailing, he took meekly the spitting, 
for it went no deeper than the cheek — but to be betrayed was more 
than he could bear.. To be smitten on ikit face, what was it but 
to endure for a moment the ruffianism of the basest men of his 
day } — but to be betrayed — that was the mortal agony, and if we 
took a right view of life, we should see it precisely as Jesus Christ 
did — ^not the robbery but the plot to rob, not the blow upon the 
yhci? but the wound upon the heart, not the crime but the sin, 
would impress us most deeply and pain us most cruelly, 

Jesus Christ will, in the judgment, take the spiritual view of 
every action. He is consistent with himself ; he has not two 
standards or methods of judgment. What we would have clone if 
we could will form our character at the last. We speak emptily 
and superficially about deeds and actions and conduct — we do 
not see the real deed. Not what my hand accomplishes, but what 
my heart zwuld effect, is my character. Thank God for that. It 



SPIRITUAL CRITidsM. 


199 


may tell against us in this or that instance, but it may also tell for 
ns in tlie supreme totalising and adjudication of life, God knows 
what it is in our heart 7(5 he, and what we can honestly saj^ in our 
heart is what we really are. Not our outbursts of temper, not our 
occasional displays of lowness of disposition, but the supreme 
desire and passion of the heart will form God’s basis of judgment. 
If we can say at the last, as many a poor misunderstood man can 
say now — but the church will not believe him — God is better and 
greater than the church— Lord, thou knowest all things, thou 
knowest that I love thee ’ — that love will burn up all the sin, and 
they shall come from the east and from the west and from the 
worth and from the south, and from all quarters, sections, 
churches, and provinces of human geography and human thinking 
and human feeling, and the great surprise will be that Heaven is 
so vast. 

‘ ‘ They consulted that they might take Jesus by subtlety. ' ' 
Subtlety — that was their condemnation. Honest men know 
nothing about subtlety, honest men are fearless, honest men rely 
upon the instincts of the people, honest men never fear the in- 
sincts of a great nation. See how sin debases everything : it turns 
a grand magisterial functmi into a machine for the performance of 
little party tricks. Sin blights whatever it touches : if it looks at 
a flower, the flower dies : if it goes through a garden it leaves a 
wilderness behind it. It is a most damnable thing. See the San- 
hedrim, the great council of the nation, that ought to be its pride 
and ornament and crown, and that ought to speak with a voice 
that would commend itself in every tone to the conscience and 
reason and inner heart of the people, conniving^, arranging, tem- 
porising, trick-making— and that is the work of the fear which comes 
of conscious wrong. Fearlessness goes out by the front door, 
honesty speaks aloud in a plain mother tongue that every man 
can understand. Honesty may seem to be inconsistent here and 
there and again, but the inconsistency is apparent only and not 
real. Honesty can bear to be searched into, for all the parts be- 
long to one another, and they: come together and form a sym- 
metrical and indissoluble completeness. Your trick is your con- 
demnation, your subtlety is mere cleverness, it is not philosophy. 

Buf they said, “ Not on the feast day,” That is an excellent 
resolution, not to take Jesus and kill him, and if the punctuation 



200 


mAtTHEW XXVI. I-S. 


had been complete there, ve would have said, “ They have come 
to their better mind forgive them, they are going to abstain from 
their purposed slaughter, but instead of having a full stop after 
‘■day," we read, “lost there be an uproar among the people,” 
A bad excuse, but any excuse will do for persons who are bent on 
villainy. We arc quick at excuse-making, we have the genius of 
wriggling out of righteous positions and evading sacred duty. 
Our reasons often come afterwards, and our excuse is but a post 
hoc — it never would ha\'e occurred to us, if we had not found our- 
selves in danger of being ensnared and trapped and killed with 
weapons tve had made for the slaughter of others. Our excuses 
may min us ; our little pleas may become the sharp weapons thafe 
will penetrate our mi.sspent life. One man thought he had an 
excuse which would make even the great man dumb ; he said, 
“ I knew thee, that thou wert an hard man, reaping w'here thou 
hadst not sown, and gathering where thou hadst not strawed, so I 
took thy talent, wrapped it in a napkin, hid it in the earth — there 
it is. ’ ' And the great man said, ‘ ‘ Thou knewest that I was a 
hard man t Thou knewest ? Thou oughtest, therefore . . . ” 
An unexpected logic, a turn in the argument which became 
intolerable as fire. No excuse can stand the examination of 
God. 

What will Jesus Christ now do with the case so vividly and 
completely before him 1 He will turn away from the great feast of 
the Jews.^ No — he wall keep the feast, though he must die. 
Thai is the Teacher the world w'anted, that was the kind of heroism 
of a moral type which alone couki act upon the world like salt, to 
save it from putridity. He will go to church, though he will be 
killed under its sacred roof ; he will keep the great historic feast 
of Israel, tliough the price he must pay for admission is the price 
of his life. But in doing that, he will give the feast its highest 
meaning. Up to this time the feast of passover 'has been but an 
historical memorial in Israel, getting farther and farther away from 
the first incident, and losing, by mere lapse of time, much of its 
first fre3lines.s. But Jesus makes all things new. He goes to that 
last service, and lifts it u]) to its spiritual significance. May he 
come to e^’ery service of ours and make our homes and prayers 
and Scripture readings and expositions new. That is all we want 
— larger definition, more fearless application of what we do know ; 



THE UPLIFTED FEAST 


201 


enlargement, not destruction, spiritual interpretation, not mechan- 
ical re-arrangement. ' 

Not a word will Christ say against the /easf : he will LyJ> it, he 
will be a /ezu, but in keeping the feast, he will give it its last deep 
and continual signification. Such a preacher do we always want 
in the church : not a man who will lay down the old hjmn-book 
and say, “We have had enough of that,” but will so sing the 
hymn as to make us feel we never heard it before. Not a man 
■who will shut up the Bible and make a new one on his own aC' 
count, but will so read the old Hebrew and Greek and the present 
English as to make our blood tingle as he reads. Not a man who 
j|ill take down the grand evangelical system of teaching and doc- 
trine, but will redeem its noblest terms from sectarian uses and lift 
up into a firmament what has been fastened upon a ceiling. We 
need no new doctrme, but we do need some ne\Y definifions zxid 
larger applications and nobler sympathies and more comprehensive 
charities. 

In going to the feast and acting so, Jesus Christ showed the 
possibility of the Frcligiotmiess of so7ne religion. That is the great 
hindrance to Christian progress — unchristian Christianity, a Chris- 
tian without a Christian practice. Who is a Christian .? 

Christianity is a question of the spij'it, the heart, the imier life— 
not a question of mere propositions and theologies and meta- 
physics and mechanical arrangements ‘of an ecclesiastical kind. If 
any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his, and if 
any man have the spirit of Christ, I care not in what language he 
may express himself — most uncouth and not at all orthodox from 
my standpoint — he is a child of God, and an inhgritor of the king- 
dom of heaven. Christianity is pureness, meekness, gentleness, 
sympathy with right, trust in God, charity, forgiveness — against 
such there is no valid accusation. 

The chief priests, the scribes, and the elders, were religious 
after an irreligious kind. The light that was in them was dark- 
ness, therefore the darkness was great, : They mumbled the right 
words, but they did not live the right life or develop the right 
spirit. If you are selfish, haughty, resentful, proud, .so sensitive 
that no man can speak to you about the affairs which belong to 
your life without your taking immediate offence, are you a Chris- 
tian ? There is not one element of Christianity in you, though 



202 


MA TTHEIV XXVI, 1-5. 


you could repeat every catechism and defend with infinite clever- 
ness every proposition made by the corruptest church in Christen- 
dom. But if you are gentle, pure, kind, unselfish, noble, forgiving 
for Christ’s sake and becau.se he is in you, you are God’s witnesses 
to the power of the cross. When the Psalmist pra)’’ed for the 
destruction of his enemies he was irreligiously religious. It was 
religion gone sour, the wine of piety turned into the vinegar of re- 
sentment — it showed what men would be even in their religious- 
nes.s, when left to themselves. The highest justice is mercy, the 
completest righteousness is gentleness, meekness, trust in God. 


LXXXVIL 


PRAYER. 

Almighty God, thine is a holy mountain, and the place 'whereon thou 
standest is holy ground. May we approach thee in a spirit of humility 
and great expectation, inspired by the hope which thou thyself hast justi- 
fied, that if we come to thee in the right way, with the right prayer, thou 
wilt grant unto us gracious replies. We come by the way of the Cross, 
|ve come by the way of Calvary ^we know no other road ; it is strait, 
and yet it is broad: we renounce ourselves and accept the Saviour, we 
put away our own ability, which is utter weakness, and run with eager 
delight and thankfulness to the almighty strength of Christ. 

We come with our accustomed prayer and our accustomed song, yet is 
our experience new, for thy mercy is always surprising, and thy com- 
passion a continual revelation. Enlarge our prayer, enlarge our praise, 
and receive, we humbly pray thee, in the name of the Mediator, what we 
now utter in thy hearing as the supreme desire of our hearts. Thou hast 
done great things for us, whereof we are glad, but not glad with suffi- 
ciency of joy, for verily our gladness would have purified us, and our 
very joy would have disputed ail dominions but thine own. Yet we are 
glad of thy tender grace and loving patience and eternal training of our 
wayward souls— -often to ourselves hopeless and only hopeful to thine 
infinite compassion. 

Thou hast arranged our life, thou hast directed it according to thy wis- 
dom ; we are here and not there, because the bounds- of our habitation 
are fixed. We are this and not that, because the Lord hath so said. 
The mouth of the Lord hath spoken it, and he who fixed the sea in its 
basin hath also fixed the waters of our life in their small channels. We 
think \ve are free, and behold we are bound : we stretch out ourselves as 
if we had stature and height enough, in order to fill all things, and behold 
the firmament is still above us ; it is the bound of its height, tind beyond 
it we cannot move. Thou hast tethered us with invisible chains, thou 
hast fastened us down to centres, and given us the delusion of liberty, 
whilst we have been all the while the bondsmen of thy wisdom and love. 

We bless thee for this mode of training us ; thou dost lure us by won- 
drous love along the widening way of life, thou dost promise us that 
which immediately appeals to our senses, and lo, thou dost train the 
.senses themselves to contemn the blessing, and look for something 
grander still. Train us, thou loving God ; make of us what thou wilt — 
thy will alone is good, ours is broken and insufficient to meet the whole 
necessity — strong only in points, and strong only with violence and not 


204 


MATTHEW XX VL 6-13. 


with the serenity of complete power. Enable us therefore lovingly to fall 
into the movement of thy will, and to ask for no other compoavtre or rest 
but to be at one with the purpose of God. 

Thou dost make us old day by day, and subtly dost thou withdraw our 
strength from us, until we know that our weakness is complete. Thou 
dost not smite us always with the great blow of thy thundei’, but thou 
takest away our days with invisible hands and with silent movement, and 
we know it not until the sum which is taken is larger than the sum that 
remains. Others die in their full strength, being wholly at ease and 
quiet, but whether in this way or in that,: thou wilt surely withdraw us 
from the scene which we were not consulted about entering, and thou 
wilt work out thy purpose on the other side as thou hast done all along 
without word or will of ours. Oh that we might rest in thy goodness, 
that we might be taught by the very bitterness of our experience, that we 
might see how frail we are, and turn our very frailty into a sign or prayer 
for greater strength. 

To-day make us glad in thine house ; fill every window with light, 
come in upon us by every opening, and make our whole heart glad with 
great joy and thrilling rapture, and while the fire burns may we speak 
with our lips. Let the day be made memorable because of the large bap- 
tism of the Holy Ghost : let all the people praise thee, O God, yea, let 
all the people praise thee ; thou who dost open dumb mouths and unloose 
silent tongues, come to us and cause us who have been too long speech- 
less and songless in this house, to utter our prayer and our praise with a 
new and glad strength. 

We pray for our loved ones who are not with us. The number is in- 
complete, the vacancy is a lesson to our anxious hearts — do thou go after 
'those who have left us for a while : with all Sabbatic comforts make them 
glad, on the high road, in the wilderness, on the sea— \vheresoever they 
are, let the light of thy Heaven be a Sabbatic glory. We pray for the 
sick, the weary, the sad, the dying ; for the whole side and aspect of 
humanity, viewing which our hearts sink within us in hopelessness and 
fear because of our entire weakness and inability to meet the urgent pain. 
Lord, gather us to thine heart, give us to feel the presence of the ever- 
lasting arms, the arms that can crush the universe, but will not hurt a 
little child. Amen, 

Matthew xxvi. 6-13. 

6. Now, when Jesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper, 

7. There came unto him a woman having an alabaster box of very 
precious ointment, and poured it on his head, as he sat at meat. 

8. But when his disciples saw it, they had indignation, saying, To 
what purpose is this waste ? 

Q. For this ointment might have been sold for much, and given to the 
poor.' 



RAPID ALTERNATIONS. 205 

10. When Jesus understood it, he said unto them, Why trouble ye the 
woman ? for she hath wrought a good work upon me. 

11. For ye have the poor always with you ; but me ye have not always. 

12. For in that she hath poured thiS ointment on my body, she did it 
for my burial. 

13. Verily I say unto you, Wheresoever this gospel shall be preached 
in the whole world, there shall also this, that this woman hath done, be 
told for a memorial of her. 

NO WASTE IN LOVE. 

I N this incident we see Jesus Christ indebted to others. It 
seems to be a humble position : he is in another man’ s house, 
for he has no house of his own — at times he had not where to lay 
his head. The writers of his story are never ashamed to say so, 
they do not want any adventitious glory, they do not care to build 
up a grand exterior : though they claim great things for their 
Master, they never claimed a house for him ; they always found 
him the guest of others. He receives too the ointment from the 
woman who poured it up(.m his head. He had no ointment of 
his own. If any such token of love or care was to be bestowed 
upon him, it must be not of his own finding, it must be the ex- 
pression of other hearts, and at the expcn.se of other hands. 

The contrast between this scene and others which have passed 
before us is so vivid as to be startling. We Iravc seen him in the 
narrative raising the dead, opening the eyes of the blind, quieting 
the storm on the sea, and now he is indebted to another man for 
his dinner, and to a kind and loving woman for bestowing upon 
him a token of personal love and regard. He touched the ex- 
treme poles — extremely poor, infinitely rich: weaker than a 
bruised reed, strong with the almightiness of God. 

How singular the imagination which conceived such a life, how 
violent in its action, how utterly improbable in its conception.s ; 
how irrational to suppose that the world would receive a story 
apparently on the very surface of it so self -contradictory and self- 
stultifying ! Yet truth is stranger than fiction. All these rapid 
alternations and self-contradictions take place in every deep and 
great life. If )mu do not realise within you something answering 
to the same marvellous rapidity, violence, and collision, blame the 
narrowness of your own experience rather than doubt what may 



2o6 


MATTimVV XXV/. 6-13. 


appear miraculous to a hope that was never a great flame and to a 
faith that was more than half mere reason and cold factual under- 
standing. , 

How pied^ he receives what is given to him. He realises his 
poverty. There is nothing of pretence about him : he never 
takes a thing as if it were not given. He stoops down to bless 
the giver, to name the donor, so to enlarge the gift and the giving 
that there can be no mistake about his own poverty in the 
matter. With no sleight of hand does he take the offerings that 
are presented : frankly, with all the honesty of a true love, he puts 
out his hand, receives what is offered, kisses it, places it in his 
heart, and writes the donor’s name in heaven. 

And yet consider what it was that he received. Let us look a 
little into what was actually given to him. What was it in this 
case.? He sat at meat in the house of Simon the leper ; he was 
eating his daily bread, partaking of friendly hospitality. What 
else was given to him .? A box of spikenard, very precious, such 
as, probably, only the comparatively rich could hold in their pos- 
session. These were the things that were given. They were poor 
things, and he was the greater for accepting them in their mean- 
ness. Who ever gave him a ihoiighi ? Who ever enriched him 
with an Mm ? Who ever startled him into gratitude by a revela- 
iion of truth which had not come within his own horizon ,? who 
ever pointed out to him, as the result of a more powerful telescope 
than his own, some planet in deeper plunges of the sky than he 
had ever penetrated ? He takes your bread, your ointment, and 
shelters himself under the roo/ot our he.; use : at that end he is one 
with us, just as human as we are : tired, he asks to sit down ; 
thirsty, he says, “ Give me to drink without food hour by 
hour, he is glad to take a meal at miy man’s table, though he be 
publican and sinner, and much mui mured at and about by those 
who look upon outsides only. And yet, whilst he is guest, he is 
host : no man can claim any table that he sits at ; he fills tlic 
place, he leaves more bread than he began with, the feast multi- 
plies under his look. He blesses the house, and it is never poor 
any more. The last lingering ghost that hid itself in some out- 
of-the-way corner vani.shes, and heaven’s cloudless light fills the 
place as if it had become a chosen temple. 

These are the things that prove him to my heart to be , 



207 


LOJiDSH/P jJV THOUGHT. 

GOD. Again and again we have seen that he is no grammatical 
deity, dependent for his primacy and sovereignty upon some cun- 
ning adaptation of ancient verbs and irregular conjugations, but a 
regal God, a palpable deity, a friendly God — so near that I can 
touch him and speak to him, so far that mj^ 03-6 cannot carry its 
vision to the infinite distance. He is all things ; he comes in and 
sits down to dinner like a common carpenter, his clothes very 
coarse and mean and much wa}'’worn, and hi.s look haggard, and 
his eyes dim with watching that nobody could keep up with. 
Then we call him Nazarene and peasant, Galilean and strange 
character, partially maniac, evidently gone out of his head, past 
the thin veil which separates genius from insanity, and we look 
and wonder and are filled with a piteous amazement that such a 
Man should run such a course of wildness. Whilst we are won- 
dering, he gives us one look which w'e can never forget, he utters a 
word as familiar as our mother’s name, but with such tonic force 
as makes it music, revelation, light ! 

So I find him indebted to others, and yet not indebted, for he 
always gives the very things which he was receiving. This is the 
way of the Lord : wewill come to know presently, if we keep long 
companionship, and close heart-intercourse wdth him, that we 
ourselves are not our own. Simon the leper thought the bread he 
was giving belonged to himself. Not a crumb of it ! Mary thought 
she had purchased the ointment or had otherwise secured the 
spikenard, so that she had a right of property in it. Only in an 
intermediate sense. The ointment was Christ’s before it was hers 
— she only held it for him. She could not account for what she 
did. Inspiration has no explanation ; it touches the soul and 
moves the Iiand like unsuspected presences, and we cannot tell 
how we did it : we only know that the deed was done. Oh, cold, 
cold hearts arc they that can tell why they do things and set down 
their reasons in numerical order, and justify themselves upon 
affidavits, and before raagi.sterial benches. Be mine the life whose 
reason is swallowed up in higher reason which I have come to 
know by the mysterious name of inspiration. Sec him there then, 
debtor yet no debtor, a receiver and yet a giver, receiving from 
the hand only, but never having the light that burned in him in- 
creased by a single ray from any spark that ever issued from 
another bi-ain. Set down in your common day books all that 



MA TTHEWyXXVI. 6-13. 


20S 

was given to him ; any coarse paper will do on which to enter the 
record, any clumsy pencil will do to write the vulgar words. 'Fhe 
pencil will never be required to write ihmight, idea, suggesiion, flash 
from heaven ; revelation from unexpected and unpenetrated sanc- 
tuaries. It is up that he is Lord ! , 

But when his disciples saw it they had indignation, and said, 
“ To what purpose is this waste In John we learn that it was 
Judas Iscariot, Simon's son, that began the objection and inquired 
into this matter of what was called waste. Said he, “ Why was 
not this ointment sold for three hundred irence and given to the 
poor The man who said that condemned himself. He knew 
the pence value of the ointment, and any man who knows the pence 
value of anything that takes place in the church is a bad man. 
There is no pence value to the higher life : you jumble unrelated 
languages. The very question is a condemnation : it was not the 
question of an economist, it was the inquiry of a thief. Do not 
believe in schedules and tables and comparative statistics in the 
church. Any man wdro gets up tables and comparative statistics 
in the church is either a bad man or a mistaken one ; he is alw'ays 
a hinderer of true progress. There should be no comparative 
statistics in the church. What have w'C to do whether the pew'S 
are full or empty, or the treasury e.vhausted or overflowing ^ 
Nothing. We have to preach the word, declare the testimony, 
read the writing, decipher the inscription on the cross and on the 
sk3% whether men will hear or whetlier they will forbear, and as to 
comparing this year with ten }'ears ago, let those do so who live in 
dust, but not those who are here for a night and will be gone to- 
morrow like the morning dew. Iscariot cannot do anytliing in 
the church, but debase and injure it. 

Jesus Christ was often misunderstood hy othQvs, When indeed 
was he ever understood Now and then it seemed as if he was 
just going to be undenstood, and then his g^reat heart rocked within 
him and went out after the undenstanding man as one might go 
after a friend long expected and at length come. Sometimes a 
stranger surprised him by great faith, and he instantly went over 
the boundary line separating Jew and Gentile, and took hold of 
him, and with all the pathos and unreserve of an ancient and in- 



209 


TRUE CONCEPTION OF POVERTY^ 

destructible masonry shook him by the hand and heart, and 
claimed him by right of affinity. 

It must come to that in the last building of the church. We 
cannot be built upon words and phrases. In the last is.suc the 
church will be a church of affinity, sympathy, love, friendship, 
brotherhood, a commonwealth — men understanding men who 
never saw one another before, but by look and touch and tone 
and gesture feeling that brothers of a commonwealth have met. 

A man is not necessarily a Christian because he is a disciple, 
nor is a man necessarily at one with Christ because his name is 
Judas Iscariot. A bad disposition misunderstands everything. Do 
not suppose that the bad disposition understands Christ alone ; 
ivhaimr it looks at it desecrates. When a bad man looks at a 
flower, he sends a chill to its little heart : when a Judas kisses your 
child, he blackens its soul. Do not go to the bad man for poetry, 
or for high and bright interpretation of life anci nature. The bad 
man cannot give you what you seek for. Wherever he is, all the 
holy spirits vanish and leave him in the vacancy of solitude. And 
yet the bad man can . use nice words : he talks about the poor. 
The poor — he w'ould sell his mother’s bones to enrich himself ! 
The poor — he would tear the gas lamps from their sockets in the 
church and sell them, if he could do it secretly, if he could do it 
and not be found out ! Yet he talks about the pcfor, makes a 
mouthful of the word, says it unctuously, as if he cared for the 
poor. He can care for nothing that is wise, beautiful, tender, and 
truly necessitous. The disease is vital, the disorder is funda- 
mental : he is bad in the inner fibres, and every look he gives is a 
blasphemy. He comes into the church, and he says, looking at 
anything which he may call by the name of ornament, ‘ ‘ Why 
was this waste made .? Why Avas not this sold, and given to the 
poor, my clients?” He misunderstands all beauty, as if the 
beautiful were not a gift to the ' poor. Why, sometimes the poor 
see more in a picture than the rich can see. To put up a beautiful 
building of any kind in a town is to give something to the poor. 

What are the poor? Mere eaters and drinkers, gonnandisers, 
people gathered around a trough to eat and drink ? Have they 
not eyes, imaginations, sensibilities, divinity of nature that can be 



310 


MATTHEW XXVI. 6-13. 


touched by the appeals of beauty and music and heroism and 
nobleness ? Simon the leper could give a dinner^ but he who 
gives an /r/d’^givesa continual feast He who shows a beautiful pict- 
ure, and gets a man to look right into it and through it, is actually 
giving to the poor. We misunderstod the poor when we su ppose 
that they can only eat and drink, and that to give to them means 
to give them something in their hands or something they can 
gnaw with their teeth. It is a base idea, it is a total misconception 
of the whole case, it must not have any place in Christ’s church. 
Build the most beautiful churches you can and you sustain labour, 
you keep men at w-ork in an honest wuy ; and fill the places with 
the poor. Every picture may be a hint, every tint of beauty may 
thrill the soul with a new hope, and every sound of the organ may 
answer something already in the soul, but silent. Abolish all 
narrow views, and do not suppose that the poor are only so many 
machines for the consumption of food and drink. Better to learn 
in Christ’s school than in Iscariot’s. 

You cannot have any great life without seniimenL Life is not 
all cold logic ; the flowers are the lovelier for the dews that tremble 
upon them, and you look so much younger and nobler when the 
tears of real pity are in your eyes— you are not unmanned, you are 
more than manned. The bad spirit cannot understand lavish 
generosity, spiritual suggestiveness, or religious sentiment. Only 
the beautiful soul can understand the beautiful act Jesus Christ 
understood the woman and told her what it meant, though she 
did not know it. We do not know the meaning of our best acts : 
I am so afraid that we yield ourselves to. those wooden teachers 
who would always keep us just between two assignable points, 
who would put down all madness — whereas it is by madne.ss, mis- 
takenly so called, that the world gets on an inch farther on its slow 
course now and then. 

Jesus now becomes the Giver. Making his voice heard amid 
the tumult, he tells the disciples what the woman has done. She 
gave the ointment, he gave the explanation, and in that explana- 
tion we have revelation. Our de^eds mean more than we some- 
times mean them to mean, says Christ. ‘ ‘ This is done in view of 
my burial’’ That was a new idea ; the woman did not intend to 
suggest death and burial when she came with that ointment, 

‘ ‘ 4h but, ’ ’ says Christ, ' ‘ this is like a flower laid upon my dead 



THE MULTITUDINOUS POOR. 


2II 


breast, that is like a finger gently pressing my dead eyelids, this is 
like an odour of heaven rising from the grave I shall presently oc- 
cupy.” He gives our actions such great meanings — oh, such verge, 
margin, and amplitude of significance ! he makes us ashamed 
of our ver}’' prayers because they are to him so much more than 
they are to ns. He interprets them at the other end, and seems to 
stretch them across the sky, whereas we did but mutter them in 
helplessness and inarticulate necessity. When Christ makes so 
much of the deed, we wish we had made more of it ourselves, and 
made it worthier his love. 

Jesus Christ thus befriended others. Tq receive graciously is to 
benefit the giver. There is a way of denying a gift that hurts the 
heart that suggested it. There is also a way of receiving a flower 
from a little child that makes the child long for next summer to 
come around in a great sudden hurry that it may gather all the flow- 
ers in the field for you. Jesus took the spikenard, with the infinite 
grace which is one of the charmful qualities of his nature, took it 
as if he had a claim upon it, and yet as if he had no claim at all 
but the claim of poverty and need. “ The poor,” said he, ” I 
will give you opportunity enough for attending to the poor : the 
poor ye have always with you, me ye have not always. ’ ' Seize 
the fleeting chance, do good to the man w'ho is going next : he 
may start before you do the great deed. Have some eye to the 
reality of things, and where there is a man that you can only see 
to-day, for he will be gone to-morrow, do good to him, and let 
the ten thousand who are not going to-morrow wait for their 
natural opportunity. 

Tender was the speech, and extorted from him by the woman’ s 
tenderness. “ She,” said he, “ is right : she knows and yet does 
not know that I am going to be buried soon : she knows by a 
feeling, an instinct, strange and anonymous impulse that some- 
thing is going to happen. Thank God for those woraen-prophets 
amongst us, and men -prophets, who cannot tell what is going to 
take place, but know very well that there is somdhmg in the air, 
and that work along that apocalyptic line. 

There is a good deal that i| modern in this ancient instance. 
Many people care for the ^oox mulliiudinously, they care for a great 
nameless quantity called the poor, they often mention tliem over 
their smoking soup, they sometimes refer to them with most 



MATTHEW XXV/. 6-1$. 

touching sympathy as they are gulping down their last cham- 
pagne. They have a warm side for the poor, understanding by 
that term something immeasurable and far away. They would 
take the shadow into their own houses if there were less of it, but 
being so vast they let it alone. These people are great m epitaphs. 
I have sometimes ventured to say that if the dead could rise at 
night in darkness, and had to return to their several graves in the 
morning, they would never be able to get back again to their right 
places if they had nothing to guide them but their epitaphs. 
They would be so surprised at their own grandeur they would 
not dare to get in again. Men cannot live on epitaphs, and the 
poor are not much obliged to us for drinking their health in a 
bacchanalian toast. Better throw a bone without any flesh upon 
it to the hungriest dog that ever lived, than talk about all the 
hungry dogs and give them no bone. Church of the living God, 
you can be mighty amongst the poor ; foiled for the moment in 
wordy argument, you can set ijp a plea for Christianity in the 
hearts of the poor that the poor can understand and apply. 

The word waste was used in connection with this offering. 
“Why — to what purpose— -was this waste.?’’ The word that is 
rendered waste in the English tongue may be rendered perdition. At 
the last Christ said, concerning this same opposing and querulous 
Judas Iscariot, “ I have lost none but the son of waste, the son of 
perdition. He accused the poor woman of having done a perdi» 
tional act. A man can only speak on the level of his own nature : 

I have lost him : it was not the ointment that was wasted, but 
himself that was waste, ’ ’ 

Ay, so it shall be in the judgment. Nothing shall be lost that 
can be kept, and what is lost shall be the son of perdition. 



LXXXVIIL 


PRAYER, 

Almighty God, thou art always leading us onward to Gethsemane, 
happy we if thou wilt enable us to sing a hymn here and there on tfie 
road. This is thy purpose that we should take our sorrows as the begin- 
ning of our joys, and should look onward beyond the place of the shadow 
into the place of the shining of the eternal light. Our eye will sorrow- 
fully rest upon the gloom, it will not lift itself hopefully and look onward 
to the light, and herein have we great and needless sorrow, for we re- 
member not that the dawn is at hand, and that thou art preparing us for 
great visions of glory. Help us, in the spirit of our Master, to endure 
the cross, despising the shame, and looking onward all the while to the 
glory that shall be revealed. Show us that the walk is a short one to 
Gethsemane, there a night of praying and sweltering blood, by and by, 
and sharply, the cruel cross with its nails and spear, then a moment’s 
burial, and away into immortality. May this lie before us as the open 
road of the soul, and believing these great and solemn truths may we 
gird up our loins and pursue the way thou hast marked for our feet. 
Grant unto us that whilst we are eating the bread of afflictions and the 
bitter Egyptian herbs, we may see our deliverer and hear the voice of 
emancipation. 

Thou hast led us just in the old Biblical way : no new line have we 
, written, though we have often tried to do so. Thou dost begin with us 
in the sunny garden where the four rivers are and all the beauteous 
flowers and luscious fruits : thou dost grant unto us limitation, and bind 
us to do this as well ds not to do that, and we are tempted and seduced 
and lured by visible and invisible powers, and drawn straight to disobe- 
dience and rebellion, .* We are cast but of the garden into the wilderness, 
the great, bleak, dj^ail^esert, and but for thy mercy we should die there : 
but thou dost appear for us and grant a great promise, even to the rebel- 
lious heart, and thou dost set before our blinded eyes, blinded because of 
great tears of sorrow, the rainbow of covenant and hope, and the great 
light of final restoration, being purified by the sacrificial blood. And on- 
ward thou dost lead us, over many a weary road, along many a length- 
ening mile, until we are compelled to sit down for very tiredness, and to 
beg water from the wayfarer, and yet all the while thou dost show to our 
eyes the whitening harvest, and give to us promise of plenitude of joy 
and deep and durable content. Lead on, thou gracious One: we will 



214 . 


MATTHEW XXVI 14-3Q. 


follow thee : Saviour of the world, cleanse us every day by thy blood, 
inspire us by thy Spirit, feed us with thy truth, and sustain us virith thy 
grace. 

We bless thee that we cannot die. If any man believeth in Christ, he 
shall never see death •, it may pass by him, and change his relation to 
things, but he will never see it. This is the victory that overcometh the 
world, even our faith, so now we say, “ O death, where is thy sting ? O 
grave, where is thy victory ?” We have conquest and peace through him 
who was calm with the serenity of God. 

We commend one another to thy gentle protection. Regard our affec- 
tionate solicitude for one another as a prayer unto thyself and plentifully 
answer it, thou whose heart is love. We commend unto thee all for 
whom we ought to pray, the royal, the great, the ruling, those who lead 
our sentiment and direct our national affairs, for all men in authority and 
influential positions— the Lord’s blessing be hot withheld from any one 
of them, may they be caught in the impartial rain of his grace, and re- 
joice because he hath visited his inheritance. Regard our 1 loved ones 
from whom we are separated for the moment ; be with them in the far 
away city, on the great sea, in the middle of the wilderness, amongst 
strange people and amongst languages they cannot speak : bring them 
back to us in thy due course, thou who dost keep the time of the world in 
the high Heavens. Take up our children into thine arms and bless them, 
thou Son of Mary, thou Son of every woman. 

Oh let thy light and thy salvation go forth like angels over all the 
earth, drive away the darkness of sin, superstition, error : liberate from 
bondage all who are enclosed in the prison of fear, distress, or despair, 
or do thou come, thou mighty One, whose right it is to reign, and having 
cleansed us in the one fount opened for sin and for uncleanness, and re- 
generated us by the mighty power of the Holy Ghost, may the earth be 
recovered from her wandering, may the prodigal be brought home again 
and set among the brotherhood of the stars, to go out no more for ever. 
Amen. 

Matthew xxvi. 14-30. 

14. Then one of the twelve, called Judas Isca^ot, went unto the chief 
priests, 

15. And said unto them, What will ye give me, and I will deliver him 
unto you ? And they covenanted with him for thirty pieces of silver. 

, 16. And from that time he sought opportunity to betray him. 

17. Now the first day of the feast of unleavened bread the disciples 

came to Jesus, saying unto him. Where wilt thou that we prepare for thee 
to eat the passover ? , 

18. And he said, Go into the city to such a man and say unto him, The 
Master saith, My time is at hand ; I will keep the passover at thy house 
with my disciples. 



TRUE MEANINGS OF OLD TERMS. 215 


19. And the disciples did as Jesus had appointed them ; and they made 
ready the passover. 

20. Now when the even was come, he sat down with the twelve. 

21. And as they did eat, he said, Verily I say unto you, that one of 
you shall betray me. 

22. And they were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them 
to say unto him. Lord, is it I? 

23. And he answered and said. He that dippeth his hand with me in 
the dish, the same shall betray me, 

24. The Son of man goeth as it is written of him : but woe unto that 
man by whom the Son of man is betrayed ! it had been good for that man 
if he had not been born. 

25. Then Judas, which betrayed him, answered and said, Master, is it 
I ? He said unto him, Thou hast said. 

26. And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and 

brake it, and gave it to the disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is ray 
body. • 

27. And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying. 
Drink ye all of it ; 

28. For this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many 
for the remission of sins. 

2g. But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the 
vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father’s king- 
dom. 

30. And when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount 
of Olives. 

SANCTIFIED SYMBOLS. 

Y OU remember the meaning of the passover ; it was a feast of 
the Jews, established for the purpose of keeping in perpetual 
remembrance the passing of the Red Sea, the coming out of Egypt, 
the final deliverance from Egyptian bondage. This festival was 
kept up every year by the Jews, it was therefore the feast of 
memorial, its one purpose was to keep continually in view the 
power and goodness of God, displayed to ancient Israel in deliver- 
ing the people from Pharaoh and in causing them to. pass over the 
Red Sea as on dry ground. 

Jesus, as a Jew, would keep this feast. You reform institutions 
best oftentimes by remaining wiiAin them. It is true that on many 
occasions assaults may be delivered from the outside, but as a 
general rule the great and beneficent revolutions and reforms 
come from within the institutions thesmelves, and are unmarked 



2i6 


MATTHEW XXVI. 14-30. 


by the violence of external onslaught Jesus Christ said, early in 
his ministry, ‘ ‘ Think not that I am come to destroy the law and 
the prophets : I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil,” — that is, 
to bring up to the ver}^ highest point of meaning and to cause to 
pass away, because the divine idea has ripened and culminated 
and there is therefore nothing further for the institution to accom- 
plish. 

The disciples asked him where they should prepare the passover 
for him. It was a family feast : there was something national in 
the arrangements, and there was something domestic in the details. 
All the lambs were brought together, penned together, so that the 
Jews rvent down and chose their lambs from the great multitude, 
and took those lambs to the priest to be examined, that they 
might be declared to be fit for the sacrifice. Two of the disciples 
of Jesus Christ went onward to do this preliminary work. They 
went to the pens, they selected a lamb according to the law, they 
took their turn amongst the others in having the lamb submitted 
to the priest’s scrutiny : in due time it was slain in the legal wa}’ 
and eviscerated, and what \vas designed for the altar was left be- 
hind, and the carcase was trussed with tw'o skewers made of 
pomegranate wood and shaped like a cross, and then the Iamb was 
taken home to be prepared for the evening meal. 

The disciples, acting under the instructions of Jesus Christ, 
were dependent on another man for hospitality. Perhaps John, 
Mark, perhaps Joseph of Arimathrea — the name is not given. 
There was no reason to divulge it at the time, and it has now 
fallen into oblivion. But hospitality w^as willingly and graciously 
offered on the occasion of the passover, and those who were very 
poor, and offered such hospitality as was in their powder, were re- 
•warded by having the skin of the lamb left, and by having the 
vessels which were used at the little feast given to them. The 
passover was never to be celebrated by fewer than ten or by more 
than twenty at a time. Jesus went with the twelve — one of them 
was hardly in the count — it was just about enough. We shall 
get the revelation why certain numbers were chosen, by-and-by : 
we shall find that not the smallest thing in the whole economy 
was done by the law' of haphazard or accident. 

Look at the little plain table. There is on it the unleavened 
bread, the bread of affliction, calling up the afflictions of ancient 



CHRIS!" S CONTINUED IDENTITY. an 


Israel. On it there was also a dish of bitter herbs, reminding' 
those who partook of them of the hard life which ancient Israel 
was doomed to live in Egypt, and there was upon it a dish of the 
conserve of fruits, and that might sweeten the feast a little, for 
surely in every lot there is one drop of sweetness. And there were 
three cups of wine, or one cup thrice filled ; it was filled with red 
wine mingled with water, and it was presented to the head of the 
feast. He rose and uttered a thanksgiving to God for the fruit of 
the vine, and partook of it and passed the cup onto the other 
guests, and then the second cup came and they ate again and 
commented upon the meaning of the festival, and the third cup 
was filled, and it was after that, that as they were eating, Jesus 
took the bread and blessed it, and brake it and gave it to the dis- 
ciples, and said, “Take, eat : this is my body.” And betook 
the cup and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, “ Drink ye 
all of it, for this is my blood of the new covenant — rather than 
testament — which is shed for many for the remission of sins.” 
According to an Eastern custom, the guests put their fingers into 
the vessels and took out what they required to eat, hence the ex- 
pression ; “ He that dippeth his hand with me in the dish,” he 
that is dipping it, he that has just dipped it, the hand that has Just 
met mine, ‘ ‘ the same shall betray me. It is the last time the 
hands shall meet on earth, they have joined together in this one 
act of fellowship ; hence on there will be nothing but disseverance, 
separation of the widest kind, which no line can measure. He 
whose hand is with mine in the dish, or has just been with mine 
in the dish, the same shall betray me.” 

Such is a little history of this nrernorial festival, -which I have 
rapidly sketched in order that we may the more vividly realise the 
scene, whilst I proceed to ask one question and to answer it, 
namely : Is this the same Jesus with whom we have accompanied 
in the reading of this gospel, these many months past ? Can we 
identify him as the same— has he changed in any vital aspect or 
relation ? We have never seen him under such a shadow before. 
Does he now, under the impending and terrific gloom, reveal the 
same features P Could little children go up to him now and say, 
“ This is the Jesus that once blessed us ?” Or is this some fancy 
portrait, lacking in every element of consistency with the living man 
w'ho has travelled with us month bj' month in our Scriptural 


2i8 


MATTHEW XXVI. 14-30. 


studies and made our hearts burn within us ? To my mind it is the 
same Jesus, and I think the proof is more than ample. Here, for 
example, is the same absolute control aver all dr cumstances.^ giving 
him the unspeakable serenity which has always appeared to us to 
be amongst the sublimest of his miracles. He is in no tumult: 
the great clock has struck his hour, but the striking has not para- 
lysed him : he is, if possible, grander than ever, as there is about 
the sunset a royalty that we do not see in the rising sun, a richer 
pomp, a grander magnificence. In the rising sun there was 
power, promise, prophecy,- the uplifting of one who said, ‘ ‘ I can 
do it, and will do it ; I will fill the whole arch with light and make 
it glow with heat, ’ ' but about the setting sun there is the calm- 
ness of one whose battle is won, a king dying amid pomp worthy 
the grandeur of his life. 

So Jesus Christ calls himself the Master even now. When he 
instructed the disciples to go into the city to such a man, he told 
them to say unto the man, “ The Master saith.” Coming from 
his lips these words have great meaning ; coming from his lips at 
such a time they seal him as one who was indestructibly conscious 
of sovereignty. He does not tremble or cower or beg. He com- 
mands even now, without a house to eat the passover in, dependent 
upon his friends for the last hospitality — he does not say, ‘ ‘ I ask 
thee, I beg of thee, I entreat of thee, ’ ’ he says, ‘ ‘ The Master 
saith. My time is at hand : I will keep the passover at thy house 
with my disciples.” Why, this is the very Jesus that looked up 
and saw Zacch^us, and said, “ Make haste, Zacchoeus, and come 
dowm, for to-day I must abide at thine house.” He had no 
house, and yet he seemed to have all houses : he went in where he 
pleased, and made the place the greater by his presence. Poverty 
never lost anything by his entertainment, and the rich man 
always found his silver cup on the top of the sack when he opened 
it, when his wondrous Guest had gone, and the money was 
there, and nothing was lost. This is Christian experience the 
ages through. No man loses anything by Christ. When any 
man in a moment of haste and thoughtlessness says, “ We have 
forsaken all and followed thee,” he makes such a reply as causes 
the man to burn with shame that he was forgetful enough and un- 
grateful enough to mention the little so-called 'sacrifice he had 
made.: ' v;. 



CONTLMUED COxMPASSION. 


319 

Here is a mastery of Everything was pointed out with 

the ease and clearness of a man who apparently had nothing else 
to do. Where the room was, how it was furnished, how every- 
thing was to be set in order — so that no two men ever left a 
master with more carefully or precisely worded instructions. He 
does not hang down his head that he may sob out his weakness, 
he does not speak incoherently because of the great pressure that 
was upon his life, he does not say, “ Please spare me now : do 
what you w'ill, and whatever you arrange, I will accept. ’ ’ He is 
still Master, and Lord still, and Great Sovereign yet, and the 
outgoing of his words is the utterance of a command, and in his 
look there is nothing to betray the consciousness of fear or the 
presence of \veakness. So far w^e know we can identify him as the 
Man w'ho was always the same, who never knew one shock of 
paralysis, who never hesitated as to the course he ought to 
pursue, and who, when his voice was lowest, showed that it was 
not the suppression w'hich comes of weakness, but the lowering of 
his mighty thunder to accommodate the weakness of others. 

Plere also we have the same tender cmnpasmn. Again and again 
we have seen that compassion is the key- word of the Saviour’s 
life. But for his the most of his miracles never would have 
been wrought. He never worked a miracle merely to exhibit his 
strength. He never hurled his almightiness upon the attention of 
society to overcome men by meVe power. He wept, he sighed, 
he pitied, he compassionated with the most clement and tender 
spirit ; and because he had compassion upon those who were 
needy and in pain or in great distress, he wrought miracles for the 
supply of their necessity, for the soothing of their pain, and for 
the abolition of their sorrow. 

We have the same compassion exhibited in this closing instance 
of his fellowship with the disciples. Whom does he compassionate 
now ? He compassionates Judas Iscariot. Think of that for one 
moment. Surely we read the words in a wrong tone if \vc read 
tie twenty-fourth verse as a mere threatening — “Woe unto that 
man by whom tire Son of man is betrayed : it had been good for 
that man if he had not been born.” He docs not turn upon 
Judas and look daggers at him : he does not utter these words in 
a tone of exasperation and resentment, then the occasion would 
have lost its sublimity. He interprets the great decrees : he 



230 


MATTHEW XAWT 14-30. 


stands fast in the tabernacle of God’s eternity, and there might 
have been tears in his eyes when he said : “ Woe unto that man 
by whom the Son of man is betrayed. ” Not, “I threaten you 
with woe," not, " I will one day repay you for this," not, 
" This is the day of your triumph, but my day will come, and 
then I will visit you with penal chastisement because of this be- 
trayal ’ ’ Such a tone would Itave been out of rhythm with the 
gospel of his love, and also with the thunder of his almighti- 
ness ; it would have become a quarrel, a mere contention ; he re- 
garded it as a fulfilment of prophecy, the final expression of that 
which had been decreed from eternity. Woe will be the lot of 
him who does this, he will suffer for it when he sees one day what 
has been done ; he will have no joy in this, he will sup sorrow 
out of a deep bowl and will drink the very dregs of the bitterness. 
Oh, I pity that man ; it had been good for him that he had not 
been born. 

Do not understand from these remarks that Judas was a 
man. This does not alter the character of Judas himself ; I am 
speaking of the divine interpretation of a fact, and the divine in- 
terpretation of the development of a certain man's character. 
Judas himself was a traitor, a thief, a man for whom no word of 
merely personal condemnation is bad enough, but we must not 
find the whole interpretation of the case herein : there is the divine 
view as well as the human view, and Jesus Christ pities the man 
who has fitted himself to carry out this purpose though it be old 
as the decrees of eternity : he pities the sinner in working out the 
sin, there is an aspect of every sinner which touches him, not with 
anger, but with real grief and pity ; when he sees a man breaking 
his commandments right in two, and throwing the halves away 
from him with eager hand, he does not burn with anger only. 
Leave such anger to artificial dieties. God is love, and he cries 
over the poor fool as he sees him doing the wrong. That does 
not excuse the that does not make the man one whit whiter 
or better, but I contend that there is an aspect even of sin which 
moves the divine pity as well as the divine anger, and I feel that 
the rhythm of this solemn music is kept up equally throughout 
not by interposing notes of discord such as would follow in mere 
commination or threat of penalty. I would see in these words 
from Christ’s point of view the sorrow which God always feels 



SANCTIFICATION OF INCIDENTS, 


221 


when he looks upon the traitor. We are all traitors ; some have 
come to public infamy, but all should live in private shame. We 
may run away from Judas as to the mere accident of what he did, 
but he is our brother, born in our heart, and we are born in hi.s, 
so far as the internal act of personal disobedience or rebellion or 
treachery is concerned. 

We misrepresent the great Father when we think of him only 
as being angry with the sinner. * Anger never suggests rede7npiion ; 
wherever God has followed the sinner with offers of redemption 
and mercy and forgiveness, it is because he has looked upon the 
sinner, not with an eye of anger only, but with an eye of pity and 
tenderness and compassion, so far as the sinner himself is con- 
cerned. He never looks with pity upon the sin, he never looks 
without pity on the sinner. 

This is the same Jesus then : he is as compassionate as ever, he 
will love down to the end. Perhaps even on the rack itself he 
may say, ‘ ‘ Father, forgive them, for they know not what they 
do," and if so, he will, to his last breath, be as compassionate as 
he has been throughout his whole career. Let us wait and 
see. 

In the next place, here is the same use of incidents, and the same 
elevation of opportunities and occasions to their highest .signifi- 
cance and purpose. “ And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, 
and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to his disciples, and said, 
Take, eat ; this is my body. And he took the cup and gave 
thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it, for this is 
my blood of the new covenant. ’ ’ Have we seen this Jesus before ? 
Unquestionably. Where .? At Cana in Galilee. What was he 
doing there — wns he keeping the feast of the passover.? No — he 
was keeping a wedding feast, and at that wedding feast he turned 
the water into zvine, and now he turns the wine into blood. He 
always moves to some higher generalisation, to some broader gift, 
to some grander display of beneficent power. Where have we 
seen this Jesus before } In the desert place. What was he doing 
there? Turning a few loaves into a feast for a great multitude. 
What is he doing now .? Taking the bread lying before him and 
breaking it so that it should be in symbol his broken body, flesh 
given for the life of the world. 



322 MATTHEW XXVI. 14 - 30 . 

Have ^ye seen this power displayed elsewhere ? Indisputably. 
Where.? Why in the very beginning. God took the of the 
earth and made of it a man. Christ took the water and made it 
into wine : he took the wine and made it into blood, he took the 
bread and made it into flesh — ^behold I make all things new ! 
think not to say unto yourselves, We are the children of Abraham, 
for verily I say unto you, God is able of these stones to raise up 
children unto Abraham. Think not that you are reputed the 
succession, and that God is depenent upon you for the continuity 
of the Abrahamic line : God is able of these stones to raise up 
children unto Abraham. 

We do not see the deep meaning of things. We read the letter 
and leave it as the letter : we do not wait until it hums ^ and out of 
it there comes the voice of the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. 
Hence we have all manner of foolish controversies about the 
words " This is my body : this is my blood." Go back to the 
feast itself, sit down as members of that little band, and watch the 
action from its beginning, and tell me if the mystery be not im- 
ported into it by the priests, for it is not there by the action of 
Christ himself, When we come to what is now termed the 
Lord’s Supper, we come to the passover of the Christian Church, 
we come to eat memorial bread and drink memorial wine. There 
is no magic about it, no priest’s fingers manipulate the elements 
so as to change them or give them value. They are to you what 
you are to them. You do not see them, you eat as if not eating, 
drink as if not drinking, and if your heart be penitent and broken 
utterly, and there be no place in it or excuse for .sin, and your 
whole soul goes out after the loving Christ for the benefits of his 
completed redemption and his continual intercession, you will be 
as if you had eaten his flesh and drunken the very blood of his 
heart. Do not try to explain these things in words, and do not 
fritt|}- away your attention and fritter away your love, too, in trying 
to j'econcile these with your reason. You cannot take the ^?hole 
sum into your house, however broad your window or directly 
southerly your aspect : you can take in but a ray or two, the 
great sun does not feel as a prisoner within the lines of your 
architecture. So with these great sacred hallow^ed histories and 
suggestions ; they take upon themselves the language of every 
country, the accent of every dialect, and they cliange themselves 



TO GETHSEMANE. 


223 


so as to throw broadening glor}’- and ample hospitality according 
to the ever-enlarging civilisation of the world. 

And is there some poor soul that is afraid of eating and drinking 
the bread and wine unworthily? You cannot do so if you eat 
and drink penitentially. If you turn the action into a revel, into 
a drunkard’s feast, you eat and drink unworthily. It is noiyou 
that have to be worthy, it is the /easi that has to be worthily 
approached, that is to say, approached with a due sense of its 
dignity, meaning, unction, and spiritual suggestion. 

The passover was eaten, the mouthful of bitter herbs had been 
taken by Christ for the last time, the new Symbol had been set up, 
the law of the passover had been fulfilled in the institution of 
the symbolic feast. “And w'hen they had sung an hymn, they 
went out into the mount of Olives.” Some few of the men sang 
the great solemn words- of the ancient Hallelujah, then the others 
joined in saying the last words of the song, and ended with the 
exclamation, “Hallelujah.” They fulfilled the law to the last 
letter, no jot or tittle of it was taken away. Poqr singing it was, 
from an artistic point of view — grand singing from the heavenly 
standpoint. If you sing artistically only, the shame be yours and 
mine. Sometimes the hymn that is sobbed xascy be more acceptable 
than the hymn that is sung. Sometimes the prayer that is broken 
off in the middle is a mightier intercession than a gorgeous address 
or a splendid litany. God accepts the heart : he knows what 
we would do if we could, but “ God abhors the sacrifice where 
not the heart is found. ” 

They went out into the mount of Olives. So simple is the action 
when set down in cold words. There never was such a going out 
before — there never has been such a going out since ! Let us be 
very quiet just now : the Master has gone out — He is on his way 
to GethsemamJ 


To Gethsemane I 


LXXXIX. 


PRAYER. 

Almighty God, thou who hast shown men great and sore trouble wilt 
revive them again, and their joy shall be greater than their sorrow ; as 
where sin abounded, grace did much more abound, so where death 
abounds, there shall be overflowing life, so much so, that the death shall 
not bespoken of but as a shadow upon an infinite firmament. Thou dost 
love us in Christ Jesus the Priest : he has bought us with his blood, and 
to-day we stand at his cross, full of gratitude, our lips eloquent with 
psalms of adoration and thankfulness, and our whole heart going out 
after thee in solemn and loving desire. Thou art the same, and thy years 
fail not : with our growing weakness thou art to us growingly strong, 
and if our eyes fail, thou dost increase the light according to their failure, 
so that in our soul there is the shining of everlasting day. 

We know these things by our hearts, and can tell them only in feeble 
and unworthy words : there is no speech for thy goodness of the same 
pattern and scope whereby we can set it forth to our own hearing and our 
own vision. The dream is within, the vision is in the heart : we see with 
our love and hear with the inner ear, and when men ask us for words of 
publication, behold there is no speech upon our tongue : we can but burn 
within and feel thy speechless presence. Thou art good to us with both 
hands ; the right hand of the Lord is full of power, his left hand is under 
us as a security and protection, thine eyes are lighted with love, the open- 
ing of thy mouth is as the dropping of honey upon our life, and all round 
about us, nearer than the living air, is thy presence, a great light, an 
eternal comfort, a sure and steadfast hope, , 

We have come to praise thee upon the harp of many strings, upon the 
organ, yea with trumpets and voices of the heart and soul. We would 
call upon all things that have breath to praise the Lord, we would 
demand, in addition to our solitary utterance of- praise, the choral service 
of the universe, for thou hast done great things for us whereof we are 
glad. Thou dost come into the orchard of our life and do wonderful 
things. Thou dost sometimes blight the blossom and take away the little 
bud, so that the hope of the heart is chilled and slain. Sometimes thou 
dost come in the autumn, and with thine own hand pluck the ripe fruit 
and hide it in the Heavens. It is all thine, the tender little color, and 
the luscious fruit, the whole tree, root and branch is thine : it is not ours. 
So do we say when the blossom goes and the fruit is plucked, “ The Lord 



PRAYER. 33 <; 


gave and the Lord hath taken away : blessed be the name of the Lord,” 
One dieth in his full strength, being wholly at ease and quiet ; another 
dieth in the bitterness of his soul and shall see pleasure no more. Thou 
dost cut down with mighty strength the life too frail for such power to 
strike it, and thou dost gather to thyself other lives like shocks of corn 
fully ripe. The Lord gave and the Lord hath taken avvay, blessed be 
the name of the Lord. Thou dost smite the mighty man in his eminence, 
thou dost cut down the cedar and call upon the fir tree to howl because 
the king of the forest is overthrown, and thou dost take away our father 
and mother, our wife and child, those that go back to our earliest years 
and make the foundations of our little history. The Lord gave and the 
Lord hath taken away blessed be the name of the Lord, He is the living 
One, and in him alone is immortality, and if thou dost take away, thou 
wilt well keep : none shall be able to pluck our loved ones out of the 
Father’s hand. Comfort all that mourn herein, and let their mourning 
and weeping be but for one night, and their joy for all the next day— - 
eternal. 

Let thy blessing come upon us according to the pain of our life and the 
need which we feel growing into a deep poverty and crying to thee in 
feebleness. Let our weakness be a plea, let our blindness be the reason 
of our prayer, find in our necessity the occasion for the exercise of thy 
grace.* Pity us wherein we are little and weak and poor, blind and not 
able to see afar off, and according to the need of our life order thou the 
multiplication of thy comfort. Give us an insight, we humbly pray thee, 
into the inner mysteries, the holy depths of divine truth. May we see 
the realities of things, may ours be no surface looking, but a penetration 
into the soul and meaning of things as they exist and relate to the 
infinite. 

The Lord comfort us with choice consolation, the Lord inspire us with 
new thought and inflame us with new light ; the Lord work in us godly 
discontent with all present attainments and opportunities — give us to cry 
for larger growth and nobler attainments and services. 

Be with all for whom we ought to pray. Thou knowest why the seat 
is vacant, thou knowest where the father of the family is, or the eldest 
son, or the wanderer, or the prodigal that will not come to church. Thou 
knowest where the sinners congregate and the scorners sit. They are 
not here to-day, they do not wish to be here, they hate thy house, and 
they make use of thy name for unholy purposes — yet is thy mercy greater 
than their sin, thy grace overarches their life as does the great Heaven 
the little earth. O Lord, continue thy mercy, keep back thy judgments, 
let the prayers of thy people, like a great wind, keep back the storm-cloud 
of thine anger. 

O Lord, hear us, O Lord, help us, O Lord, forgive us — wash us in the 
atoning blood, cleanse us by the power of thy Holy Spirit, and make our 
life richer, greater, grander in all holy aspiration and beneficent uses, day 
by day, till the sun set, and we pass on to other climes, Amen. 



226 


MATTHEW XXVI 31-46. 


Matthew xxvi. 31-46. 

31. Then saith Jesus unto them, All ye shall be offended because of 
me this night :*for it is written (Zech. xiii. 7), I will smite the shepherd, 
and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad. 

32. But after I am risen (unheeded words !) again, I will go before you 
into Galilee. 

33. Peter answered and said unto him, Though all men shall be 
offended because of thee, yet will I never be offended. 

34. Jesus said unto him. Verily I say unto thee. That this night, before 
the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice. 

35. Peter said unto him, Though I should die with thee (so Thomas' 
had said, John xi. 16), yet will I not deny thee. Likewise also said all 
the disciples. 

36. Then cometh Jesus with them unto a place called Gethsemane (oil 
press), and saith unto the disciples. Sit ye here, while I go and pray 
yonder. 

37. And he took with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and 
began to be sorrowful and very heavy (weighed down). 

38. Then saith he unto them. My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even 
unto death ; tarry ye here, and watch with me. 

39. And he went a little farther (about a stone’s cast), and fell on bis 
face, and prayed, saying O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass 
from me ; nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt. 

40. And he cometh unto the disciples, and findeth them asleep, and 
saith unto Peter, What, could ye not watch with me one hour ? 

41. Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation ; the spirit 
indeed is willing (ready and eager), but the flesh is weak, 

42. He went away again the second time, and prayed, saying, O niy 
Father, if this cup may not pass away from me, except I drink it, thy will 
be done. 

43. And he came and found them asleep again : for their eyes were 
heavy. 

44. And he left them, and went away again, and prayed the third time, 
saying the same words. 

45. Then cometh he to his disciples, and saith unto them. Sleep on 
now, and take your rest : behold, the hour is at hand, and the Son of 
man is betrayed into thh hands of sinners. 

46. Rise, let us be going (not to flight but to danger) ; behold, be is 
at band that doth betray me. 



WRITTEN ANS WERS. 327 


THE CULMINATING SOHEOW. 

S MITTEN,” — but Shepherd still. Strokes do not change 
character. The Shepherd was not deposed from his tender 
function ; he was scourged, smitten, oppressed, and grievously 
tormented, but he was still a Shepherd. ” Scattered abroad,” — 
but still the sheep of the flock. Understand that eircunisianc&s 
do not make or unmake you. You are not Christians because 
you are comfor table, you are not sheep of the flock because you 
are enfolded upon the high mountains and preserved from the 
ravening beast Sometimes the flock is scattered, sometimes the 
shepherd is smitten ; but the shepherd is still the shepherd, the 
flock is still the flock, and the tender relation between the two is 
undisturbed and indestructible. 

If I were a Christian only on my good behaviour, woe is me. If I 
belong to the flock only because of the day's calm, or the richness 
of the pasture, and because of the plentifulness of all I need, then 
is my Christianity no faith at all : it is a thing of chxumstances, it 
*is subject to climatic changes : any number of accidents may 
come down upon it and utterly alter its quality and its vital rela- 
tions. I stand in Christ, I am redeemed with blood ; the work 
is done ; where sin abounds, grace doth much more abound. The 
church was just as much a church when she was in dens and in 
caves of the earth, destitute, tormented, afflicted, as when she 
roofed herself in and painted the roof with gay colours and lighted 
up the house with rare lights. Let us more and more understand 
that our election and standing are of God, and are not tossed 
about, varied and rendered uncertain, by the tumultuous accidents 
of time or by the sharp variations of a necessary and profitable 
discipline. 

Jesus Christ stood always upon the written word. When the 
devil first tempted him, he answered, “It is written^ Now 
when the devil has returned to him with the whole host of hell em- 
battled against his trembling life, he begins to quote the Scripture,s 
once more. What could we do without the writing ? We need 
something to refer to, to stand upon, to quote — the positive and 
real word. When our mouth is filled with that, we feel as if we 
were equipped for battle. You must not have your Scriptures to 



228 


MATTHEW. XXVI. 31-46. 

extemporize when you need them suddenly : the Bible must be old, 
venerable, dwelling in your heart, ruling all your thinking, and 
must be quoted as a familiar expression, and not as a rare and 
curious saying with which the tongue is unacquainted, and to 
which it takes but unskilfully as to a tune not heard before, 
“ Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly” — then, in the fight 
in the wilderness, you will be master, and in the night of smiting 
and scattering you will be able to speak of Resurrection and 
Reunion. Do not let us live in accidents, in transient circum- 
stances and in variable and uncertain relations. We have a 
written word in which we may hide ourselves, we have a testimony 
cut up into sentences, so concise that a child can quote them, and 
written with so plain and keen a finger, that if they be quoted with 
the earnestness of the heart, the very tempter himself will reel 
under the shock of their quotation. 

It is the Shepherd that is calm, though he is going to be 
“smitten the rod is lifted up that wall fall heavily upon him, 
and whilst he yet sees it uplifted in the air, he says to the flock, 
“ But after I am risen again I will go before you into Gali- 
lee.” This is not something unexpected or unforeseen : an 
ancient prophecy is about to be fulfilled, but after it is fulfilled in 
what we may term its harsher aspects and meanings, there will 
come the broa,d morning of Resurrection, and the infinite joy of 
renewed, continued, and endless communion. 

I am afraid that some of us do but meanly live from day to day 
in this Christian life. In one sense that is right — that is, so far as 
the supply of immediate and peculiar necessity is concerned ; but 
as to its depth, serenity, solidity, and irrevocableness, it is, not 
something buttressed up every day by some new act of masonry : 
it lies deeper than the granite at the heart of all things. Be peace- 
ful, be quiet, be filled w'ith the peace of God. The climate 
changes, but the sun is the same, and is daily relighted by the 
same hand. 

Peter answered and said unto him, “ Though all men shall be 
offended because of thee, yet will I never be offended. ” When 
men boast, such exaggeration is itself ay^//. If he had ended 
there, he would have ended as a fallen man. There is a time 



THREEFOLD SINS. 


229 


when even to speak is a vulgarity : there is a time when to con- 
tradict is black blasphemy : there are times when men ought at 
least to think in quietness, and to nurse their resolutions in the 
secrecy of unuttered prayer. Some virtues are vices— -that is to 
say, their exaggeration becomes vicious. So there were men who 
prayed so much that they never prayed at all. They lost the 
spirit of prayer, they did not know its meaning ; it became an ex- 
ercise in speech, in the utterance of language and involved sen- 
tences oft repeated, until the exercise became purely mechanical, 
and so the prayerful words were prayerless speeches, and God 
neither heard nor answered. ■ 

So there is a fast that becomes feasting, and there is a steadfast- 
ness that becomes bravado. Let us take care lest we exaggerate 
our virtues into vices. 

Jesus Christ performed what we may call in some sense the 7(3:^/ 
of his miracles. It was in sweet and tender harmony with the 
grand music of the occasion. Said he, “ Verily I say unto thee, 
Peter, that this night, before the cock crow, thou shall deny me 
thrice.” It was o mental miracle, an instance of that prescience of 
Christ which gave him his infinite superiority above all other 
teachers. We have seen how often he read the heart, and gave 
language to the unuttered thought, and brought the fire of shame 
to the cheek of men who supposed that their heart-thoughts were 
unread and unknown. Here Christ repeats the mental miracle of 
foretelling the mental condition of his senior disciple, and his moral 
lapse within a given period of time. How emphatic he makes 
it ; there is music in the word “ thrice,” it is a rhetorical word ; 
all happily balanced rhetorical sentences have in them three mem- 
bers : so there is to be here an emphasis of completeness, har- 
mony, and undeniableness of reality. Thrice. The bad man 
“walks,” “stands,” “sits” — so it must ever be.. Vice must 
take its little rhetorical curriculum, and finish its bad career ac- 
cording to the ancient and unchangeable rule. When Peter 
denied once, he might have recalled almost his breath, and 
denied that he had denied ; but this boasting shall be humiliated, 
there shall be left no doubt or hesitancy on the part of Peter him- 
self, that the denial was threefold, complete — in its way infinite. 

So verily it has been in the history of the whole world. We 


230 


MA TFHEW XXVI. 


are not left in doubt as to our sin. It is thrice-sin, fold on fold, 
and to deny it is to aggravate it. There are no once-done sins, 
“ Thou shaft deny me THRICE.” . 

Peter said unto him, “ Though I should die with thee, yet will 
I not deny thee.” It was honest ignorance; it was the worst 
kind of ignorance, the ignorance of one’s own heart. Until we 
know what our heart really is, we can have no conception of what 
Christ proposes to do. Young, strong, prosperous, flourishing, 
with the colour of health upon our cheeks, and with the energy of 
health in our step and our mien, we cannot understand Christ’s 
great speech to the heart. He must reduce us, humble us, grind 
us to powder, fill us with shame, drive us out to weep bitterly, and 
in that infinite rain of penitence he may say something to us that 
will lead us to God. Meanwhile he let the boastful man have the 
last word ; to chide such ignorance was to waste energy and time. 
He allowed the disciples to have the last word. On other oc- 
casions he had the last word, but was this a time for chaffering, 
was this a season for the adjustment of relations, or for the asser- 
tion of supremacies ? He allows the boaster to have the last 
word, that having his own word ringing in his ear, he may tlie 
more accurately and vividly remember it when the stroke .falls and 
his tortuous lips utter the speech of denial. 

“ Then cometh Jesus with them into a place called Gethsera- 
ane,” up to that time a local name. Just as the bread we have 
spoken about was ordinary, and suddenly became “body;” and 
the wine, the common red wine mixed with water, which sud- 
denly under a touch and a look became “ blood,” — so this place 
called Gethsemane can never hence on through all the ages change 
its name. It w'as an olive-yard, and in it was the olive-press. 
The olive w^as the emblem of peace. Under that great solemn 
passover moon there bent down One in infinite agony who is our 
Olive, our Peace. Let us repeat these words to the soul, till 
they become tender by gracious familiarity, “ He is our Peace ; 
he hath made both one.” 

Then saith he unto them, “ My soul is exceeding sorrowful, 
even unto death. ” That is the time for a man to answer the 
question whether he has a soul. That is not a question for inteh 



NO COMPANIONSHIP. 


231 


lectual debate or metaphysical inquiry, or for the sharp exchange 
of skilfully chosen words. When such debate goes on, the soul 
may well have retired into some secret place to cry over the 
degradation to which it has been subjected by the superficial in- 
quiry. There is a time when no other words will express a man’s 
consciousness and experience but . . , “ my soul," Speak to a 
man in those educational hours and a great pain goes through him 
like a dart of fire. Then dare yon ask him if man has a soul P 
There are bodily troubles and there are troubles of the heart, and 
are there not griefs which are peculiarly agonies of the soul t For 
every blood -drop we are implicated in the fierce endurance and 
trial. Let not those come into this sanctuary who have no great 
woes, but into it there will come an innumerable and reverent host 
of hearts that have known the bitterness of sorrow and the grief of 
death. Do not suppose that the soul’s existence is to be proved 
by words. There will one day come into your life a pain which 
nothing but the sotil could feel. Once felt it can never be for- 
gotten. Wasted are those hours which we spend with men whose 
souls have never been dried. It is an exchange of words, a 
bantering of foolish sentences, one against the other. Let men 
meet who understand one another by the masonry of a common 
grief and they will tell those who are outside how true it is, not 
only that man has a soul, but is one. 

This is not a complaining voice. We have never heard the Mas- 
ter complain. He has stated his circumstances, he has told those 
who would follow him, without sufficiently counting the cost, that 
he had not where to lay his head, but he announced the circum- 
stance with a cheerfulness of a divine content. Now he brings 
into his speech a tone we have never heard before. ‘ ‘ My soul is 
e.xceeding sorrowful, even unto death." Had he been doing 
wrong P No. Had he changed his course } No, Was he pro- 
posing to the world some new and forbidden line of liberty and 
delight } No. But \ho purpose of his own heart is ripening, and 
the divine decree is coming to the utterance of its last syllable, 
and the prophecy which has been the poetry and the light of the 
world is now about to pass into stern and solemn history, and in 
that transition this agony is felt. 

Yet how human he is. “ Tarry ye here, ’ ’ said he, “ and watch 


MATrilEW XX VL 31 - 46 . 


232 

with me.” There are times when even a little child would be a 
defence for a strong man ! There are hours of fear in which, 
could we but feel a child’s little touch, w'e should be men again ! 
There is a loneliness which the soul cannot survive ; it must fall 
before it like a victim, though, being true in itself, and gracious in 
its purpose, it will rise again, and the great multitude shall gather 
around it to maintain with it and through it eternal fellow'- 
ship. ... 

lie would have with him the very men who were going to flee 
away from him. He could only build with such materials laid to 
his hand. It was rotten material— sometimes we put out our 
hand to -A.yiddmg sod, thinking that perhaps it will not altogether 
give way till we get higher up through its uncertain help. These 
men were about to flee away from him, but he would just have 
them remain to give him such little comfort as was in the power 
of man to give under circumstances so tragic. You have been 
urfder the weight of long dark cold nights of loneliness, when a 
child's little silvery laugh would have made you heroic as an army 
of soldiers. In such nights you have felt the need and the value 
of a little human sympathy. Oh the touch of a friend’s hand, the 
look of a loving eye, the utterance of a voice of trust and loyalty 
— these would have been right eloquent in certain periods of in- 
tolerable silence ! 

“He went a little further and fell on his face.” There are 
weights that crush men down so / They do not then ask what is 
the proper attitude in prayer — you will be told, you will be put 
into it, there is a force that will attitudinize you without any study 
on your part, a mighty terror force that will dash you on your 
face ! In such circumstances ask a man as to the legitimacy and 
utility of prayer ! Such are the circumstances for the answering 
of such questions. In one case you will discover whether man 
has a soul, in the other case you will discover whether it is any 
good to pray. The question is answered from within ; the reply 
does not come as the answer to the long, connected, and subtle 
argument, but within you breathes the suppliant that will not be 
silenced, in your soul is the intercessor that will pray. Do not 
discuss these questions about the soul and prayer in cold blood 
and in cold words. Leave such great inquiries to be answered by 
the tragedies of your personal experience. 



OUR FATHER AND MY FATHER. 2.33 

“ And he went a little further and fell on his face and prayed.” 
This is the Lord’s prayer! 0 my Father” — why tljat is the 
prayer he taught us long ago^ — ^]u.st the same ! What said he when 
we asked him, “ Lord, teach u.s how to pray.?” Said he, “ Our 
Father. ’ ’ Now, when he; has to pray himself, what says he .? “ O 

my Father. ’ ’ It is the same Jesus : Tde is the same yesterda}', to- 
day, for ever. What, was God a Father still .>=’ When the Shep- 
herd was being “ smitten,” when the Hock was being “ scattered, ’ ' 
when the night was getting colder, deeper, darker, when in the Avind 
Avas the breath of pursuing hell, Avas God .still Father ? By this 
standard let us try ourseh'es. If the great Ruler of the universe 
come to us in sun.shine only, mighty, grand, majestic, royal, Ave 
have lived the AAnong way : Ave should haA'e lived up into tender- 
ness and filial trust and gracious expectation, and the deep happy 
assurance that how dark socA'cr be the clouds, they are the dust of 
our Father’s feet 

Now he is shut up and alone Avith God. There are times AA-hen 
we must keep our dearest companions at a little distance. There 
are seasons w’hen a man must be as if he Avere the only man in 
God’s universe, and as though face-to-face speech Avith the Father 
could alone determine and ov^errule the crisis of agony, We pray 
a certain kind of prayer in the great congregation, a necessary and 
beautiful prayer, the expression of common praises and common 
Avants, But there is another kind of prayer AALich none but God 
may hear. If it be heard by our mother even it Avill be spoiled. 
If we could knoAv that the friendliest ear Avere overhearing it and 
catching the words before they got to God’s ear, Ave should feel as 
if the life-stream had been diverted and had changed its course and 
gone on a Avrong career. 

What are your troubles— are they but transient aches and pains, 
small ailments for AA^hich the handiest doctor has an immediate 
remedy .? Then you cannot folloAv into this great darkness of the 
passover-night. But is there bitterness of soul on any account 
whatsoeA'er, real feeling in the innermost chambers, so to say, of 
the soul ? — then the Lord’s prayer is AAnitten here for our use ac- 
cording to the measure of our necessity. He Avill have the great 
harmony established the great harmony of the universe takes all 
its utterance and expression from the divine Avill, The moment 
you have /tw wf/A in the universe, you break up its harmony ; 



234 


A/A TTHE W XXVL 31-46. 


there can be in a harmonic universe but one will, and that is 
God s ; our will must fall into it, become part of it, and must ex- 
press it in such phrase and accent as our circumstances enable us 
to realise. 

Jesus Christ will now dispense with miracles : he could have 
performed a miracle by prayer, but he will not.. This shall not 
be done by spears and swords and angelic hosts : it shall be a 
question of will. So the miracles might well have ended there, 
and have all sunk in the majestic cry, “ Thy will be done.'” 
There is no further prayer: that is the all-inclusive and all -cul- 
minating desire and petition. Yet the angels will come. We 
read elsewhere that an angel came and comforted him. Surely we 
have heard of that angel htioxt— where did we hear the rustling 
of those wings before? In the wilderness! “Then the devil 
leaveth him, and behold, angels came and ministered unto him. ' ’ 
And here in Gethsemane, a bleaker wilderness, a drearier desert, 
when his soul was afire with an infinite agony, and when out of his 
skin there dropped as it were great drops of blood, behold an 
angel came and strengthened him ! 

The universe is one ; who could live in a universe that was 
nothing but what he could see ? What, the uni%'erse no bigger 
than my sight, my power of vision and capacity of intaking and 
realization ? It were a mockery, not a universe. When you tell 
me the air is full of angels and the great blue heaven is an infinite 
church, and that all things live, that God is over all, blessed for 
ever — ^you satisfy something that is in me, you answer an unuttered 
prayer ! 


SELECTED NOTES. 

" Here, then, we have two subjects of contemplation distinctly marked 
out for us. I. The irreparable Past. 2. The available Future. The 
words of Christ are not like the words of other men : his sentences do 
not end with the occasion which called them forth ; every sentence of 
Christ’s is a deep principle of human life, and it is so with these sen- 
tences : ‘ Sleep on now ’ — that is a principle ; ‘ Rise up, and let us be 
going ’—that is another principle. The principle contained in ‘ Sleep on 
now ’ is this, that the past is irreparable, and after a certain moment wak- 


NOTES. 


235 


ing will do no good. You may improve the future, the past is gone 
beyond recovery. As to all that is gone by, so far as the hope of alter- 
ing it goes, you may sleep on and take your rest ; there is no power in 
earth or heaven that can undo what has once been done.” — (Robertson.) 
“ Here seems to be a contradiction ; he bids them rest, and yet by-and- 
bye he says, ‘ Arise, let us go hence.’ Some answer that he speaks by 
way of upbraiding and not of permitting ; but Mark makes it plain, that 
after this speech, staying awhile, he stirred them up again, saying, ‘ Let 
us go hence.’ For having bidden them sleep, he says, as after some in- 
terim granted, It sufficeth, and then the hour cometh, etc.” — (Augus- 
tine.) “ Even as water may be pierced with a weapon, and so likewise 
the fire and the air, yet they cannot be said to be wounded ; so the body 
of Christ might be beaten, hanged up, and crucified, yet these passions 
in his body did lose the nature of passions, and the virtue of his body, 
without the sense of pain, received the violence of pain raging against 
him. The Lord’s body indeed had been sensible of pain — if our body 
had been of the same nature to go upon the water, and not to make im- 
pression with our footsteps, and to go through doors that were shut. But 
seeing this nature is proper only to the Lord’s body, why is the flesh con- 
ceived by the Holy Ghost judged by the nature of a common body? He 
had a body indeed to suffer, but he had no nature to grieve.” — (Hilary.) 



xc. 


PRAYER. 

Almighty God, grant us thy peace. The peace of God passeth all 
understanding. Great peace have they that love thy law. O that we had 
hearkened unto thy commandments, then had our peace flowed like a 
river, and our righteousness had been as the waves of the sea. Jesus, 
Lamb of God, Saviour of the world, grant us thy peace. Not as the 
world giveth dost thou give — say unto us, “ Peace be unto you,” and 
there shall be a great calm. Thou art the Prince of peace, the Son of 
peace, the Spirit of peace : may we know that thou art present in the soul 
by the peace that reigns there. Deliver us from all quietness that is 
deceitful, save us from lulling our souls into unholy slumber, and grant 
us thy peace, thine only, too deep to be measured, too ■ calm to be ex- 
pressed in words. 

We have sinned against thee, and therein has our peace been destroyed. 
Truly we can say, there is no peace unto the wicked. We have felt the 
sting of conscience, the torment of remorse, the gloom of guilt and 
desp&, but in the night of our sorrow and woe thou hast sent unto us 
angels of light with promises of pardon, and we have been led to the 
cross on which there died thine only-begotten Son, our Saviour and 
Priest and Surety. He is our Peace, he hath made both one. He is our 
Daysman, and he has laid his hand upon thee and upon us, and has made 
reconciliation. Great is the mystery of godliness ; we cannot penetrate 
it with our understanding, we cannot receive it into our minds, but we 
can feel it in the heart, our love answers it, and the appeal of thy grace 
is replied to by the cry of our penitence. 

We have come to worship God and to eat bread at his table. He 
establishes the feet of his saints, and watches the outgoings of them that 
are his. Behold we have in our hearts the sacred vow, upon our tongues 
is the holy word, and in our understanding is the conviction of thy pres- 
ence and grace- We have done the things we ought not to have done, 
we have left undone the things that we ought to have done, and when 
we say there is no health in us, we feel how dead we are. We do not 
interrupt our confession with excuses and pleas ; we fall down before 
thee, infirm, broken, shattered, without one word of self-defence. Thou 
knowest our frame, thou rememberest that we are dust, a wind that 
cometh for a little time and then passeth away. Thou wilt not thunder 
upon us with thy great power, thou vyilt not magnify thine almightiness 
in our destruction, thou wilt rather lift up thine omnipotence in pledge 



THE TEXT. 


237 


of thy pity, and in the great power of God shall we find the tabernacle of 
his grace. In wrath remember mercy : remember how frail we are, 
remember that we are of yesterday and know nothing : see how few are 
our years, a handful at the most, and pity us and love us with continual 
compassion. 

We bless thee for the year now closing around us as a church and peo- 
ple. Thou hast brought us to the day of temporary farewell; looking 
back upon all the past we bless thee with full heart, we thank thee for 
every rev. lation of thy truth, for all the light which has gleamed upon us 
from the upper places, and for all the comfort that has strengthened and 
encouraged our life. This is the Lord’s doing, and it is, marvellous in 
our eyes. Thou wilt conduct us to the end, thine hand of defence will 
never be withdrawn ; when heart and flesh do fail, thou wilt be the 
strength of our heart and our portion for ever. 

Pity all that has been amiss. Come with thine infinite forgiveness 
upon every guilty deed, and from the cross of thy Son our Saviour, 
absolve us from all sin. Wherein we have been good and have done 
good, to thy name alone be the praise. 

Help us to resume our work with all thankfulness of energy and of 
hope, with invincible strength, with perfect consecration of mind and 
heart. Thus may we spend the years and prepare for the great eternity. 

Comfort all that are sore of heart, speak a message of encouragement 
to those who need to be touched gently, or they will surely die. To the 
stranger within our gate speak home words that shall touch the heart 
and comfort the life with a new solace. 

Pardon our sins, forgive our enemies, include within thy love our 
friends who are absent from us but who are longing to hasten back. 
Take up the lambs in thine arms, thou Shepherd of Israel ; save tvith 
thine almightiness those who cannot save themselves, and when the dis- 
cipline of life is perfected, may we begin the study and the service of im- 
mortality. Amen. 

Matthew xxvi. 47-75. 

47. And while he yet spake, lo, Judas, one of the twelve, came, and 
with him a great multitude with swords and staves, from the chief priests 
and elders of the people. 

48. Now he that betrayed him gave them a sign, saying, Whomsoever 
I shall kiss, that same is he : hold him fast. 

49. And forthwith he came to Jesus, and said. Hail, master; and 
kissed him. 

50. And Jesus said unto him, Friend (comrade), wherefore art thou 
come ? Then came they,.: and laid hands on Jesus, and took him. 

Sr. And, behold, one of them which were with Jesus stretched out his 
hand, and drew his sword, and struck a servant of the high priest’s, and, 
smote off his ear. - 



238 


MATFHEW XXVI 47 - 75 . 


52. Then said Jesus unto him, Put up again thy sword into his place : 
for all they that take the sword shall perish \vith the sword. 

53. Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall 
presently give me more than twelve legions of angels (the possible and 
the impossible) ? 

54. But how then shall the scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be ? 

55. In that same hour said Jesus to the multitudes, Are ye come out 
as against a thief (as against a robber with swords and clubs) with swords 
and staves for to take me ? I sat (a sign of authority) daily with you 
teaching in the temple, and ye laid no hold on me. 

56. But all this was done, that the scriptures of the prophets might be 
fulfilled. Then all the disciples forsook him, and fled. 

57. And they that had laid hold on Jesus led him away to Caiaphas 
(already committed to the policy of condemnation, John xi. 49) the high 
priest, where the scribes and the elders were assembled. 

58. But peter followed him afar off unto the high priest’s palace, and 
went in, and sat with the servants, to see the end. 

59. Now the chief priests and elders, and all the council, sought (a word 
which implies a continued process of seeking) false witness against Jesus, 
to put him to death ; 

60. But found none ; yea, though many false witnesses came, yet found 
they none. At the last came two false witnesses, 

61. And said. This fellow said, I am able to destroy the temple of God, 
and to build it in three days. 

62. And the high priest arose, and said unto him, Answerest thou 
nothing? what is it which these witness against thee? 

63. But Jesus held his peace. And the high priest answered and said 
unto him, I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou 
be the Christ, the Son of God. 

64. Jesus saith xuito him, Thou hast said : nevertheless I say unto you, 
Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power 
{the power), and coming in the clouds of heaven. 

65. Then the high priest rent his clothes, saying. He hath spoken blas- 
phemy : what further need have we of witnesses ? behold, now ye have 
hard his blasphemy. 

66. What think ye ? They answered and said. He is guilty of death. 

67. Then did they spit in his face, and buffeted him ; and others smote 
him with the palms of their hands, 

68. Saying, Prophecy unto us, thou Christ, Who is he that smote thee ? 

69. Now Peter sat without in the palace ; and a damsel came unto him, 
saying, Thou also wast with Jesus of Galilee. 

70. But he denied before them all, saying, I know not what thou 
■:sayest. ■ 

71. And when he was gone out into the porch, another maid saw him, 
and said unto them that were there, This fellow was also with Jesus of 
Nazareth. 



239 


THE PRINCIPLE OF SUBMISSION. 


72. And again he denied with an oath, I do not know the man. 

73. And after a while came unto him they that stood by, and said to 
Peter, Surely thou also art one of them ; for thy speech bewayeth thee 
(the Galilean patois was probably stronger when he spoke under the influ- 
ence of strong excitement). 

74. Then began he to curse and to swear, saying, I know not the man. 
And immediately the (the Greek has no article) cock crew. 

75. And Peter remembered the word of Jesus, which said unto him. 
Before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice. And he went out, and 
wept bitterly. 

THE ARREST OP CHRIST. 

O UR concern is to know the spirit and conduct of Jesus in 
this transaction. How does he hold himself, by what spirit 
is he animated, how does he stand the stress of his infinite trial ? 
We have little to do with the rabble gathered around him ; we 
have only to do with the ruffian band in so far as it shows, in 
luminous contrast, the spirit and service of Jesus Christ. Observe 
what a grasp of principles Jesus Christ displayed in this culminating 
hour of his life. There are crises in which men are obliged to 
look about them for their principles. There are occasions upon 
which men of wit can answer surprising assault ; there are other 
days and nights wherein a man has no wealth if he be not rich in 
doctrine, principle, and conviction. Riches of an earthly kind make 
themselves wings and flee away, but there are unsearchable riches 
that reveal themselves in glittering brightness when the soul would 
otherwise be in its poorest and most painful condition. 

There was one impetuous man on the side of Christ, who 
stretched out his hand and drew his sword and struck a servant of 
the high priest and smote off his ear. That was 2. little man : he 
mistook the range and scope of energy— he was the victim of the 
continual sophism which debases our thinking and causes our action 
to palpitate with vicious life, that it is necessary to do something. 
Jesus found a place in life for Simon. Jesus Christ showed what 
could be done by submission. Peter w'as anxious to meet force 
with force, a sophism so plausible that statesmen have been 
victimised by it, and men of every age have fallen down to wor- 
ship that golden calf. It seems to be born in us, does the feeling 
that force must be met by force, There is a force of passiveness. 



240 


MATTHEW XXVL 


there is an energy of silence, there is the magnificent retort of non- 
resistance, which puzzles men of common :^ind and ordinary 
heart, the very mystery of heroism to those who mistake noise for 
music and tumult for power. 

The answer which Jesus Christ made upon the occasion showed 
that he was not too absorbed to neglect even the trifling incidents 
connected with the infinite tragedy. “ Put up again thy sword 
into his place.” That would have been a mere instruction, but 
following that instruction is the philosophy of civilization, the key 
of all definite and lasting progress, the very glory of human states- 
manship and political and spiritual security. Who then could 
have expected another gospel who could have said that even 
upon so trifling an occasion Christ would have interjected a revela- 
tion that would gleam in ever-growing brightness upon the mind 
of the ages ? Yet that was exactly what he did. Not only did he 
give the instruction, “ Put up again thy sword into his place," 
but he gave the reason for the instruction, namely, “For all they 
that take the sword shall perish with the sword." If he had 
never said anything in his life but that one word, he would have 
laid down a rule that the world would have grmn up to in all its 
education, disappointment, falling, and failure Avhich it has ex- 
perienced. We pass over the words lightly as we pass over all the 
grandest words ever spoken by the human tongue. We are so 
occupied with the anecdote, the moving panorama, the startling 
incident, that we overlook the philosophy of the grand, moral rev- 
elation, and hasten on, like impetuous Peter, to “ see the end." 

Jesus Christ did not attempt to snatch a transient victory. 
“Suppose you, Peter, could cut down all these men to the 
ground, it would amount to nothing : their progeny will come 
up ; evil has an indestructible posterity, if it be encountered only 
hj force. There must be another method of attacking this disease : 
It cannot be cut down with cold steel, it must be met by heavenly 
ministries, by spiritual and regenerative influences — put up again 
thy sword into his place." It could do nothing in the spiritual 
kingdom ; when force meets force, death falls upon all who use it. 
There are triumphs, there are defeats, and there are failures that 
are successes : do not suppose that to smite down an enemy is to 
overcome the enmity. One wonders that- men, reading these great 
sentences, so great yet so smallr—that they do not instantly un- 



THE SCRIPTURES FULFILLED. 2j.i 

cover in the presence of a Peasant who laid down in terms so 
luminous and dei^ite the philosophy which underlies every be- 
neficent an cl stable civilization. 

Jesus Christ reminded Peter that all that was happening’ was in 
fulfilment of the Scriptures, “ But how then shall the Scriptures 
be fulfilled, that thus it must be .!*” Connect yourself with 
Destiny if you would be calm : do not live in the spluttering and 
dying anecdotes of the passing day. Consider that all things arc 
elect of God, and move you in the current of His foreknowledge 
and forearrangement of things. You will be troubled, tossed about 
with every wdnd of doctrine, if you are living only from day to 
day, and upon the breath which is breathed from the human 
mouth. We must live in the eternity of God \{ we would be quiet 
amid all the storm and stress of life. There are some who resent 
the idea of a supreme will, or must boast of the predominance of 
Fate. This is a doctrine you cannot escape : your life is either 
gripped and driven by Fate, or must be ruled and blessed and 
sanctified by a Supreme Will. 

But observe how evilly do they think and speak, who suppose 
that, having ignored the reigning will of God, they can rush into 
the cold and chilling sanctuary of impassable and inexorable 
Fate. Life, come upon me as thou wilt, I live in the will of the 
Father; whatever happens to me happens that the Scriptures iXiUiX 
be fulfilled. The writing is old, and is rewritten every day — every 
life is a revelation, every breath 'is a miracle. Stand thou, O 
living man, in this sanctuary, and no fool shall be able to throw a 
stone into the_ depths of thy peace. Do not suppose that men 
come around you accidentally with swords and staves : they know 
not what they do ; if your purpose is right, if your prayer is pure, 
if your face is set steadfastly, even , with hardness, towards tlie 
Jerusalem of your destiny, you will be an ever-quiet and all- 
quieting presence in life. 

The mistaken thinker is always caught in his own snare. Those 
who would escape from Will, fall into the arms of iron Fate, and 
those who decline to be guided by the Scriptures, which were ful- 
filled in the case of Christ, go straight t)vcr ia atrother revehtion 
which is incomplete without the written one. You cannot esca])e 
from prayer. You can run away from the altar of the church, red 
with blood glowing with fire, bpt you go to an altar of ice, and 



242 


MATTHEW XXVI, 47-75.' 

breathe, out your soul’s wish into a head ear. Still you pray. 
You run away from the living paternal beneficent will, and try to 
quiet yourself with such narcotics as are handed to you by the iron 
hand of unpitying Fate. 

One of the ablest minds that ever led the sceptical thinking of 
his time— I do not hesitate to say that I refer to Thomas Paine, 
a resolute and energetic thinker, and a man not without benefi- 
cence of purpose and patriotism of heart — has laid down the 
sophistical and monstrous proposition, that a revelation can only 
be made to one ma?t, that no revelation has been made to us, 
therefore the revelation which Christ claimed to be fulfilled in his 
history was no revelation to after ages. Flow truly has every 
Achilles a vulnerable heel ! A revelation granted only to one 
man ? But there is a daily revelatmi, there is a lasting revelation 
of nature, providence, history, law, and when this lasting revelation, 
which comes to repeat its story every day, confirms the revelation 
that was given to minds and hearts in the ancient time, the revela- 
tion of to-day repeats in modern tones, and with present-day ap- 
plications, all that was true in the immemorial time. 

But the Scriptures must be fulfilled. Fulfilment of Scripture is 
the rewriting of Scripture. No promise can be realized without 
being written over again in its very realization. It is because 
human life takes up and repronounces divine words that the Bible 
keeps its hold upon human confidence and human love. Were 
it an old book, in the sense of speaking terms that have no im- 
mediate meaning, it would by mere lapse and effusion of time 
disable itself from holding supremacy over human thinking. It is 
because its words are old as eternity, yet new as the present morn- 
ing, that the Bible is what it is and where it is. 

So Jesus Christ rested in the fulfilment of Scripture. lie laid 
his hand upon Destiny as ruled by a personal Will, and getting 
such hold of such principles, he was calm to apparent passionless- 
ness. Once indeed there was a ripple up»on his placidity : said 
he, “ Are ye come out as against a thief Y’ His soul was stung 
there. He knew that was the way thieves were taken, and to be 
thought 0 . thief to have all evil names fastened upon him, did 
seem to sting him into a question that might have in it one spark 
of sacred resentment. Or was he mocking the fools, was he 
showing them to what an unnecessary expenditure of strength and 



THE POSSIBLE AND THE IMPOSSIBLE. 


243 


force they were going? Was he a man who would run away? 
Judas indeed said to those who were with him, “ Hold him fast/' 
probably not through any spirit of cruelty, but where a man lays 
hold upon the lightning he must hold it fasiii he would keep it. 
Was there not some subtle tribute in this very exhortation 
addressed by Judas to the ruffian band ? Did he not in this one 
exhortation seem to say, “ I know his strength : I have seen his 
power : there is no limit to his resource. This is no ordinary 
culprit or criminal, if so we may describe him. Having touched 
him, surround him, draw a cordon round his life, or he will 
surely elude you ?” 

Sometimes men pay compliments unconsciously, as many men 
pray to a God they profess to ignore. Instinct may he relied 
upon more than argument : the -inborn impulse of the heart will 
assert itself above all controversy and logic and intellectual creed. 
So the time will come when even Judas shall add a laurel to the 
chaplet which binds the temples of the Saviour, and therein shall 
the word be fulfilled, “ His enemies will I clothe with shame, but 
upon himself shall the crown flourish.” I know not but that 
when Judas himself will yet come to write the epitaph of Christ, we 
may find that grim monster of iniquity carving upon the marble 
rock—” INNOCENT BLOOD.” 

Then how grandly does Christ move between the possible and 
the impossible. When he said, ” Thinkest thou that I cannot 
now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than 
twelve legions of angels ? I can, and yet I cannot. The possible 
is impossible,” Have we not lived that strange experience ? To 
the man who lives only in the letter the statement that the possible 
is the impossible will appear to be a contradiction in terms. It is 
the very key of life ! you can do things which you ca?mot do : you 
cannot do tilings which you can do. Learn that lesson and life 
will have new aspects, and every day will have new experience. 
As a mere matter of ” can,” you could do the most outrageous and 
monstrous things this very day, and yet you could not do anything 
of the sort. You can burn your property, insult your friends, 
dismiss your servants, if it were a mere matter of /f/mr/ ability, and 
yet you could not do one of these things ! What keeps you back ? 



244 


MATTHEW XXV L 47 - 75 - 


Not force, not a sword — an invisible principle, a conviction, com- 
mon sense, thought — all unknowable, unnamable, immeasurable 
qualities. As a mere matter of literal ability there is no length of 
absurdity to which you could not go, and yet you cannot take a 
single step in that direction— cannot, because of will, thought, 
sense of the fitness of things, because of the inspiration of righteous- 
ness, the dictation of justice and the regulation of common sense. 

So Jesus Christ sa3 s, ‘ ‘ I could pray for angels — and yet I can- 
not : there is a pre.ssure upon me which I will not resist ; how 
then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be How 
they tried to kill him : they wanted to be murderers without hav- 
ing the remorse of murder in their souls. That is what many men 
wish to be ; if there were no hot blood in the case they would kill 
so quickly : it is the j-Zizw they cannot rub out, that they fear. 
Blood spouts out of the veins and splashes things that are a long 
way off ; it i.s difficult to erase, it tells its burning story to scientific 
inquiry, falls in unlikely places, and comes up with speech of 
horrible eloquence to those who are in quest of the murderer. 

■ How the .Saviour was walched, malignly watched, always 
watched, watched with eyes theological, eyes political, eyes of 
envy, eyes of passion. No wonder. He opposed himself to the 
religion of his times— whoever does that, dies. He opposed him- 
self to the orthodoxy, the respectability, and the self security of 
his age, and whoever does that, dies ! 

When they urged liim, and sought to drive him to e.xtrcmitics, 
Ave read these wonderful words, “But Jesus held his peace.” 
That was probably the crowning miracle this side the cross. The 
great Speaker dumb, the Man of eloquence without a word upon 
his lips— silence was then truly golden. What made him so 
quiet .? The struggle in Getlnsemane. There was nothing more 
to be said : the J\Ian who had passed through such experience was 
bound to be quiet. This is no arrangement or trick or ex- 
pedient : it comes up out of the philosophy of the case. When 
we return from some grave-sides we cannot speak. When wm 
leave some altars after all-night prayer, we cannot speak for the 
next three days. We seem to our friends to be distrait, absent, 
lost, —with a singular shining in the face, a new gentleness in the 



CHRIST SILENT AND SPL'AA'ING. 245 

hand : it is not derangement, it is the fulfilment of the unwritten 
Scripture \NsX sorrm conqjitred must be followed by eloquent 
silence. Have we not sat together wdicn the favorite child has 
been taken out of the house to come back no more, and have 
spoken to one another never a word ? Have we not sat down with 
our smitten friends seven days at a time and never said a syllable 
because their grief was very great ? 

The battle was w'on in Gethseniane : to have spoken after that 
would have been to degrade the grandeur of all that made the life 
of Christ sublime. Yet when he did speak, under the pressure of 
the High Priest, he , spoke in a fitting tone. “ Plereafter shall ye 
see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of power and coming 
in the clouds of heaven, ' ’ What could you do to a man who 
talked so You cannot smite that man to his hurt : he is above 
your touch. You smite, and he does not feel the smiting: the 
soul in that hour is so much greater and grander than the body, 
that the body is but as a dead surface to the hand that ill uses it. 
Live in heaven, live in the actual possession of God’s blessing, 
have your tabernacle and your pavilion in Eterniiy, and not a 
hair of your head shall perish. What could death be to a man 
who talked so He had abolished : they met, they caught 
one another in their terrific arms, and Death was left where the 
blood-sweat fell ! 

Now' the hounds of hell have their turn. Who could find such 
reading as this — “ Then did they spit in his face, and buffeted 
him, and others smote him with the palms of their hands V' — si.v 
fists fell on him in a shower, and the villains said, “ Wdro smote 
thee, thou Christ.?” Then all spat together, and asked him to 
name them one by one. But they touched him not ! All bad 
men do this selfsame thing. This is not an old villainy, it is a 
daily crime. We sit in church and shudder at the old Pharisees 
and Romans and Jews, and therein do we put the Scriptures 
eighteen hundred years away from us and make them a story- 
book, whereas w'e all live in this sixty-seventh verse. 

Something grieve Christ more than the enemy. Peter cut 
his heart in two. enemy cannot hurt a man : if it had been 

an enemy that had done this, he could have borne it, but it was 
thou, a man mine equal, my acquaintance ; we went to the 
house of God together, and together kept ht)ly day. That is the 



246 MATTHEW XXVI. 

sting ! Peter said, “ I know not what thou sayest.” Then he 
added, “ I do not know the man.” In the third instance he be- 
gan to curse and to swear, saying, “ I know not the man.” That 
surely is an ancient anecdote .? so it is — ^yet it. is not a day old .‘ it 
was done this morning, do it in some instances day by day. 
We are orthodo.x; in conviction^ we are heterodox vn spirit and action. 
No enemy can hurt Christ as a friend can hurt him. The enemy 
does not get at his heart, the friend does. Peter is living now, he 
is living perhaps in the very most of us— not in this rough and 
violent form, but in some mood more subtle yet not less deadly in 
its expression. O Searcher of hearts, have I denied the Saviour- 
have I made light ’of his name in order to avoid the mocking 
sneer of some enemy Have I pledged his name in order to 
sanctify some bad transaction,? Yet there was one thing about 
Peter that gives one hope : this was the weakness of violence, and 
therefore it will have suitable reaction. When he began to curse 
and to swear, I began to have hope of him. If he had coldly 
said, ” I know not what thou sayest,” he might never have 
been recovered. The violence of some cases is their hope. Then 
began he to curse and to swear, saying, ” I know not the man, ” 
The lips now foaming with such madness will presently pray. 
We say it is never so dark as before the dawn. Have hope of 
your worst ones : they may come back yet. Backsliders return. 
Do not give up those who have left you as if they would never, 
never be seen at home again. You tell me their la-st words were 
so violent and so severe. Thai is my very hope of them. It is 
very dark just now : let us go to the door— open it — and perhaps, 
there in the darkness, we shall find the violent one, ‘ ‘ weeping 
bitterly.” 


NOTE. 

At the end of this volume will he found a special examination of the 
character of Judas Iscariot. The line of thought which is there 
pursued may he novel to mme readers. 



I 


f " ■ ■ ■ ■ 

' XCL 

1 PRAYER. 

I Almighty God, because the house is thine, there is peace in it, and a 

li great light makes it glad with a morn bright as heaven. This is the day 

- ' the Lord hath made : we will rejoice and be glad in it. We would fain 

dry our tears to-day and have nothing but joy dwelling in the heart and 
singing along all the range of the redeemed life. Thou hast redeemed 
us with blood, thou hast encountered the adversary in mighty battle, and 
behold the outshedding of the blood of the heart of Christ was the very 
victory of the Son of God., We are redeemed: not with corruptible 
things, but with the precious blood of Jesus Christ thy Son. We know 
^ not the price thereof ; they only who have lived long as thyself can add 

up the mighty value. To us it is precious, redeeming blood, the blood 
’ I which cleanseth from all sin, the answer of God to the wickedness of the 

; ‘ world. 

; We have come up to thine house with all musical instruments making 

glad noises, with shoutings of the heart because of thy goodness, yea our 

i whole life lifts itself up in anthems of joyous praise, because thou hast 

beset us behind and before and laid thine hand upon us. Thou hast held 
over us the lamp which thou hast set for thine anointed, and thoh hast 
* found for us a rod and a staff. We have come to render our whole life 

to thee in grateful return : Lord, accept the worthless gift, and make it 
worthy through him that was slain. 

We have come to sign thy book again, to write our names upon the 
i open pages, and publicly, in the light of noontide, to proclaim ourselves 

j sinners saved by grace. We would be living sacrifices unto Gpd, our life 

: would rise up into the heavens daily as an acceptable incense. Lord, 

! what are those impulses and desires of ours, but inspirations of the Holy 
Ghost? Herein do we feel the might gracious ministry of the Holy 
Spirit. These impulses are thy creation, these prayers come out of thine 
own wisdom, and this uplifting of the soul is the marvel of thy power. 

Save us from the dust, from the trifles of time, from the vexations of 
earth, from seeking prizes that have no value, and grasping at that which 
perishes in the hand. Enable us to covet the true riches ; may we be 
misers in the sanctuary, treasuring up all thou dost give, and loving it, 
I and often counting it, and making ourselves wealthy because of thy daily 

p revelation and grace. Enable us to turn our back upon the yesterdays 

that were poor and mean, and to set ourselves with glad faces and new 


248 PRAYER. 


desires towards the unborn time ; inspired by the Holy Ghost, anointed 
daily with an unction from heaven, made clean by the blood which alone 
can cleanse, may the time to come be more profitable than the time that 
is gone, in all holiness of heart, consecration of spirit, and industry of 
hands. ■ • 

We commend one another to thy benediction ; great Father, give us a 
sense of fellowship in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, give us keen 
and clear insight into the holy naysteries of thy book and into the unwrit- 
ten law of thy universe. Graciously help us to itnderstand ourselves, our 
greatness, our littleness, thy purpose concerning us, the subtlety of temp- 
tation, the might of the enemy, the inexhaustibility of thy resource, and 
thus may we walk soberly, wisely, with all watchfulness of mind and 
heart, so that, come when thou mayest, we may be found ready. 

Thou knowest what we are and what we need ; what we pine for most 
and what we love the best. Thou knowest what is right for us, whether 
it be better to be on the hill-top, amid all the healthy wind, or to be down 
in the valley, suffering, crushed, hopeless. Where thou wilt, there it is 
best for lis to be, and give us the peace of resignation where we cannot 
have the joy of triumph. 

Regard the old and the young, the withered, and those who are in the 
■vernal freshness of their beauty and youth. The busy man forget not, 
but remind him of the littleness of time and the greatness of eternity. 
The sick at heart, the ill at ease, do thou comfort with the hidden balm 
of heaven, wherewith thou hast comforted the saints of every age and 
made glad the holy men of every time— it is not exhausted, it is like thy- 
self, without measure, without end. <»Do thou therefore bring from the 
hidden sanctuary the solaces so rich and tender, which the heart needs 
every day, and comfort those who trust in thee with the consolations of 
God. 

Where thou hast smitten ivith heavy blows, thou wilt recover witli great 
redemption and tenderness ; where the darkness has been intolerable, 
thou wilt set a great wealth of light, and in the shining thereof the dark- 
ness shall be forgotten. 

We commend to thee this day all who suffer personal loss, family 
bereavement, or national desolation. Let the mercy and the pity of the 
God of men and families and nations be not repelled from those who are 
in great sorrow. Magnify thyself in the darkness, let thy grace be greater 
than all human want, and may souls buried in the depths of night know 
how true it is that light is greater than all darkne.ss. 

Now that we set ourselves to our worship and to our study of thy book, 
looking behind rve bless thee for all thy care and love and pity and suste- 
nance, and looking before we commit ourselves lovingly, hopefully, to thy 
wisdom and thy power. Sanctify this reunion, re-establish our confidence 
in one another, cause our love to burn with a steadier glow, comfort us 
in all immediate distress or prospective trouble, and when the twilight 
shall come, and the eventide, and the farewell, may they all come, not 



THE TEXT. 



I 


i 


249 

in wrath but in mercy. At eventide may there be light, and may the 
night of earth be the beginning of the day of heaven. Amen. 

Matthew xxvii. 1-19. 

1. When the morning was come, all the chief priests and elders of the 
people took counsel (held a council) against Jesus to put him to death : 

2. And when they had bound him, they led him away, and delivered 
him to Pontius Pilate the governor (the Procurator of Judea). 

3. Then Judas, which had betrayed (the Greek participle is in the present 
tense) him, when he saw that he was condemned, repented (Greek — a 
simple change of feeling) himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of 
silver to the chief priests and elders, 

4. Saying, I have sinned in that I have betrayed the innocent blood 
And they said, What is that to us ? see thou to that. 

5. And he cast down the pieces of silver in the temple (the part of it 
known as “the sanctuary,” — the money was thrown into the Holy 
Place), and departed, and went and hanged himself. 

6. And the chief priests took the silver pieces, and said, It is not lawful 
for to put them into the treasury (Corban, or sacred treasure chest), 
because it is the price of blood. 

7. And they took counsel, and bought with them the potter’s field (the 
type of the unseen Gehenna), to bury strangers in. 

8. Wherefore that field was called. The field of blood, unto this day. 

9. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet, 
saying, And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him that was 
valued, whom they of the children of Israel did value ; 

10. And gave them for the potter’s field, as the Lord appointed me. ■ 

11. And Jesns stood before the governor : and the governor asked him, 
saying, Art thou the King of the Jews ? And Jesus said unto him, Thou 
sayest. 

12. And when he was accused of the chief priests and elders, he 
answered nothing. 

13. Then said Pilate unto him, Hearest thou not how many things they 
witness against thee ? 

14. And he answered him to never a word ; insomuch that the governor 
marvelled greatly. 

15. Now at that feast the governor was wont to release unto the people 
(a common incident in a Latin feast in honour of the gods) a prisoner, 
whom they would. 

16. And they had then a notable prisoner, called Barabbas. 

17. Therefore when they Were gathered together, Pilate said unto them, 
Whom will ye that I release unto you? Barabbas, or Jesus which is 
called Christ ? 

18. For he knew that for envy they had delivered him. 

19. When he was set down bn the judgment seat (the chair of judg- 


25o 


MATTHEW XXVII. 1-19. 


ment, which was placed on a mosaic pavement), his wife sent unto him, 
saying, Flave thou nothing to do with that just man ; for I have suffered 
many things this day in a dream because of him. 

CHRIST BEFORE PILATE. 

"WJ morning was come. ’ ’ Was ever morning in- 

VV vited to Took upon so ghastly a spectacle? Morn and 
death ! There is a grim irony in this conjunction of terms. God 
sends a fair day upon the earth, and we befoul the very dew that 
glistens upon the heavenly gift. We rise from sleep as men skilled 
in evil, and begin at once, with practised hands, to rub out the 
commandments' written upon the rocks, and to pervert every 
promise hidden in the sweet flowers. : We begin soon ; we might 
have spent some little time in hesitation, but we are apt scholars 
in the school of evil ; we soon cease to be scholars and become 
kach&rs. The morning that once had in it some gladness for us, 
and some hint of veneration and religiousness, and that came to 
us as a revelation, and a lifting up of the heart, now comes a new 
chance to serve the devil. What I say unto one, I say unto all, 
“ Watch." • 

. Judas went by night to seek the Lord. It was better. There 
was a kind of remnant of religion about the traitor when he chose 
the night for his villainy. He was not quite so bad as he might 
have been ; he waited till torch-time. The chief priests and elders 
seized the morning — thus the whole day has been stained through 
and through with wickedness, the morning, the night, the shining 
of the sun and the trembling of the .stars, the whole circle of the 
day has not had one degree of it left without taint of blasphemy 
and evil. 

There are* no particular times for sinning. If you want a 
chance it will come. Thus a God of pity has to take up es)ery day 
like a spoiled thing, and baptize it and regenerate it and send it 
upon the earth as a new morning to us. But he never fails to do 
this. He giveth more grace, he will not cast us off for ever, he 
will yet rub out the evil of the day and of the night, and he will 
save us if he can. If lost, we shall be suicides : there shall be no 
imprint of the fingers of God upon us as having thrust us out, 
when we find ourselves in utter darkness. He lives to save ! 


CONSajiMCE. 

The chief priests and elders held aT e ^ 

h™ to death. They are Jesns to p„, 

^ '““'"S .t : tllat council never 

Until Christ be killprf i t 

elders of histoo- will have no pe“ c2 /'T’. Ptieste and 

on the same earth with Christ^ i> ^ ““ peacefully 

to destroy the elder, to 'abdish seh”" “ *e priest, 

suffic ency, and to reduce mctt “““-““‘"“S' 

humihation and personal auii, « ,/ “d moral 

heart, “God be memiful u ‘ 1 “ '™"“ cry i„ every 

rM bound, and is being led awav^t P Christ is 

mg, and is being cnicified at hivh no “°™'' 

day, thank God, he stands ° cveiy day. Every third 

teach, and stiil mighlt^ve -dy to 

notion that this transaction occfrlM “ & foolish 

tion that can occur once for a^rl m 'mnsac- 

realities ' of hisRwy : they are cr P " f 
those solemn realities there is amidst 

and so ^^eneficent/as this whole t grand, so tender, 

the trial, the death, ihe resurrect, ™st, 

whom we publicly and loyally call ‘ °t him 

how ChrisJ^depoZ‘‘wnii“Z^^^^^ ®''‘’ “t 

-- "f - =sx'r 

facia in their pecuZ Z,t ' to , ‘hesc 

question which we have to ask '^’'= ““ 

How did Jesus Christ den u- possible to answer, is— 
stances? in these -tragical ciicum- 

'vho had ZtaJodZ:' Jute 7 ;““ “f 'he man 

man can betrav Christ witV, appalled by the issue. No 

-stand that. Und«! 

foully rvith any of the irretf -.™ him, or play 

having first h=trayed and sold tod ‘dam without 

not the actions of tlie hand do^eVT ’’heso are 

forgotten as accidents of the’transienJd*^ moment, set down and 
spoken a word against the spnof * ' 3'oa could never have 

revelation, until .Ze* n^to Z'’ ^«ht and its 

y had taken place 


252 MATTHEW XXVIL 1-19. 

amounting to self -betrayal I'he villainy is in the heart before it is 
in the hand. Not only docs all history elucidate this, but much 
of our personal experience and observation goes to confirm it. 
Who has ever known a man play falsely with the balances of the 
sanctuary, with the light and spirit and truth of the holy place, 
who did not at some time — ^quickly it may be — afterward show 
that before he did so there had been a tremendous collapse in 
his own heart ? Then he sought for excuses, then he would 
mortgage the future, then he would so lay his lines that they 
might be useful to him on the occasion which he too vividly fore- 
saw. And they who look but with the eyes of the body only, anti 
do not read moral mysteries and penetrate into spiritual secrets, 
are bewildered or misled, or are for the moment shocked into 
undeserved pity for the man who, having dug- the pit, fell into it, 
instead of being allowed to bring others whose ruin he had con- 
templated into the tremendous catastrophe. 

Judas always reveals himself. He never was '•so revealed to 
himself as when Christ acted as he did immediately after the 
betrayal. If Jesus Christ had taken any other course than the 
one which he then adopted, he would have justified the spirit and 
the policy of Judas Iscariot' Search into Christ's method of 
meeting the circumstances, and you will find here) as everywhere, 
the ineffable wisdom that is always at peace with itself, so com- 
plete in its range, and in its purpose, that it cannot be ruffled, 
and can never know the torment of vital disquiet. Jesus Christ 
will utter no words about Iscariot, but he will so conduct himself 
as to show Iscariot in his .true light. This is his method of 
judgment with us all : he enters into no wordy controversy, he 
does not bandy terms with us, or set himself into weaving elabo- 
rate accusations ; he so orders his providence, the whole method 
of his economy, as to bring out of us the reality of our soul 

Suppose Jesus Christ had betaken himself to personal resentment. 
Judas would have stood justified before the public, he would 
have been credited with the insight that this man only needed to 
be brought into certain circumstances to reveal the evil quality 
that lurked within him. But there was no anger, — anger, a 
sputter for a moment, an indignity inflicted upon the man who is 
himself angry ! There was the appalling quietness which makes 
criminal men afraid. To speak to one who will not answer — 



CHRIST' S TREA TMENT ■ OF IS CAR 10 7] 


253 


wkj/IhdX silence ? a fit of madness, a lull before the storm, a secret 
which tabernacles the very God of heaven himself ! Why that 
persistent speechlessness ? The man is thrown upon himself ; he 
has to find the explanation in his own heart, he has to be forced to 
the conclusion that he has done something for \vhose accusation 
and impeachment there is nothing in human language to touch 
the tremendous matter. 

Suppose Jesus Christ had proclaimed himself King of the Jews, 
in the vulgar sense which the disciples had conceived and acted 
upon so long — ^Judas would have stood Justified ; he would be 
hailed as the second man in the empire ; his the crafty-headed- 
ness that forced the proclamation — his the high and subtle states- 
manship that saw the hour had come for the coronation of the 
king ! But there was no, such proclamation : to Pilate’s courte- 
ous question there was a courteous reply which carried with it a 
deeper mystery than it answered. What could be thought of a 
Man who to Pilate’s inquiry “Art thou a king.?’’ said to Pilate 
himself, ‘ ‘ Thou sayest. ’ ’ An unexpected echo, a question 
turned into a confirmation, an enquiry made the starting-point of 
thought and a new set of actions ! 

Thus he answers our questions as if we ourselves had answered 
them, and thus he replies to our prayers as if we ourselves had 
uttered and answered both. 

Suppose Jesus Christ had betaken himself to recantation. Seeing 
that the chief priests and elders of the people were really in ear- 
nest, and that death was meant, suppose that he had hung his head 
and said, “ I have been wrong all this time and presumed upon 
your ignorance : I have cast myself upon the well-known credulity 
of the world, I have acted with the highest- handed empiricism, 
ever attempted in all the history of time — now seeing anger in 
your faces and malice in your eyes, believing that you arc about 
to cut me in twain and to pour out my blood upon the earth, pity 
me and forgive me. ’ ’ Judas would have stood justified : he was 
the man who had brought to a proper issue the most monstrous 
imposture that ever appalled the human imagination ! 

The man Avho betrayed Jesus actually gave him the highest 
compliment ever offered to his sacred name. What said Judas ? 
“ Innocent blood.” He said it who had spent days and nights in 
the comj.>any of the accused Man ; he said it who had heard the 



254 


MATTHEW XXVn. 1 - 19 . 


very whispers of the heart which he had sold ; he said it who had 
followed him night and day, week and month, year and year, 
and who knew all there was to be known ; and looking upon the 
whole circle of the wondrous lifcy among his last words were, “ It 
is INNOCENT BLOOD.” Had there been a flaw in that character 
.Judas would have known it : had there been any temporizing or 
cunning arrangement of policy or expressed purpose in the most 
concealing whispers, Judas would have been well acquainted with 
the whole circumstances. If he could have gone back upon the 
three years’ story and what had been done, that was his time for 
the relation of scandalous anecdote or suspicious circumstance; 
standing there — himself to die before the Man he had offered to 
death — he said, “ innocent blood.” 

So say we all, when we come to our true consciousness ; we 
will not blame God’s providence or God’s way of conducting and 
developing life — we will vindicate his course, though in doing so 
we should write in bolder characters our own condemnation. Let 
God be just, and every man unjust before him ; let God be true, 
and every man a liar. It may suit us for momentary purposes to 
seek to cast reflections upon the divine providence, but when 
we come to see the reality of things we shall say, ‘ ‘ Innocent 
God, innocent blood, innocent sanctuary — the evil is vsx myself 
only. ” 

Jesus Christ so acted as to call forth the real quality of the men 
who hated him. Outwardly he left them to themselves, but in- . 
wardly he plagued their hearts as with stings and torments of hell. 
He would give them no hold upon him : he gathered himself so 
intensely into himself that they could nowhere grasp the victim 
they would kill. This silence was meant as a judgment. This was 
a controversy not to be settled by the noise of anger or the sharp- 
ness of intellectual defence : it went down to the very heart of 
■ things, and carried before it the destiny of the whole world. He 
showed that the men who undertook to slay him knew exactly 
what they were doing ; he made them say it in plain words, and 
those plain words are, '' It is the price of blood." 

He forces us into speech : he who can be so silent can make us 
so talkative ! Men must be driven to say in plain words wdiat they 
have been doing : there must be no making of haste over the 
matter, but a deliberation which brings out every accent and gives 



THE WORD FOR WICKEDNESS. 


255 


it ample scope to ring itself into the hearing of the soul and of the 
world, every -man must state his own case and make plain his 
own sin. 

They would .call the field “ a place to burj' strangers in,” but 
ihe comvion people would not be misled by any such euphemism — 
hence it was called “ the field of blood.” Trust the instincts of 
a great people for knowing how to name things rightly. The 
priests and the elders label them with fine terms, cunning men 
seek for classical terms in which to hide the iniquity of their lives, 
but there is a spirit in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty 
giveth him understanding, and though the priests and elders might 
morning after morning call it “ a place to bury strangers in, ” an 
act of beneficence, the' great heart of the nation said, “ Aceldama, 
blood-bought, blood-soaked, the field of blood I’ ’ 

Until we name things properly, we cannot deal reformatively 
with them in any deep sense. Do not seek a great word to 
describe your course in life, use the little word— SIN. Let no 
man delude you by using -long terms, empty polysyllables, in the 
sounding of which you lose the consciousness of your guilt, but 
say with plainness that cannot be misunderstood, “ God be merci- 
ful unto me a sinner. ” 

The men who were in charge of this base business paid no heed 
to the pain and sorrow of Judas. When he made his confession 
they said, ‘ ‘ What is that to us } See thou to that. ’ ' The bad man 
can co-operate only up to a given point : his policy always breaks 
itself up. What, would you trust a bad man ? He will watch you, 
balance you, value you, drain you dry, study your character — 
and when he has brought you either to the extreme of remorse or 
to the humiliation of destitution, he will say to you, ‘ ‘ See thou 
to that,” There is no duration in evil, there is no health in 
wickedness, there is no honour in the bad heart. Will you trust 
men who tell lies to you, will you trust men who can sell innocent 
blood They will leave you to yourselves one day. “ My son, 
if sinners entice thee, consent thou not ; if they say. Let us lurk 
privily for blood, let us have one purse, let us enter into a com- 
pact — G my son, consent thou not ; they will rob thee, ruin thee, 
mock thee, disown thee, and send thee out to a felon's rope.” 

Jesus Christ developed the wickedness of the world. As the light 
shows all things, so the life of Christ showed human nature exactly 



256 


3L4 TTHE W XX VII. I -i 9 . 


as it was. But for this life of Christ we never should have known 
what human nature is, in reality. We should have seen it in parts 
and sections and aspects, but its inner self, its essential quality, we 
never could have known, 

Jesus Christ allowed these men to lie to the top of their bent. 
Pilate himself listening, w'onder-struck, said, “ How many things 
they witness against thee !’' They who did not know him, they 
who read only the outside, they who were eavesdroppers and not 
allowed to go into the inner sanctuary, they who were fertile in 
falsehood — how many things they witnessed against him ! But 
the man who had come from the inside, with the odour of sanctity 
not quite exhausted, said, Innocent blood,” They dropped the 
word ” innocent” and kept the blood.” Jesus Christ 

allowed them to go to the full length of their tether, to show how 
base was their criminality, how mean their purpose, and how little 
they deserved the titles they wore. 

So he does with us. Pie strips every man of unworthy gar- 
ments, and forces every man to a confession and a revelation of 
his real guality. He is set for the fair and the rising of many. 
Judging ourselves by ourselves, we pronounce upon ourselves 
condemnation, and confer upon ourselves dying honours, but 
standing in the sanctuary, weighed in the balances divine, coming 
near to the Son of God, w'e can only say, if we speak the true 
word, “ I abhor myself in dust and ashes.’' 

What mystery and embarrassment Christ created in those 
circumstances ! Pilate did not know what to make of him. No 
such case had ever come before him. What he heard by the ear 
was contradicted by what he heard in the spirit. He listened to 
witnesses against the hlan, and all the while there was a spirit 
talking to his heart saying, “ They are liars, do not heed them.” 
'Fhey made out a fine case, and a Spirit said to his heart, “ This 
is envy.” ” Pilate knew that for envy they had delivered him.” 
And envy is a thing that cannot be legislated about. No man 
knows where it begins, %vhere it operates, where it ends. It taints 
the speech, it perverts the spirit, it gives a twist to the look, it 
writes its base signature upon every feature of the countenance. 
There is no law for it, there is no whip made for the scourging of 
the envious man : he must be left to those subtle ministries of 



257 


PILATE'S WIFE'S DREAM. 

Providence which bring the jealous to the ground and torment the 
envious with intolerable pain. 

Pilate's wife had a dream by day. If the chief priests and 
elders were busy in the morning, so the great God, watching over 
all, sent a day-dream upon a good woman. We lock up our 
dreams and make them night-visitants, God sends them at noon, 
closes the eye and makes an angel talk to us, shuts out the vulgar, 
visible world, and makes to pass before the mystical eyes of the 
soul a panorama of his purpose and meaning, and we come out of 
that trance with a new world swinging before our bewildered 
gaze. A dream is a lens through vvhich we see into the bigger 
spaces and the ampler worlds. God speaks in visions of the 
night, in sudden appearances and disappearances, in marvellous 
contortions of circumstances which we had pronounced ordinary 
and regular. 

Do not try to make your world less^ try to make it higg&r. 
There be those, indeed, victims of superstition, who have multi- 
plied dreams of their own making, and brought the dream-part of 
our life into contempt ; but God has used the dream, through 
every age of human history, and the vision of the night, singular 
circumstances, and flapping of wings in the air without any visible 
figure — and out of these have come strange issues and often 
beneficent endings. I will not therefore throw away any oppor- 
tunity which history has given me of enlarging my outlook, and 
feeling that the world is bigger than that blue line that lies on the 
hills yonder, and which men call the horizon. 

Mysterious Christ — saying nothing, yet speaking all the time : 
looking other people into speech, and maddening them by an un- 
accountable dumbness, making them play the fool because he will 
be no party to their base transactions. Rather be at peace than 
at war with such a man ! Acquaint now thyself with him and be 
at peace, or he will bruise thee ! No man can get the belter in 
battle of this Christ. He goes down that he may come up again 
with a fuller power. They who come out against him in battle 
are left dead upon the field of their choice. If this stone shall 
fall upon any man it will grind him to powder — if we fall upon it, 
in penitence and contrition and religious hopefulness, we shall be 



258 


MATTHEW XXVJI. 1 - 19 . 


broken, but it will be the breaking which is the beginning and the 
seal of true and eternal healing. To this Christ I call all men. 
Why lift the little fist against him to have it bruised ? Many 
there be who have struck at Christ, but he has wounded them to 
their destruction. Let us go to him, pray to him, confess every- 
thing to him, and there is room in that great heart of his for every 
one of us I 



xcn. 

PRAYER. 


Almightv God, vre come to thee through the crucified One as through 
the only way by which we can find access to thy throne. We stand by 
the cross, and as we look up into the eyes of the dying Sufferer, our sin 
finds out all the meaning of his great work. He was delivered for our 
offences, he was bruised for our iniquities, and the chastisement of our 
peace was upon him. By his stripes are we healed. We know not all 
the mystery of this love : it is enough for us to know that it was love. 
God is love, infinite love ; we need it all ; we sin every day, and every 
day we need the cross. Blessed be thy name, the cross stands through 
all the light and through all the darkness ; the night and the day are the 
same to it, for thy mercy endureth for ever. Where sin abounds, grace? 
doth much more abound. Thy grace is greater than the law, — taking it 
up and causing it to be swallowed up in that which is greater than itself. 
We are saved by grace, and that not of ourselves, it is the gift of God — 
the grace, the favour, the mercy of God. In this grace we stand, by it 
we are saved, and in it is the secret of our hope, and the security of our 
being is in it also. Thou dost give more grace, thou dost give grace 
upon grace, till we are filled with thy love and made holy by thy pres- 
ence. 

We have come to worship thee in hymns and psalms and loud thanks- 
givings, for thy tender mercies are over all thy works, and the morning 
brings us a new revelation of thy lovingkindness. Thy faithfulness is as 
a great rock, and thy mercy as a boundless sea, and thy wisdom and thy 
love like *a great shining heaven. We run into thine house and find 
security there. This is the day the Lord hath made, we will rejoice and 
be glad in it. Recall to our memory, we humbly pray thee, all that is 
best, purest, tenderest in our recolleciion, and make our memory glow as 
it brings before its review thy wonderful tokens of patience and regard 
and love. May we omit nothing uf the great sum ; thou hast left no 
moment unbaptized : in every moment hast thou hidden some drop of thy 
dew. O thou who givest always, give us thy very self to reign in our 
hearts. 

As for thy word, it is sweeter to us than honey, yea than the honey- 
comb ; we found thy word and we did eat it ; we sighed for some token 
from heaven, and behold we found it in the written word, full of light and 
love and redeeming messages, filled from end to end with the majesty and 



z 6 o 


MATTHEW XXVIL 20-54. 


tenderness of the cross. We would live upon thy word as upon bread 
sent down from heaven ; it would be unto us bread which the world 
knoweth not of, a light at midnight, a song in the storm, an angel always 
in the house. Grant us an inspiring spirit to read the inspired word -so 
shall we go beyond the letter and find out all the mystery of the music 
and all the blessedness of the eternal love. 

What we are thou knovvest, and what we would be none but thyself can 
tell. We are here for a few d.ays, most of the time as a cloud overhead, 
and we see nothing but the great gloom. We struggle and wonder, we 
pray and blaspheme, we read thy word and forget it, and in the midst of 
all the rush of life thou dost lay us down in our last sleep. Man that is 
born of woman is of few days and full of trouble. We all do fade as a 
leaf, and our iniquities like the wind have taken us away. O that we were 
wise, that we would consider our latter end. Lord, teach us the number 
of our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. May we be 
amongst those servants who shall be found waiting when their Lord 
comethj having in their hearts a great expectancy, a noble and inextin- 
guishable hope. 

Look upon us now as needy suppliants at thy throne— needing light, 
grace, forgiveness, uplifting of heart, rekindling of all that is best which 
is of thine own creation. Thou wilt not spare any blessing which thy 
needy children ask at thy hands. When thou hast given all, then forgive 
—hear thou in heaven thy dwelling-place, and when thou hearest, forgive. 
May the power of the cross, its holy blood and great sacrifice, be realized 
in our consciousness of individual and complete pardon. 

Grant to each of thy people what each most needs— guidance through 
the immediate perplexity, release from the day’s embarrassment, an 
answer to the difficulty of the immediate time, solace under the deep 
wound which has touched the heart. 'Cover up our graves with flowers, 
make our bed in our affliction, lift up the weak in thine arms and give 
them rest and renewal of strength, and lead us all the way through to the 
very end, till we languish into life. Amen. 

Matthew xxvii. 20-54. 

20. But the chief priests and elders persuaded the multitude that they 
should ask Barabbas, and destroy Jesus. 

21. The governor answered and said unto them. Whether of the twain 
will ye that I release unto you ? They said, Barabbas. 

22. Pilate saith unto them. Wluit shall L do then with Jesus which is 
called Christ? They all say unto him. Let him be crucified first 
direct intimation of the mode of death), 

23. And the governor said. Why, what evil hath he done? But they 
cried out the more, saying, Let him be crucified. 

24. When Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing, but that rather a 
tumult was made, betook water, and washed his hands (Deut. xxi. 6) 



THE TEXT 


261 


before the multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood, of this just per- 
son : see ye to it. 

25. Then answered all the people, and said. His blood be on us, and 
on our children. (Madly inverting the law, Deut. xxi. 8.) 

■ 26. Then released he Barabbas unto them : and when he had scourged 
{Jlagillum ; ihfi Roman punishment with knotted thongs of leather) Jesus, 
he delivered him to be crucified. 

27. Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the common hall 
(the Prastorium), and gathered unto him the whole band of soldiers (the 
cohort, or subdivision of a legion). 

28. And they stripped him, and put on him a scarlet robe. (Probably 
some cast-off cloak of Pilate’s own.) 

29. And when they had platted a crown of thorns, they put it upon his 
head, and a reed in his right hand (representing the sceptre used symboli- 
cally both in the Republic and the Empire) : and they bowed the knee 
before him, and mocked him, saying, Hail, King of the Jews ! 

30. And they spit upon him, and took the reed, and smote him on the 
head. 

31. And after that they had mocked him, they took the robe off from 
him, and put his own raiment on him, and led him away to crucify him. 

32. And as they came out, they found a man of Gyrene, Simon by 
name (Mark mentions him as the father of Alexander and Rufus), him 
they compelled to bear his cross. 

33. And when they were come unto a place called Golgotha (nigh unto 
the city, John xix. 20), that is to say, a place of a skull, 

34. They gave him vinegar to drink mingled with gall (wine mingled 
with myrrh, meant to dull the sufferer’s pain), and when he had tasted 
thereof, he would not drink. 

35. And they crucified him, and parted his garments, casting lots ; that 
it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet. They parted my 
garments among them, and upon ray vesture did they cast lots. 

36. And sitting down they watched him there ; 

37. And set up over his head his accusation written, THIS IS JESUS 
THE KING OF THE JEWS (the titulus, or bill, or placard). 

38. Then were there two thieves crucified with him, one on the right 
hand, and another on the left. 

39. And they that passed by reviled him, wagging their heads, 

40. And saying, Thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in 
three days, save thyself. If thou be the Son of God, come down from 
the cross. 

41. Likewise also the chief priests, mocking him, with the scribes and 
elders, said, 

42. He saved others ; himself he cannot sav^e. If he be the King of 
Israel, let him now come down from the cross, and we will believe him. 

43. He trusted in God ; let him deliver him now, if he will have him ; 
for he said, I am the Son of God. 


262 


MATTHEW XXVH ^o~s^. 


44. The thieves also, which were crueified with him, cast the same in 
his teeth. 

45. Now from the sixth hour (the place of execution was reached about 
9 a.m.) there was darkness over all the land unto the ninth hour. 

46. And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, 
Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani ? (to the Roman soldiers and the Hellenistic 
Jews unintelligible), that- is to say, My God, my God, why hast thou for- 
saken me ? 

47. Some of them that stood there, when they heard that, said. This 
man calleth for Elias (probably a wilful perversion). 

48. And straightway one of them ran, and took a sponge, and filled it 
with vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him to drink. 

4g. The rest said, Let be, let us see whether Elias will come to save 
him. 

50. Jesus, when he had cried again with a loud voice, yielded tip the 
ghost. 

51. And, behold, the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top 
to the bottom ; and the earth did quake, and the rocks rent ; 

52. And the graves were opened ; and many bodies of the saints which 
slept arose, 

53. And came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into 
the holy city, and appeared unto many. 

54. Now when the centurion, and they that were with him, watching 
Jesus, saw the earthquake, and those things that were done, they feared 
greatly, saying, Truly this was the Son of God. 

THE ORHOIFIXION. 

"O AR ABBAS or Jesus.” That is the question, to-day, that 

XJ question never changes. . Our choice is not between things 
similar, but between things exactly and irreconcilably 
This does not always appear to be the case, but it is so in reality. 
We have shaded things now so much int© one another that we 
delude ourselves with the notion that the distance between one 
action and another is merely nominal. We mu.st get rid of that 
sophism, if we would begin the real work of life. There are but 
two spirits in the univer.se, both present at the opening of human 
history, and the)’’ rule the world to-day. Those spirits are good 
and evil, God and the devil, the pure and the impure, the heavenly 
and the infernal To one or other of these we belong. 

Yet we may not appear Xo belong to either of them decisively. 
In our motive and purpose we may be the very elect of God, 
whilst we are apparently the children of wrath. We are what we 



THE TRUE STANDARD OF CHARACTER. 263 

would be if we could. Our character is not in the broken deed, 
the unsaintly word, the passing temper : our character is in our 
heart of hearts, our secret motive, onr supreme purpose. Herein 
are men misjudged, both on the one side and the other ; herein 
has been found a considerable difficulty in the reading of the 
Bible itself to some, for they know not how a man can be said to 
be a man after God’s own heart, w'hen he has done thus and so — 
actions evidently contrary to the spirit of holiness and of justice. 
How can Peter be a disciple of Christ, when he has sworn with 
an oath that he knew not the man ? Surely there must be some 
other standard of judgment by which we make our mistakes, for 
we make no true judgments. I find rest in the doctrine that we ' 
are in reality, all appearances to the contrary, -what we really would 
be, in our holiest prayers and in our highest inspirations. If we 
can say, “ Lord, thou knowest all things — thou knowest that I 
love thee,” though ten thousand accusing voices ring from the 
very caverns of hell itself in impeachment of our life, God will 
know how to esteem us. 

The doctrine holds good on the other side. We are not to be 
judged by our occasional goodnesses, our fits of charity, our studied 
actions of beneficence. We cannot pay the mighty debt of accu- 
sation which the law brings against us. Thrust we our hand 
never so deep into our resources, there is nothing in those re- 
sources themselves to answer the mighty claim. So let us be just 
on the one side as on the other. I do not value the momentary 
sigh, the mere cry of a calculating penitence, which is sorry for 
the restilt rather than for the sin. I must be understood as speak- 
ing to to essences, to the VQty vitalities of things, and as 

holding the candle of 4he Lord over the thoughts and reins of the 
heart. .« 

Is not some such word of cheering necessary to recover us from 
the leprosy of despair.? We get into the way of adding up what 
we have done, and complaining of the little sum. There is a 
sense in wdrich such action is perfectly proper — but what is your 
spirit, what is your supreme desire ? Stripping yourselves of all 
commendation, false refuges, mistaken trusts, and fanciful con- 
ceptions of life, what is it that you really wish to he ? If hidden 
in God’s sanctuary, shut up with God face to face, you can truly 
say, “ Lord, thou knowest all things, thou knowest that I love 



j64 


MATTHEW XXVH. 20-54. 


thee : God be merciful unto me a sinner,” then who shall lay 
anything to the charge of God’s elect .? It is God that justifieth. 
Who is he that condemneth It is Christ that died--who is he 
that shall rub out the record of his sacrifice and blood ? Stand in, 
the temple of these infinite securities and let no man take thy 
crown. 

“ The chief priests and elders persuaded the multitude that they 
should ask Barabbas and destroy Jesus.” The chief priests and 
elders are doing the same thing to-day. The priest is always a bad 
man ; if he be not 7 nore than a priest, he is the worst of men. 
This w'as the irreligiousness of religion. Religion has done the 
very worst things that ever were done in human history. We 
must get rid, of his word “ religion” in some of the senses in 
which it is so often mistakenly and mischievously employed. 
Religion lay at the bottom of the original FALL, Eve never 
could have been deceived by anything but religion. It was along 
the religious instinct she was approached, it was through the 
religious instinct she was destroyed. . What said the tempter ? 
” Ye shall be as ^(9^.” 

That is the sophism which underlies the subtlest temptations 
which assail our life : to be as gods,—\.Q break through the 
boundary line, to commit the final trespass, to include all things 
within the circle of our thought and movement ! Religion may 
describe a merely outward attitude, religion may be nothing but a 
Latin name : what w'e want is. . . . Godliness. God is a Spirit. 

We want an essential quality, a vital spirit, a holy inspiration. 
Religion may be irreligious, but godliness can never be less than 
divine. * 

In all the imprecatory psalms we have nothing but the irrelig- 
iousness of religion ; religion pressed beyond its proper province ; 
a partial and imperfect righteousness, a little and mean righteous- 
ness which thinks itself virtuous because it w'ould bring down fire 
upon the vices of other people. The great righteousness is love, 
0 that we could learn that lesson ! then should we get rid of all 
censoriousness and cynicism, and all mutual criticism, and men 
would be silent where they are now noisy as to one another’s 
faults. The imperfect man, the Old Testament .saint, the man 
wiio thinks that righteousness consists in perpetual visitation of 



UNCONSCIOUS MEAxMNGS. 


265 


justice upon the head of the offender, is an irrdigmis rdigiomst. 
He who sees righteousness rising in infinite glory into Ime, and 
shedding from, its boundless firmament the dews of pity, upon a 
sinning \vorld — touches the very heart of Christ! Truly I 
know not where religion would lead some men ; it makes them 
angry, sour, cynical, and foolish, and invests them with a power 
of doing incalculable mischief in the family and in the church. 

The action of Pilate is described with infinite naturalness. 
There be many who condemn Pilate and laugh at him. I cannot 
join the unholy contempt. Pilate could have done nothing else. 
He has been condemned for vacillation by men who have not 
transformed themselves into his personality and made themselves 
reel under the tremendous pressure of the tumult which surged 
around him, He has been to them but a figure on a page ; they 
have approached him with cold criticism ; they have condemned 
where they should have sympathised and pitied. 1 honor Pilate. 
He was in a difficult position — he was not master : he suggested 
reasons and methods, which if accepted would have tended 
towards pity, release, and even justice of the noblest kind. But 
whilst I speak this word for the historical man Pilate, I have nothing 
but condemnation for ?nodern Pilatisni. Always distinguish be- 
tween the historical man and the principle which has been modern- 
ized and named in his name. Cain is dead — Cainism never dies ! 
Pilate is no more with us in the flesh, but Pilatisni is the principal 
influence in the church to-day. What does Pilatism do? It 
affects friendship / it pays compliments ; it transfers responsibility ; it 
wants to be on both sides ; it speaks a word and then does a con- 
tradictory deed ; it washes its hands and shuts its eyes to the 
great murders of the times. It accepts a ritual, it avoids a disci- 
pline. 

Plow far are we ourselves the subjects of this condemnation ? 
Where is the honest follower of Christ? Not the blatant follower, 
but the steady,, constant, loyal, loving follower whosQ life is a 
gospel written in the largest characters, and whose .speech is 
eloquent' with the messages of the cross itself ? In what relation 
do we stand to modem controversies ? Men are surging around 
Christ now who want to crucify him again on a literary cross, or 
across that is critical. How do we stand in relation to them — 



266 


MATTHEW XXVII. zo-SA, 


are we firm, clear, simple, not with the firmness of bigotry, not 
with the simplicity of ignorance, but with the steadiness of loving 
gratitude to Christ for every revelation of wisdom and every hope 
of redemption ? Let the church be steady and it will become the 
centre of peace in a tumultuous world. The peaceful man brings 
peace into every scene. 

The people answered Pilate with this great cry, “ His blood be 
on us and on our children,” — a prayer with an unconscious mean- 
ing, a vulgarity with a sanctuary enclosing it I It is marvellous 
how many persons have uttered words with unconscious meanings, 
and how some of the greatest testimonies have come from men 
who did not know that they were uttering them. Take the case 
of Caiaphas, for example : he gave counsel to the Jews that it was 
“ expedient that one man should dje for the people ” : he did not 
know what he was saying, yet in that saying he uttered the very 
gospel of eternity. We cannot tell how far our words go and 
what they really do in the world, and what great meanings will be 
attached to words which we spoke with more or less of thought- 
lessness or with more or less of merely local contraction and 
application. 

How noble an eulogium might be wrought out by skilful 
eloquence out of the testimony of outsiders and enemies ! I ask 
for no other testimonial to the spirit and character of Christ, and 
to the effect of his spirit and character, than that which has been 
consciously given by those who were outsiders, or who were supposed 
to be personal enemies. What said Judas ? “ Innocent blood.” 

What said Pilate's wife .? “Just person.” What said the cen- 
turion amid all the darkness and terrible' phenomena of the last 
hour — the Roman centurion, a participator in the great guilt? 
At the close of all he .said, ” Truly this Man was the Son of 
God,” These are not the testimonies of personal allies or sworn 
supporters. Judas and Pilate and Pilate's wife and the centurion 
concur in writing under the name of Christ a testimony which is 
sufficient of itself to confirm his claim and to lift his character 
above all just suspicion. ” He maketh the wrath of men to praise 
him, he drags the enemy at his chariot wheels.” It is one of two 
things, a hearty, spontaneous, cordial union in the mighty anthem 
which bears his name above every name in its thunders of praise, 



INGENIOUS CRUELTY, 


267 


or a reluctant testimony forced out of unwilling lips, but still 
tending in the direction of the lofty and immortal song. 

Now we come to the last scene of all. Hear these words, “ He 
delivered him to be crucified.” The law that would find no fault 
in him was like an iron gate crushed down by an angry mob — 
the gate of law gave way, the last barrier fell, and the powers of 
darkness were triumphant. Pilate delivered JeSus to be crucified. 
If wolves can be glad when they fasten their gleaming teeth in the 
flesh of their prey, then were those men glad when they laid their 
cruel hands on the unresisting Christ. From him there was no 
cry of pain, in him there was no shudder of mortal fear — he had 
died some time before, the bitterness of death was past, he had 
accomplished his sorrow, in all its higher aspects, in Gethsemane. 
Now he is “ led as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before 
her shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth,” They 
could not touch him ; they could tear down the Aouse in which 
he lived, but himself beyond the cruel act ! 

See the ingenuity of cruelty ; see what hell can do at its best. 
Let us realize the scene so far as we know it. Let Christ be the 
central figure of our assembly ; closing our eyes, as it were, let 
us look upon him with the inner vision and see what actually 
took place. They stripped him, they plaited a crown of thorns 
and put it upon him, they put a reed in his right hand, they 
mocked him, they spat upon him, they took the reed out of his 
hand and smote him on the head — they led him away to crucify 
him. The ingenuity of hell could go no further. They stripped 
him who said, “ If thine enemy take thy coat, let him have thy 
cloak also.” He who preached great sermon lived it in every 
throb of its infinite passion. They plaited a crown of thorns for 
him who said, “My kingdom is not of this world.” They 
mocked him who said, “ Our Father, wLich art in heaven.” 
They spat on who kept the door open for the prodigal and 
would not begin the feast till the wanderer came back. They 
smote hwi on the head who never had one thought or wish but for 
the public good. They led him away to be crucified who never 
harmed a single living thing ! The evil powers triumphed. 
When he hung upon the cross they said, “ He trusted in God, 
let him deliver him now if he will have him. They that passed 
by wagged their heads and., railed on him. The thieves also 



268 


MA TTHEW XXVir. 20-54. 


which were cracified with him cast the same in hisdeeth. " And 
he, as if confirming the very triumph of hellj said with a loud 
voice, “ Eloi, Eloi, Lama, Sabachthani, — -My God, my God, why 
hast thou forsaken me?” There was darkness over the whole 
land— the earth did quake, and the rocks were rent, and the 
graves were opened, and the God-forsaken Sufferer hung there — 
the Victim without a friend, the Saviour of many without a voice 
to defend his fame I 

O thou great hell, take the victory. Spirit of evil, damned 
from all eternity, mount the central cross and mock the dead as 
thou hast mocked the living ! The night is dark enough— no 
such night ever settled upon the earth before. Will the light ever 
come again— is the sun clean gone for ever— will the blue sky 
ever more kiss the green earth? All the birds are dead, their 
music is choked ; the angels have fled away and the morning stars 
have dropped their sweet hymn. This is chaos with an added 
darkness. What is happening ? 

May be God and Christ are communing in the secret places 
away beyond the mountains of night — -may be that this murder 
will become the world’s Sacrifice— xasiy be that out of this blas- 
phemy will come a Gospel for every creature. It cannot end 
where it is — that cannot be the end of all ! What will come 
next ? We must wait. . 


NOTES. 

And when they had platted a crown of thorns^ they put it upon his 
head, and a reed in his right hand, and they bowed the knee before ki?n, and 
mocked him, saying, Hail, King of the Jews !" Did not the thorns come 

of the curse ? “ Cursed is the ground for thy sake; thorns shall 

it bring forth.” Did he not, in the fullest sense, bear the curse for us? 
They put a reed in his right hand,— do not all insincere professors do the 
same ? Partial sovereignty, often merely nominal sovereignty, is' given 
to Jesus Christ even by those who avow his religion. The soldiers knelt 
before their victim in an attitude of mock worship ; this, even more than 
crucifixion, is the uttermost depth of depravity ; crucifixion may be a 
legal act, but mockery is the refinement of cruelty. 

" And they spit -upon him, and took the reed, and smote him on the head." 
Truly, it was the hour and power of darkness. The spiritual temptation 



NOTES. 


369 


having failed, the lower instrument of physical torture is employed with- 
out mercy. The soul was untouched, — why fear them that kill the body, 
and after that have no more that they can do ? They smote him on the 
head— -or into the head, sic KstpaAr/v, drove the thorns into his head with 
bats and blows.” — (TRArp). 

'' They compelled Simon of Cyrene to bear his cross." The writer just 
quoted well says : ” Not so much to ease Christ, who fainted under the 
burden, as to hasten the execution and to keep him alive till he came to it. 
Truly the tender mercies erf the wicked are cruel ! ‘‘ They gave him 

vinegar— cold comfort to a dying man ; but they did it in derision, q.d.., 
Thou art a King, and must have generous wines. Here’s for thee, there- 



XCIII. 


PRAYER. 

Almighty God, how wonderful is thy way in light and in love. We 
cannot follow all thy going, but thou hast so wrought in us by the mighty 
power of the Holy Ghost, that we can wholly trust thy love, and be 
assured that thy way is light, though it be in the whirlwind, and the 
clouds be the dust of thy feet. Thou dost rise above us as the heaven is 
higher than the earth, yet thine eye is upon us for good, and thine hand 
is searching our life to find pur where it may lay some other gift. Thou 
dost live to give ; thou didst so love the world as to give, and in that giv- 
ing we saw thy whole heart, all the love of thine eternity, and all the 
grace of thine infinitude. Thou didst give thine only begotten Son, that 
whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. 
Thou hast no pleasure in the death of the wicked— thy purpose is life and 
immortality, and bliss and service that is rest, and expectation that is its 
own fulfilment. Enable us to lay hold upon the gift of thy Son, and to 
make it the chief and only treasure of our life. His blood cleanseth from 
all sin,' the great answer of his love confounds every accusation of the 
law, so that we say. It is God that justifieth, who is he that condemneth ? 

Enable us more and more clearly to see the cross, to feel its gracious 
power, to answer its pathetic appeal. May we live in Christ because 
Christ lives in us, and may we serve Christ because of the inspiration of 
his own Spirit. May the secret of our energy be in the constraining love 
of Christ, may the mystery of our power and our industry be found in the 
love of our heart for the Son of God. He that spared not his own Son, 
but freely delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also 
freely give us all things ? So would we have but one care, that we have 
Christ in us, and that we live in Christ— then shall all things needful and 
good be added unto us. 

We now unanimously praise thee in cordial and loving song for all thy 
tender care over us from the first breath until now. We are thy children : 
thou didst make us and not we ourselves ; we have in us thine own image 
and likeness, marred indeed and broken, not to be known by any eye but 
thine ; yet still God is our Father in heaven. Thou wilt not shut the door 
until the prodigal returns, thou wilt welcome all who come to thee in 
penitence and hope and loving trust. Thou dost not turn away from the 
sons of men who cry unto thee contritely, thou dost further open the 
home-door arid with broader welcomes call to those who are furthest off. 



PRAYER, 


271 


Thy mercy endureth for ever : thy mercy is a great sea, thy love is with- 
out bound or limit which we can determine. Where sin abounds grace 
doth much more abound, for art not thou the all-filling One, and all-rul- 
ing, putting away everything contrary to thine own holiness and causing 
thy wisdom to be the light and peace of creation ? 

We come with our sins, but we shall not take them away again : we 
lay them down as a black and heavy burden at the foot of the ci'oss. 
Lord, help us ; Lord, pardon us ; Lord lift up the light of thy counte- 
nance upon us and say, “ Thy sins, which are many, are all forgiven.” 
Thou dost not forgive little by little, thou dost not pardon partially, thou 
dost multiply to pardon, yea, thou dost pardon with pardons, as billow 
rolling upon billow, until our sins are like stones which are cast into the 
depths of the sea. 

We come with our continual prayer for light, guidance, defence, and 
peace which passeth understanding. _We know not how few our days, 
but we would make them the best days of our whole life. Hence on we 
would have no mistake or error ; from this time forward may our life be 
complete in thy presence by reason of the holiness of its purpose and the 
sanctity of its prayer. Yet we know we shall fail, we shall be bruised 
again, the enemy shall yet overthrow us— yet surely thou wilt come in the 
end and bind us up with an eternal healing, and make us strong with 
immortality. We are in thine hands as we have always been ; our sin 
shall not separate us from thee, if so be there rise in our heart the hatred 
of it and the desire to be belter. 

We come asking for light upon thy page, holy page, divinely written, 
full of light and truth. Open our eyes that we may behold wondrous 
things out of thy law, give to our understanding the light that shall be as 
a lamp of thine own lighting, and may we see things afar off, and read 
with quick and sure vision all the writing of God concerning this life. 

Hear any special hymn and any particular prayer now offered by those 
who bow before thee in morning worship. In some houses thou hast 
given new life, and with new life is a new song. Otherwhere thou hast 
put out the fire and blocked up, the window into which the most light 
came, and made the house cold and drear. O visit thou the dwelling thus 
desolated, and make it glad again with some purer joy. Regard those 
whose life is now to them a perplexity and a wonder, not knowing how 
they shall spend the little remainder of their energy, and grant them un- 
expected answers of release and joy. 

The Lord’s blessing be upon us now as a worshipping people ; give us 
the spirit of adoration, the spirit of supplication, and the spirit of hope- 
fulness, and work in us that sacred and vigilant desire which looks out 
for blessings and hails them with joy in their descent. 

As for those who are not with us, they are with thee—the sick, the 
afflicted, the helpless, the poor who dare not venture out in the light, but 
who wait for the darkness that they may seek even their Father’s house. 
The Lord remember such, and make all heaven shine upon them with 



372 


THE TEXT 


promise and blessing. Onr dear ones on the water, the great abyss, 
voyaging homeward, with many a tender memory and many a sacred 
hope— the Lord himself navigate the ship and bring it to the desired 
haven. * . 

Bless the stranger within our gate, the man unfamiliar with the place 
and institute, and give him comfort in the thought that this is his Father’s 
house. In all our meetings and partings be thou with us, the one Light 
and the only joy, till we are gathered in the house that is above. Amen. 

Matthew xxvii. 65-66. 

55. And many women (distinct from the “ daughters of Jerusalem,” 
Luke xxiii. 2S) were there beholding afar off, which followed Jesus from 
Galilee, ministering unto him ; 

56. Among which was Mary Magdalene (the first mention of the name 
in Matthew), and Mary the mother of James (the Little) and Joses, and 
the mother (Salome, Mark xv. 40) of Zebedee’s children. 

57. When the even was come, there came a rich man of Arimathma 
(probably Ramah, the birthplace of Samuel), named Joseph, who also 
himself was Jesus’ disciple ; 

. 58. He went to Pilate, and begged the body of Jesus. Then Pilate 

commanded the body to be delivered. 

59. And when Joseph had taken the body, he wrapped it in a clean 
linen cloth, 

60. And laid it in his own new tomb, which he had hewn out in the 
rock : and he rolled a great stone to the door of the sepulchre, and 
departed. 

61. And there was Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary, sitting over 
against the sepulchre. 

62. Now the next day, that followed the day of the preparation, the 
chief prie.sts and Pharisees came together unto Pilate, 

O3. Saying, Sir, we remember that that deceiver said, while he was yet 
alive, After three days I will rise again. 

64. Command therefore that the sepulchre be made sure until the third 
day, lest his disciples come by night, and steal him away, and say unto 
the people, He is risen from the dead : so the last error (better deceit, as 
corresponding with deceiver, ver. 63) shall be worse than the first. 

65. Pilate said unto them, Ye have a watch : go your way, make it as 
sure as ye can. 

96. So they went, and made the sepulchre sure, sealing the stone, and 
setting a watch (the priests took part as well as the soldiers). 



27j 


ON THE CROSS. 


THE SAYINGS ON THE CROSS. 

T hese incidents are utterly trifling as compared with whal 
had transpired on the cross itself, as indeed all incidents, 
except the Resurrection, must be. Nothing can occur, so soon 
after the scene upon the cross, which can, compared with that 
tragedy, be worthy of one moment’s consideration. Whilst there- 
fore these petty details are completing themselves, let us study the 
inner life of Christ as revealed in some of the Sayings which he 
uttered from the cross in his last agony. These .Sayings will 

admit us into the very sanctuary of his soul. You remember that 

he called his sermon upon the mount “ These sayings of mine,” 
— now that he is upon the higher mount, the cross, he utters 
Seven Sayings, which are really but a re-pronouncement of the 
first. The Sayings on the cross seem to be the solemn peroration 
of the Sayings on the mount. The great music is one. He 
returns, after many a wondrous and thrilling variation, to the note 
with which he opened the anthem. In such returns and such 
consonances, we find an argument for his Deity. 

What said he on the cross 1 “ Woman, behold thy son.” He 

also said, ” I thirst.” Further, he said, ” Father, into thy hands 
I commend my spirit,” Again he said, “Father, forgive them, 
for they know not what they do.” And he cried, saying, “ My 
God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me.?” Finally he said, 
“ It is fini.shed.” He laid the rock when he preached the sermon 
on the mount : on the cross he built the infinite fabric. Without 
professing to settle the order \n which the Sayings arc uttered, wc 
can have no difficulty in discovering the meaning of the revelation. 
After we have studied that meaning awhile, we can come to these 
little incidents, and gather them up and show their greater meaning. 
The Sayings upon the cross surely give a complete revelation of 
humanity oi Jesus Christ. It was no dramatic per.sonage that 
quivered on the cross. It is of importance to say this. The 
voice was huma7i, the confession of need was human, the sense of 
desolation was human, his filial affection was human. All these 
last proofs were needed to render absolutely impossible any theory, 
mythical, dramatic, or imaginary in any sense. On the cross was 
the MAN Christ Jesus. The 'humanity of Chri.st made his priest- 


374 


MATTHEW XXVI/. 55 - 66 . 


hood J>oss{6le. We could not have a priest in a mere Deity. 
Deity does not pray. He must be a man, often as weak as I am ; 
he must have a body as real, burning with the same fire, quivering 
under the same pain, answering the same great demands. He 
hungered, he thirsted, he slept, he rested because of weariness, he 
sat down on Jacob’s well. Verily he took not on him the nature 
of angels, he took on him the seed of Abraham. Touch him, 
grasp him, look at him, watch him, and he is Man and Woman, 
male and female, the ideal man, bone of our bone and flesh of 
our flesh. “ We have not a High Priest that cannot be touched 
with the feeling of our infirmities : he was in all points tempted 
like as we are. ” 

This is the tender power of his priesthood to my soul. Peter 
touches the exact music of the occasion when he says, “Casting 
all your care upon him, for . . O listen to the following and 
completing words. How grandly the sentence would have read 
had it stood thus, “ Casting all your care upon him, for he is 
mmpolenl.” That would, however, have touched but a feeble 
chord. Only the few can respond to sublmiiy. The sunset is 
wasted upon most eyes. But all hearts can tfnswer the sympatheiic 
— so the glorious sentence stands not as I h^ve suggested it, but, 
“ Casting all your care upon him, for he careth for you.” It 
is the moral sublmiiy, not the inkllectual magnificence, that touches 
the universal heart ! 

Herein is the secret of the power of evangelical preaching, 
above all philosophical abstraction and ethical prelection. These 
touch but a few, but evangelical unction, sympathy, tenderness, 
grace, these belong to the universal heart, and the tone is detected 
as the tone of a universal speech. Be quite sure of your Lord’s 
humanity. Do not allow any section of the theological church to 
steal that from you, as if it belonged to that section as a special 
possession. When a theologian of any school arises and says, 
“ I believe in the humanity of Jesus Christ,” we. ought to answer, 
“ And so do we.” More fully, more pathetically, and more 
trustfully, we accept more from his blood than any school of 
theologians can accept, who doubt or hesitate concerning his 
divinity. A body was prepared for him : he interrupted no law 
of nature : whilst on the cross he said, “ I thirst,” — what wonder, 
with his blood drained from his heart,- what wonder if the peasant 



THE HUMANITY OF CHRIST. 275 

ihtrsted ? The wonder was that he co^ased the thirst. But it 
was a wonder of love, a wonder of condescension, a wonder that 
concealed a revelation. The words ‘ ‘ I thirst’ ’ did not indicate a 
merely personal accident, they revealed and confirmed a sublime 
doctrine and fact, namely the humanity, and the priestly humanity, 
of the suffering Son of God. He suppressed no natural instinct — 
“ Son,” said he, “ behold thy mother. ” He created new rela- 
tionships whilst he was sundering old ones, ‘ ‘ Woman, ’ ’ said 
he, “ behold thy son, thy support, thy friend, thy refuge in time 
of bitterest loneliness and childlessness.” He set up a new 
household whilst the temple of his body was being torn asunder, 
he whilst he was being unmade. He smothered no natural 
emotion; “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me.'*” 
uttered in a strange language, “ Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani. ” 
Hark, is it Hebrew ? is it Syriac ?— what is it ? They could not 
tell. The bystanding Jews said, “ He calls for Elias,” He was 
always misunderstood ! The Son of God calling for Elias ? 
Always were his great magnificent words dragged down to little 
applications and accidental circumstances, by the mean interpreters 
who thronged around him, crowding him with their society, but 
not enlarging him with their thoughts. 

These Sayings do more than reveal the complete humanity of 
Christ : they show the grandeur of his jnoral nature. I do not 
dwell on the tenderness of his care for his mother, but I would 
point to the sublimity of his forgiveness. It was his then to be 
the great Man, to work the last miracle, to mount a throne from 
the very head of the Cross itself. He would have his murderers 
forgiven ! It is grander to forgive than to slay ! we should have 
no enemies if we could really pray for them. They in themselves 
might continue to be enemies, but in our hearts there would be 
no sting of enmity. When did the Lord turn the captivity of Job 
— when he gave his most brilliant retort to his three comforters 1 
No. d'he Lord turned the captivity of Job when he prayed for 
his friends ! 

It is always so : it is a subtle and beneficent law in the divine 
revelation, and the administration of human affairs, that we get 
our greatest blessings in our most religious moments. Examine 
what has been done to you, Analyze it, weigh it in scales of your 



276 


MATTHEW XX VH 55 - 66 . 


own making, measure it by standards of your own setting up, and 
then you will but aggravate the enmity which you have already 
deplored. But pray for them that, despitefully use you and 
persecute you, and though no answer fall upon //mn, the reply will 
surely enter jyour mn heart, and in the sanctuary of your conscio^"s- 
ness there will be rest, and even joy. 

Blit I would dwell still more upon the magnificence of Chiist’s 
religious conceptions. He called himself “ forsaken," but he did 
not therefore deny the existence of God; he did not allow the 
experience of a moment to becloud and destroy the eternal 
realities. That is where so many of us fail. God takes away the 
delight of our eyes, and w^e therefore turn our back upon him, 
and deny what is infinitely of more consequence than his existence 
— we deny his Im ! Of what avail is it to confess his existence if 
we deny his providence, his compassion, his mercy ? What does 
it amount to if we have •&. theological God, but no God gleaming in 
the compassion which bedews every morning, and shining in the 
light which gladdens the whole day.? Better deny his existence 
and shout blasphemous oaths into his blank heaven, than profess 
to acknowledge his existence and yet deny, or distrust or disown 
his love and his claims. ' 

Let us read this ciy- of forsakenness in the light of the other 
Sayings, and we shall see what it meant. How many of us have 
taken out this dark expression and reasoned gloomily about it, 
instead of setting it in its right place, and allowing all the lights to 
shine upon it and illustrate its great sadness and mystery.? 
“ Torsaken," yet not without comciousness of God: calling him 
“ Father," committing the spirit into the Father’s hands. He is 
not “ forsaken’ ’ who can in the darkness say, “Father.’’ For- 
saken, yet confident in prayer, spending his last breath in supplica- 
tion — ^addressing the heavens, making no appeal to the earth : 
■sending enough downwards to prove his humanity, but sending 
upwards the great breadth and force of his life. “ Father, receive 
me, Father, forgive them" — he cannot be much forsaken who can 
thus trust his spirit to the Unseen One ! 

Forsaken, yet forgiving all ; dying with the word of .clemency 
upon his lips, anticipating and outblotting, the great judgment 
about this solemn tragedy. He was not forsaken who thus 



CHRIST FORSAKEN OF GOD. 


277 


prayed. “ hast thou forsaken me,?" ay, that is the ques- 
tion of the ages, and that cry Avas meant for our consideration 
rather than as an expression of his own loneliness. ‘ ‘ Why hast 
thou . forsaken me?" Let the ages ans'Jt^er that inquiry ! let the 
church ponder it ! let the world renounce all smaller inquiries, 
and answer this infinite perplexity ! It is a question wc. must 
answer : God made no reply ; we must find out why it was that 
for one moment Christ was orphaned and left alone. When we 
come to consider this question in other relations we may find that 
it was part of the gvsaid priesRy process that Christ should feel the 
woe of orphanage ; we shall find that this was no reflection upon 
his purity or his purpose, but one of the infinitely solemn secrets 
of the impenetrable decrees of heaven. Maybe that explained 
the forsakenness, that w/ wrought out this isolation ; the Lamb 
must stand back in terrible loneliness to receive the last shock of 
the very storm which he came to silence and to sanctify. 

Then mark how these Sayings show Christ’s assurance of the 
completion of his work. He bowed his head and said, " It is 
finished." “i?" — what? The sentence relates to something 
beside and beyond itself. " It is finished " — how much is signi- 
fied by that meanest of the pronouns. Who can tell what visions 
enthralled his attention at that moment ? how the eternal purpose 
stood before him like a tower on which the top stone had just 
been laid ; how some immeasurable cycle of time completed itself 
and another cycle of vaster sweep and intenser light began its 
revolution. What decrees were fulfilled, what prophecies, matured, 
what hearts enlightened, what worlds opened — none can tell. The 
ATONEMENT was completed, the answer to the law perfected, the 
way to the Father was opened, the love of God shone upon the 
world without a cloud to interrupt its light, and righteousness and 
peace kissed each other over the covenant fulfilled. 

In the light of these reflections turn to the little incidents that 
make up the rest of this chapter, and in those incidents you find 
bewildered but undespairing love. " IMany women were there 
beholding afar off, which followed Jesus from Galilee, ministering 
unto liim," They stood their. ground, and were saying just what 
Christ was saying, in a sense their own. They said, " My Jesus, 
my Jesus, why hast thou forsaken me ?" Had he forsaken them ? 



2/8 


MATTHEW XXVIl 55-66. 

No more than God had forsaken /wk. See in their loneliness 
some hint of the meaning of his own, “ I will come again. After 
three days I will rise again. Destroy this temple and in three 
days 1 will build it again.’' It was a momeniary forsakenness ; it 
recalled an ancient prophecy — “ For a small moment have I 
forsaken thee, but with everlasting mercies will I gather thee.” 

Then here is what we always find in the whole Christian history, 
and perhaps in the individual story as well — Hdp from an un- 
expected quarter. “ When the even was come, there came a rich 
man of .Arimathsea, named Joseph, who also himself was Jesus’ 
disciple ; he went to Pilate and begged the body of Jesus. ’ ’ Help 
from an unexpected quarter ! the evening having a star all its 
own ! This star was not seen in the bright light, it shone ‘ ‘ when 
the even was come.” The evening brings us all together : morn» 
ing scatters us, evening reconstitutes the household and resanctifies 
the home. Thank God for evening stars, for night glories, for 
jewellery gleaming through the darkness. We have seen some of 
God’s bright stars when the night settled upon our houses, but 
what w'e have seen is but a dim hint of the glory that shall be 
revealed. 

And here also we have a confession of human weakness. They-^ 
the chief priests and Pharisees — ^remembered what the disciples 
had forgotten. The disciples required to be reminded of the 
resurrection ! — ” Then remembered they the saying that he would 
rise again,” — but the enemies treasured it. Our enemies catch 
tones in our speech which our friends sometimes miss. Those 
who watch us most carefully with a view to our destruction write 
down in their note-books sentences which our friends hardly hear. 
“ Sir,” said they, ” we remember that that deceiver said while he 
was yet alive, After three days I will rise again.” So they would 
have precautions taken. Pilate said unto them, — I wonder with 
how much of irony, — ” Ye have a watch — go your way, make it 
as sure as ye can. ’ ’ As ye can ; go your way — ^wave your hands 
to the rising sun, and forbid him to advance. What a fool’s 
errand 1 Go your way : seal up the Spring, and tell it that this 
year we shall have no vernal wind and no vernal blossoming. 
What a fool’ s errand ! Go your way and tell Arcturus and his 
sons to shine no more, and bid the Pleiades vanish from the 
heavens they have illumed so long. What a fool’s errand ! — but 



THE ENEMy DEFEATED. ^79 

a philosopher’s undertaking compared io sealing the tomb in which 
lay the Son of God. 

So shall all our enemies be disappointed, if we ourselves be 
right ; so all sealing and watching shall come to an ignominious 
end, if the thing buried be only the body^ and not soul that 
cannot die ! 



XCIV. 


PRAYER. 

Almighty God, if thy blessing be given unto us, we shall know no 
more any pain of want or any weakness of fear. Send thine angels to us 
to tell us what thou wouldst have us do. With the music of their mes- 
sage in our ears we shall run, if with fear yet with great joy, to bring thy 
disciples word. The. word is thine, every letter and tone of it ; it is not 
ours else it would perish in the wind which first hears it, but it is thy 
word, full of the music of thine own heart, tender with the tremulousness 
of thine own love, and because it is thy word and none other, it shall find 
acceptance in the earth, and make the whole world pure and glad. 
Herein is our trust, here do we find the light of our hope, into this prom- 
ise as into a rock do we run in the time of darkness and desperate sor- 
row. When thou dost try our faith, we would that our faith might be 
strongest ; when the cloud is darkest, we would break it up by the ur- 
gency and penetration of our vehement cry ; when the night is longest 
we would charm away all its darkness by continual songs of hope. This 
is the victory which overcometh the world, even our faith. Lord, 
increase our faith. Faith is the gift of God : we ask thee for it now, with 
loving and expectant heart. 

We come to thee by the way appointed, broad as thine own love, and 
bright as thine own heaven — Jesus Christ, the Living Priest, by whom 
we have received the atonement, and because of his sacrifice and inter- 
cession we shall have all things and shall truly abound in all heavenly 
bestowals, and in us shall there be a daily inspiration that shall renew 
our strength and our hope. 

We have come to bless thee with many words and many songs, to 
recall all thy tender mercies, though it be impossible so to do, to set our 
memory upon the miracle of complete recollection. Lord help us to do 
what we cannot do— but in the straining attempt to do it, we shall 
increase the strength which is mocked, and shall show thee how loving is 
our grateful heart. 

Thou hast been with us all the day, so that we hardly know one day 
from another, so Sabbatic has been the quietness of the whole week, so 
tender the suggestion of every shining hour. Yet dost thou give us 
.‘.pecial mercies amid all that is even unusual. Thou raisest up moun- 
tains, the higher the one than the other, even in the land of great hills. 
Tliou dost send upon us. unexpected joy, and if now and again thou dost 



THE TEXT. 


281 


touch the foundation of our tower, it is that we may learn that if our 
foundation be not fn God it is insecure. How terrible art thou, and yet 
how gentle ; in wrath remember mercy, in the day pf judgment look upon 
the bow of promise, and in all the fire of thine indignation against sin, 
remember how frail we are, a leaf that fadeth and a shadow that fleeth 
away. Enable us to work well during the hours of light, knowing that 
the night cometh wherein no man can work. Give us a right view of the 
work of thine house, may we feel that there is no slavery in thy bondage, 
that thy captivity is freedom, and that to be the Lord’s slaves is to be the 
Lord’s sons. 

Thou knowest what our life is, shattered and torn, lying around us in 
many a ruin without shape or meaning ; thou knowest how our vows 
have been broken, and our prayers have been plucked back from heaven 
without answer and without pressure ; thou knowest us altogether— 
behold we have but a handful of days to live, do thou pity us, spare us, 
and work out in us all the way of thine own love. Enable us to live the 
larger life, to look upon the whole revelation of thy truth with the eyes of 
the heart, which take the whole sight, and which seeing perceive also. 

Lift the burden where it is too heavy, dry the tears where they do not 
enlarge the vision but blind it, open for us ways upon roads that are at 
present inaccessible, give us a humble, heartfelt trust in our Father’s 
goodness, and may we stand upon that as upon a rock that cannot be 
shaken. Go after the prodigal whom our prayers fail to overtake, bring 
back the wanderer who has left all the common roads of life and is 
groping in thickets and wildernesses which we cannot penetrate. Nurse 
our sick ones, lift them awhile from the hot bed and give them rest within 
thine arms— lay them down again with thine own gentleness, and give 
them sleep. 

Baptize all our little ones with dew from heaven : preserve their lives 
that they may become good and great and wise and honourable. Watch 
our houses that they be not broken in upon with violence : may we find 
a sanctuary on the hearthstone and the beginning of heaven in the inner- 
most joys of the house. 

We say this in the dear, great, tender Name, we baptize our prayer 
with the blood of the cross —without that baptism what is our prayer but a 
speech of the lips ? Hear us at the cross, and as thou hearest come to us 
with assurance of perfect pardon and release from every sin and every 
accusation, and may we find a Sabbath within the Sabbath, the peace of 
nature enclosed within the larger peace of God’s own calm. Amen. 

Matthew xxviii. I- 10. 

1. In the end of the Sabbath (late on the Sabbath), as it began to dawn 
toward the first day of the week, came Mary Magdalene and the other 
Mary to see the sepulchre. 

2. And, behold, there was a great earthquake ; for the angel of the 



282 


MATTHEW XXVIH. i-iO. 


Lord descended from heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from 
the door, and sat upon it. 

3. His countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white as snow : 

4. And for fear of him the keepers did shake, and became as dead men, 

5. And the angel answered and said unto the women, Fear not ye ; 
for I know that ye seek Jesus, which was crucified. 

6. He is not here : for he is risen, as he said. Come, see the place 
where the Lord lay. 

7. And go -quickly, and tell his disciples that he is risen from the dead ; 
and, behold, he goeth before you into Galilee ; there shall ye see him : 
lo, I have told you. 

8. And they departed quickly from the sepulchre with fear and great 
joy ; and did run to bring his disciples word. 

9. And as they went to tell his disciples, behold, Jesus met them, say- 
ing, All hail. {Rejoice !) And they came and held (clasped) him by the 
feet, and worshipped him. 

10. Then said Jesus unto them, Be not afraid : go tell my brethren (by 
spiritual relationship) that they go into Galilee, and there shall they see 
me. 

REUNION. 

J ESUS CHRIST has for the time being withdrawn from the 
page we are perusing, yet we can think of nothing but him- 
self, even during his temporary absence. After the high 
converse we have had, we cannot easily fall into common talk. 
The sleeping city is a mean sight to the man who has been out 
early and come down from the mountain whence he .saw the sun 
rise. To him the sleeper seems to be almost a criminal : the 
sleeper is a man who has lost an opportunity and can never have 
that opportunity renewed under precisely the same conditions. So 
all the people that are now moving upon this page, up to a given 
verse, are commonplace, and would be intolerable but for the 
inquiry which strains and elevates their attention. We have no 
patience with them, but their inquiry makes a common standing 
ground for the human race. Let us join it, and ply heaven with 
the same eager and expectant question. 

“ In the end of the Sabbath.” No ! In the end of the /ewM 
Sabbath mayhap, but not in the end of the Sabbath. Literally in 
the end of the Sabbaths, as if they had all come to a point of 
termination. The Sabbath is only about to ^e^in ; there are no 



THE CONTINUAL DAWN. 


283 


endings in God’s blessings — what wc call the end is only the little 
rest which the blessing takes, to come up again in fuller bloom 
and tenderer colour and larger fruitfulness. Why have you this 
word “ end” in your speech as Christians .? There is an end to 
nothing but sin. “ The last enemy that shall be destroyed is 
death.’’ No is losty no iig/ii, no speech of tenderness, no 

comfort of benediction, no inspiration of truth. The Sabbath can 
never end ; man would take it back again if it were to be with- 
drawn. may undergo changes, but the^ sabbatic sj>i7-ii, the 

genius of rest, the elder brother of the days, the cj[ueen of the 
week, the shining star amid all the galaxy of time— the world 
would not willingly let die, the great religious heart of man can 
never allow to expire. 

“As it began to dawn.” Yes, that is just what it did. 
That is the very poetry of the occasion ; the word written with 
apparent accident is the very expression of heaven. It began to 
dawn, — a new tender light shot up in the easterir sky, the orient 
trembled with a new presence, and glowed as with an infinite 
surprise. Chri-stianity is always r/trzfjw/wjg .• the Sabbath dawns 
over all the world ; the Sabbath day is more than half over away 
down in the eastern lands — in the far-away western places, men 
are just beginning to rise now, and when wc have concluded our 
service they will begin to sing 

“ This is the day the Lord hath made.” 

In the highest scn.se that can challenge the imagination and sat- 
isfy all the religious vision that is in us, Christianity is a continual 
dnoning. When Christ comes the light comes ; when Christ 
shines upon the life the darkness flees away j when the mind gets 
its first true conception of Christ, it is as if a shaft of light were 
shot from a great firmament of gloom, and as if all heaven shone. 
It began in the beginning. God created the heavens that dawn 
every day. Believe me, we live in bcgiimings. Give me some 
hint of endings, ^n^ strength goes, inspiration expires, and energy 
says, “There is no longer use for me to unfurl the banner, or 
blow the trumpet’s bray in the ear of the dead. Let me lie down 
and die too. ’’ There is z. joyousness about the daivn and the 
beginning, the stirring tunc, the hour of activity, when every 


284 


MATTHEW XXVni. 1 - 10 . 


energy leaps to the front, and every power says, “ Baptize me for 
thy service, and may I be crowned as a blessing in the world’s 
commonwealth.” 

“ As it began to dawn towards the first day. ” That also is 
just what it’ did ! Now the primacy of tivu is covered with the 
higher primacy of grace. The “ first day” it had always been 
since time was broken up into weeks and months and years.' For 
many a long century it had been the first day of the week as it were 
by nativity— but now it is born again. It was sown in corruption, 
it is raised in incorruption ; it was sown a little glint of time, it rises 
big v/ith eternal splendour. So may we be born again. You are 
first in intdhct,— would that you were also first in goodness. And 
you are first in energy, ~v}Ou\ 6 . that you were also first in prayer. 
You in the third place are first in wealth—ynoxAdi God every golden 
piece you have were made more golden still by being transformed 
into the gold of the sanctuary. Be not satisfied with natural or 
hereditary primacies ; over those you have next to no control, it 
may be j but in this primacy of goodness, where may elevation 
cease } There is no terminal point on that heaven-ascending line. 

The women came to the sepulchre, and Luke gives us some 
additional and illustrative particulars about them and their com- 
ing. According to Luke’s account, the women came, ” bringing 
the spices which they had [)repared.” Notwithstanding they 
had been distinctly told that Jesus Christ would rise again on the 
third day, with that singular obstinacy which distinguishes the 
prejudices of the human mind, those blessed and affectionate 
women came with their spices to embalm their Lord ! How can 
you account for the stubbornness of this view of death? The 
women had been told, and told by Jesus Christ himself, that on 
the third day he would rise again, and yet so treacherous is the 
memory, or so irreligious the heart, that Sight staggers Faith 
The women saw him die; any recollection -of a promise 01 
” rising again” must have died in that death. So forgetting the 
prediction, or regarding it as a sentiment that had perished, or 
otherwise viewing it as a hope rather that as a fact which lay within 
the possibility of accomplishment, they came ” bringing their 
spices which they had prepared. ” 

The angel chided them. Said the angel to them, “ Remember 



MEMOR V CUL TIVA TED. 


2S5 


how he spake,” and “ they remembered his words,” but the re^ 
membrance of his words would have been of no avail to them two 
hours before they saw the angel. If they had found the stone at 
the door of the sepulchre they would have remembered no such 
words — but Sight now helped Faith. The grave was empty, the 
stone rolled away, celestial visitants were the attendants of that 
gloomy place, and out of the depths of death they heard the voice 
of Resurrection; — “then they remembei'ed his words.” That 
remembrance is all but fatal. There is a time when our religious 
remembrances will rather be aggravations of our sin than mitiga- 
tions of our mistakes. What was it to remember the words when 
the grave was empty, when the angels were filling it with morning 
light, when the stone, fastened, sealed, watched, was hurled back ? 
It was nothing to remember then. That is the true faith which 
sees in the darkness as well as in the light, which goes to the grave 
bearing no spices but the spices of the immovable certainly of the 
resurrection and the life. You take your spices to your graves in 
the form of flowers and immortelles. It is pardonable, because 
the bones of the dead body are still hidden under the sod ; it 
would be better if we could look straight up into the blue morning 
and breathe upward the spice of a concentrated life and a hope- 
ful and all-conquering spirit. 

Memory is to be touched in 7nany ways. The old sermon.g will 
yet come upon us with great vividness, the mighty prayers that 
took us up to heaven’s gate .so that we had a mind to alight there 
and never return, will come back with all but infinite energy and 
pressure upon the forgetful mind. And all the holy sabbaths that 
stand out upon the plain of time, like great mountains, will rush 
upon the recollection and become the chief of our joys, or the 
mo.st oppressive and unanswerable of our accusations. Cultivate 
your memory j live in your religious recollections ; if you let your 
yesterdays die, I wonder not that your to-morrows are amongst 
the darkest of your fears. Rather wmulcl I say, The I.ord who de- 
livered me out of the paw of the lion, and out of the paw of tlie 
bear, will deliver me from the hand of this uncircumciscd Philis- 
tine. Remember the old battles and the old victories, the ancient 
fears, and the light that drove them away like shadows that could 
stand no longer in their presence, and say with heightening thank- 
fulness. 


286 


MATTHEW XXVIH i-io. 


“ His love in time past forbids me to think 
He’ll leave me at last in trouble to sink.” 

Do not let histoiy be wasted upon you, your experience evaporate 
and be found no more ; rightly estimated, human experience 
ought to be amongst the richest of human treasures. 

Ihn- what purpose did the women come ? According to Matthe\v 
they came to “ see the sepulchre.” An atheist might have done 
that^ any man might have done it — but when Mary Magdalene 
and the other Mary do it, it seems as if the Heavens were closed 
up and the earth were a place that had no sky. We trust to the 
womanly heart to keep up our noblest hopes, we give ourselves over 
into the custody of that higher love and trust. When Mary 
Magdalene and the other Mary cease to pray, no man will have 
audacity enough to lift his face heavenward. The mother must 
save us, the housmife must make the house a sanctuary, the 
womanly heart must keep the altar-fire ablaze. 

They came, “ to see the sepulchre,” and they did see it : they 
saw more of it than they expected to sec — the}’- saw it turned in- 
side out, So may all our expectancy be fullilled ! We came to 
the sanctuary to see — what ? One another an individual ? an oc- 
casion ? a service ? a sepulchre May we all be disappointed in 
this same happy way : may those who come to see the outside, 
the mechanical, and the transitory, sec the Lord’s own face, 
aglow with the light which fills all heaven with its splendour. 
Many have gone with aching hearts to sec some religious sight, 
who have returned with great joy. 

‘ ‘ And behold the angel of the Lord had rolled back the stone 
from the door,” Mark describes this angel beautifully ; Mark 
took more notice of certain particulars than any of the otliei 
evangelists ; for the detail of the picture, always consult the 
evangelist Mark. According to Mark the angel was ^yoimg man. 
Are there any old men in heaven I None. There are really no 
old men on earth, if we take the right view of the case. How old 
are you, trembling pilgrim .? Do you say eighty .? I can show 
you a tree three hundred years old. Do you say you have passed 
the fourscore years, and now there remains but a little more light, 
and you will soon be gone ? You are an old man, but you are a 
young being : the age is an accident, the existence is a fact. Do 



THE YOUNG AfAN'S WORK. 287 -i 

not give way to old age, it is only a mockery, it is not really old 
age : you are, if in Christ, always young. How else could the 
narrative read than young man came and did this ? For God 
could have sent no old man, having none in his great household, 

“ Who are these, arrayed in white robes ? and knowest .thou 
whence they came?” “These are they who have washed their 
robes and made them white in the blood of the I,amb. Therefore 
are they before the throne night and day, and serve God in his 
temple. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, 
neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat. ’ ’ A youth 
that has no necessities, a youth on which time can write no 1 

wrinkle. We shall all be young some day, when we are clothed 
upon with our. house from heaven ! God is always sending 
young men down into the world to roll its stones away, to break 
up its rocks, to liberate its captives, and to give new” dawning. 
Encourage the young, be large-minded and pitiful toward their 
mistakes, and see in the outputting of their energy the possibility 
of a noble and beneficent manhood. 

He rolled away the stone. The stone was turned to new uses, 
for the angel “sat upon it.” Wdiat thought the stone had oc- 
casioned by Joseph’s rolling it to the door of the sepulchre 1 It 
was kindly meant : no other construction could possibly be put 
upon Joseph’s act in that matter. It was sealed, it was wratched, 
it was guarded— and yet it was rolled away. God sends a great 
W'ind upon the earth and throws down your towers and temples 
and towns and fortresses — an invisible wdnd— you cannot tell 
whence it comes or whither it goes, but it comes in great shocks 
and tries the foundations of 3”our structures, breaks the ships of 
Tarshish, and troubles the sea as w'ith great agony, and yet it is 
only a w'ind, without shape,, without colour, without measure, 
almost without name, invisible — but when you see the ships hur- 
ried before it, and all their proud niast-w'ork torn to rags and 
thrown into the foaming deep, and see great structures bulge out 
and fall flat dowm on the astonished earth, we feel how, in some 
aspects, we are truly little and weak. 

Now the angel speaks, and I would hear every word he says. 

“ Fear not ye, for I know that ye seek Jesus which was crucified. 

He is n )t here, for he is risen as he said: come, see the place 
where the Lord lay, and go quickly and tell his disciples that he is 


288 


MA TTHEW XXVJIL i-io. 


risen from the dead, and behold he goeth before you into Galilee, 
there shall ye see him ; lo, I have toM you.” You could not 
have put more matter into so short a compass. The angels speak 
concisely, they have specific messages to deliver, and with miserli- 
ness of language they crush into every syllable all the meaning 
which it will hold. The speech was synipathdk—A’‘ Fear not ye.” 
The speech was heart-reading— ' For I know that ye seek Jesus.” 
The speech was explanatory-—' He is not here, he is risen, as he 
said.” The speech was comforting—" Come, see the place where 
the Lord lay.” The speech was inspiring — “Go ye,” The 
angel was the first to preach Jesus and the Resurrection ; all other 
preachers follow the “ young man” who announced the Resur- 
rection and sent the women to proclaim it. 

What was the effect oi the preaching ? The women departed 
quickly from the sepulchre with fear and great joy, and did run 
to* bring his disciples word. Haste, joy, energy, this is the mis- 
sionary way,, this is the true mini.stcrial way, this is the great 
lecture upon the method of preaching. They departed quickly 
with fear and great joy, reverence and infinite rapture, and did 
run to bring his disciples word. We have fallen into a mean 
amble, we have slunk off and let every racer beat us ; the gospel 
messenger lags somewhere in the rear, he is outrun by many a 
man. We want more quickness, more energy, more running 
power in the church. We are indifferent, we are respectable, we 
are reluctant, we are calculating, we are selfish. Rather would I 
belong to a Christianity that is censurable from a worldly point of 
•view by reason of its vehemence and energy, than belong to some 
perversion of Christianity which regards its religion and it.s 
slumber as coequal and synonymous terms. 

And as they went— it always so happens ! A thing is never 
complete in itself ; incident runs into incident, and the whole 
work is carried on with infinite skill to perfectnc.ss, to .symmetry 
and life. ‘ ‘ And as they went, ’ ’ Jesus , met them ! No man can 
go upon his errands without his company. Jesus Christ always 
meets his messengers or joins them or overtakes them : he is 
alway with his angels to the end of the world. And Jesus said, 
“Go.” Some day we shall collect the , incidents in which that 
word Go is used, and we shall see how wonderfully God’s Spirit 



THE PAR TING COMMAND. 


589 


always points in the direction of movement, aggression, energy, 
“Go ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every 
creature. ” With such a “ GO” ringing in our ears, with the 
resonance of a thunder-trumpet, who will sit down or stand still 
or forget his errand ? 



xcv. 


PRAYER. 

Almighty God, the darkness and the' light are both alike unto thee : 
thou dost not slumber nor dost thou sleep, nor are thine eyelids weary 
and heavy. Thou dost cast the horseman into a deep sleep, and in the 
time of his slumber thou dost work out the great wonders of thy name, 
yea thou dost blind men with light and cause the day to be unto them as 
the night, and then thou dost send unto them revelations and messages 
from heaven. In our day there are twelve hours, but one day is with the 
Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years in thy sight are but as 
one day. 'We cannot measure thy going, we are surprised and overtaken 
by sleep ; thou dost punctuate our time with nights and hours of forget- 
fulness, so that we cannot piece together in one line all the days and 
hours that we breathe. Thou only art sleepless, thou alone dost not 
slumber, the eyes of the Lord run to and fio throughout the whole, earth, 
and there is nothing hidden from the penetration of thy glance. 

■We own before thee our wickedness, and we ask thee not to look upon 
it with the eyes of judgment, but to look upon it with the eyes of pity 
and compassion. Thou seest all things, and yet thou dost remember that 
we are but dust, or as a wind that cometh for a little time and then 
passeth away. In wrath thou dost remember mercy, thine anger is kept 
back by thy love, thy righteousness does not strike us with death, because 
thy compassion pleads for the life which we have forfeited. 

We come before thee with praises, with songs innumer;xble, ay, and 
sweet, full of the heart’s tenderest tones,' because of thy continual loving- 
kindness and the mercy which is to usward everlasting. We find thy 
mercy always near at hand : sometimes we have to seek for thy judg- 
ments, but thy compassions shine in all the light of the day and in all the 
radiance of the night. We live because thou dost love us ; we do not 
deserve our life, but thou dost spare it unto us as another opportunity to 
come to thee and be renewed by thy Spirit and by thy grace. 

Surely thou dost delight in the man whom thou hast made, otherwise 
thou wouldst cut him down as with a sword and cast out his name from 
thy recollection— but thou dost spare him and watch him, with choice 
bread dost thou nourish him. and thou dost find for him water in the 
wilderness, and thou hast promised him growth and joy and rest in 
heaven. Thou hast indeed poured out thy heart’s love as wine to be 
drunk by the children of men. How great is thy love, how tender is thy 



THE TEXT. 


291 


pity, how incessant thy concern for the sons of men. We see this in the 
cross, we feel it in every beat of the heart of Christ, we behold it in all 
the revelation of the atoning ministry of the Son of God. In him we live, 
in him is our rest, in him is the spring of our joy, in him, through him, 
and by him alone do we live and move and have our being, and is our 
life lighted with a celestial hope. 

We humbly pray thee to give us energy to meet all the demands that 
are made upon our life. Give us the responsive spirit which quickly, 
with all the joyous obedience of love, answers every appeal of thine. 

■ May we render thee no reluctant homage, but the homage of loving 
hearts, eager to pray, to adore, to sing, and to serve. Thus may our 
whole life be a sacrifice unto the Lord, heaven-ascending, sweet-smelling, 
acceptable unto God, that thou mayest yet have joy in the child of thine 
own creation. 

Teach us how frail is our life upon the earth, how brief our time and 
how certain our dissolution. May we learn lessons from those that are 
roundabout us in pain, in weakness, in poverty and in distress, and 
whilst we are thankful that we are not reduced to the extremities of their 
condition, may we remember that in thy providence we too must lay 
down our life and die. May we therefore give our hearts unto wisdom, 
with all industry and patience ; may we serve every hour of the appointed 
time, and may we know the joy of those servants who being always ready 
can hardly be surprised by their Lord’s coming. 

Speak to those who are ill at ease, and cheer them with secret solaces 
from heaven. Save those that are helpless, and show them how in the 
extremity of weakness thou dost magnify thy gracious strength. Visit 
all who to-day need thee at home, because the house is dark, or empty, 
or filled with, intolerable sadness. Be thou the Physician at home, and 
the preacher of thine own gospel to those who cannot come to thy church. 
Send a plentiful rain upon thine inheritance and refresh and bless every 
root which thou hast planted. 

Care for our little ones, make their infancy the reason of thy tender- 
ness, and becau.se they are so little do thou bow thyself down to take 
them up, and in all such condescensions of love we shall see the mystery 
of our own redemption, and know how true it is that we are not saved 
by works, but by the grace of God. Amen. 

Matthew xxviii. 11-20. 

11. Now when they were going, behold, some of the watch came into 
the city (related by Matthew only), and shewed unto the chief priests all 
the things that were done. 

12. And when they were assembled with the elders, and had taken 
counsel, they gave large money unto the soldiers, 

I3i Saying, Say ye, His disciples came by night, and stole him away 
while we slept. 


MATTHEW XXV JIL 11-20. 


14. And if this come to the governor’s ears, we will persuade him, and 
secure you. 

15. So they took the money, and did as they were tauglit : and this 
saying is commonly reported among the Jews until this day. 

16. Then the eleven disciples went away into Galilee, into a {the) 
mountain where Jesus had appointed them. 

17. And when they saw him, they worshipped him ; but some doubted. 

18. And Jesus came and spake unto them, saying, All power is given 
(all authority was given) unto me in heaven and in earth, 

19. Go ye therefore, and teach all nations (make disciples of all the 
heathen), baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and 
of the Holy Ghost : 

20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded 
you : and, lo, I am with you alway (all the days), even unto the end of 
the world (the age). Amen. 

THE FINAL COMMISSION. 

I T may be a little fanciful, but I would ask you to remember 
that this text consists of kn verses, and further to note that the 
ten verses are equally divided, and may therefore be said to con- 
stitute, in point of length, two equal but very different pro- 
grammes. It may assist your imagination, and contribute to your 
enjoyment of the exposition, if you will suppose yourselves to be 
holding , one programme in the one hand ami the other pro- 
gramme in the other. The one is the programme of the enemies 
of Christ, the other is the programme of Christ himself, and upon 
the ?noral difference of those two programmes I risk the whole 
Christian controversy ! In studying the first five verses we shall 
see what the enemies did : when we come to the second five versc.s 
we shall see what Jesus Christ did, and let me repeat that upon the 
difference of moral tone, as between those two policies or purposes, 
I would risk every claim and every appeal coming under the title 
of Christian, 

Our attention then is to be fixed upon a moral difference. 
Unusual circuhrstances have transpired, and the question to be 
considered and answered by us is— What different effects were jiro- 
duced by those unparalleled events .? Circumstances develop the 
moral. nature of men : suddenly placed in new relations, the true 
nature of the man asserts itself. There has been no time for trim- 
ming, for preparation, for arrangement of a calculating kind ; 



THE TWO PE OGR AMAZES. 


293 


suddenly, like thunder at midnight, the men on both sides 
have been awakened to a new consciousness, and the question 
which we have now to put is — What was the moral complexion and 
tone and purpose of that new condition of affairs ? You have the 
one programme in your right hand, you have the other programme 
in your left hand — look on this picture and on this, and upon the 
moral difference of the two fear not, Christian believers, to rest and 
risk the whole truth concerning the kingdom of heaven upon the 
earth. Let us see, then, how the case stands in detail. 

We have first of all, on the part of the watch and those with 
whom they communicated, confusion. The mind is unbalanced, 
events have occurred for which there was no adequate intellectual 
or moral preparation — so one is saying one thing, and another 
another, and there is collision between the statements, and con- 
fusion is the word which best describes the condition of the mind 
of every speaker in that unhallowed communication. What was 
then to be done ? First of all there was bribery, the money power 
was brought to bear upon those who had some part to play in the 
transaction. For money you can buy silence, for money you can 
procure false testimony, for money you can make the next step in 
your life comparatively easy. Then there were lies. You never 
find a single sin. Sin does not dwell, so to speak, in solitary 
places and alone ; sin is no hermit, sin means progeny, multitude, 
allies, confederates of every name and every colour, ‘ ‘ Say ye, 
His disciples came by night and stole him away while we slept." 
Have a short and simple message to deliver, and stick to it. Put 
your answer into words of one syllable, which the shallowest head 
can remember, and having said your lesson over to yourself a few 
times, it will become familiar to you, and when you are asked a 
question, speak it, and stand by it. 

But that very simple answer incriminated the very men who 
used it ! For observe, they were to confess that they had them- 
selves slept. Why, they had slept all the da}' l)efore in order to be 
ready for the sleeplessness of the night on which* they were ap- 
pointed to watch the sealed tomb! But they did not see that 
they were called upon to make criminals 0/ themselves whilst they 
were trying to bear false witness against others. It was necessary, 
to give any colour of probability to their absurd and criminal 
statement, that they should confess themselves to have been 


MATTHEW XXVm, 11 - 20 . 


294 

unfaithful to their trust. How difficult it is to be consistently 
bud ! How all but impossible so to patch lies together that they 
will hold up like a piece of solid masonry, and not slip cut here 
and there and let the roof tumble upon all that they had supposed 
themselves to have securely built. All stories have to be rehcansed 
and recast and calculated and tested here and there, and have to 
be approved by men of cunning and subtle mind, and then they 
are sent away to make the best they can of such conditions as may 
daily arise. 

Followers and speakers and lovers of truth have no arrangements 
to make. They may contradict one another in verbal statement, 
there may be a difference as to the recollection of there may 
be some apparent direct contradiction as to the fact, now and 
again, but all can be cleared up and reconciled and settled into 
self-consistent harmony, without arrangement, collusion, or 
preparation of any kind. Men are not afraid to own that they 
were mistaken, to recall a statement, to amend a particular, be- 
cause truth is always proverbially audaciou.s in its fear]e.ssnes.s, It 
is not mere boldness, it is sublimely religious courage wliich 
upholds truth in all the criticism and cross- examination to which 
it is subjected. 

The men who can tell lies ^iHooviitkemsclves, can easily tell lies 
about others, and therefore they engage to say that the disciples 
came by night and stole him away. The liar takes away the 
character of other men easily, because he has first taken away 
<m)n. Fie who familiarizes himself with suicide of a moral kind 
falls easily into murder of a moral nature. His hand is in it, he 
is to the manner accustomed, if not born. Expect noykr/Zc^ from 
the liar. Do not imagine that the liar will become a truthful man 
on purpose to serve your interests and to promote your good 
fortune and happy progress. The liar will use you, the false man 
will, tear down all that is sacred in your name, tender in your 
family, and holy in your household. Falsehood is bad, through 
and through; ‘to it there is nothing it owns no altar, it 

respects no oath, it abides by no sacramental bond. It will drink 
to your health, and stab you under the fifth rib ; it will smile 
upon you, and plunder not your property but your soul — -your 
soul! Do not therefore let us give way to the ever-damaging 
sophism that a man may speak lies in one direction and be quite 



THE EOLL Y OE CHRIST'S EAEJI/ES. 29S 

truthful in another. There are no such anomalies in God’s 
moral creation. He who can deliberately tell one lie, will tell a 
thousand if he has anything to gain by the cataract of false- 
hoods. 

Then was there iruculence. They took the money and did as 
they were told. They had a part to play, they were paid actors, 
they were professional liars, they had been feed to swear and work 
on the other side. 

This then is the programme of the enemy. I find nothing 
7 ioUe in it, I find nothing massively sensible about it, I never 
saw a pack of men so little, mean- minded, sour-hearted, wicked, 
vile, bad— and there is no w in their craft. Never did men 
go out into the world wdth so palpably absurd an account of a 
surprising event. Read the words again, and tell me if we our- 
selves, were we evilly disposed, could not have struck out some- 
thing more ingeniously happy than this — ‘ ‘ Say ye, His disciples 
came by night and stole him away while we slept. ’ ’ How could 
the men look at themselves and look at one another, after perpe- 
trating a piece of contemptible folly like that ? How could they 
ever shake hands one with the other in anything api>roaching 
trustful fellowship I How ever could they be sent out on any 
errand again so long as their life lasted, when tliey tvere capable of 
submitting to so contemptible a humiliation as to be told to say 
that the disciples outwitted them ? Taking their otvn account of 
it, the disciples were sharper than they were. Taking the case 
exactly as they put it, they madey^i»/j of themselves as well as 
criminals. They had a charge, they were armed, the stone rolled 
to the door of the sepulchre was a sealed stone, and yet they said, 
for money’s sake, that disciples wnthout arms and without strategi- 
cal power and without resources, came and played a successful 
trick upon them whilst they were asleep I 

The enemy has never got beyond this programme. The ene- 
mies of Christianity to-day are working according to this time- ' 
bill. They start from this point, take this journey, and arrive at 
this destination. The genius of anti-Christian argument has never 
published another programme than the one which is now before 
us. The words may have been altered, a little re-arrangement of 
sentences may have taken place, some difference may have been 
made in the punctuation, but in substance, in m<u-al compass, in 



296 


MA TTHEVV XXVIIL i i-ao. 


intellectual dignity, the programme of eighteen hundred years ago 
is the programme of anti-Christians this day. 

Let us now look at the programme in the other hand, which is 
the programme of Jesus Christ and his disciples. The eleven 
disciples went away into Galilee, into a mountain where Jesus 
had appointed them— the familiar mountain, the grand old hill- 
church, the typical place ! No dark corner, screened off for dark 
uses, hut a mountain caught by the great light of heaven at every 
point of its rugged majesty. Not into a cavern, not into a fissure 
of a rock, not into the depths of some inaccessible forest, but into 
a MOUNTAIN. I'here is health already in these living lines. 

And when Jesus came to them, what did he say ? “ All power 

is given unto me in heaven and in earth : go ye therefore and 
teach.'” Who would not rather take //2A programme as his life- 
guide.? Listen to the difference of the moral tone. On the one 
hand — “ vSay ye. His disciples came by night and stole him away 
while we slept.” On the other, Jesus says, “Go ye therefore,” 
that is, becau.se I have all power in heaven and on earth, ‘ ‘ and 
TEACH.” In Christianity, when allowed to speak for itself, you 
always hear a tone of high spiritual robustness. Christianity is a 
lesson, a message, and has to be taught, and teachers are 
appointed of God who are qualified by his Spirit and grace to utter 
the lesson and explain alike its patent and its hidden eloquence. 

And observe how this teaching is bounded. It is only bounded 
by “ all nations J' This is the beneficence of Christianity, it will 
not teach a few, it w’ill not be dwarfed into a sect, it will not be 
bricked up within given boundaries, and held there as the 
prisoner of any number of partialists ; its wings were meant to 
flap in the firmament, and its voice loud and sweet enough to bo 
heard all over the spaces, and to cause its gospel tone to fall like 
a revelation upon the ear of every listening man. 

Compare the breadth of the one programme with the narrowness 
of the other ; the breezy, fresh, mountain-like air of the one pro- 
gramme with the head-to-head, whispering, collusive, calculated 
programme of the enemy. Judge the policies of men by their 
moral lone. Beware of men who set traps for the catching of the 
unsuspecting, and -have faith in those teachers who have a grand, 
moral tone, and who exhibit in every breath and act and word a 



TRUTH AND FALSEHOOD. 


life worthy of the majesty which they can but imperfectly 
represent. 

These are the two programmes which are before the world this 
very clay. Finst of all, in the camp of the enemies, there are 
pe7-plexiiies : they do not move along straight lines ; for a time the 
road seems broad enough and open enough, and they get along 
for a mile or two with considerable speed, and then suddenly 
there is a gate in the road to which they have no key, or a deep 
place which they cannot fathom, and dare not attempt to leap. 
There are ugly facts, there are surprising events to be accounted 
for, there are cro.ss lights that daze the vision, and cannot be 
exactly set in their astronomical centres. So the enemies of Christ 
have told a crooked story, or a lame one, or a short one — and I 
have to ask you to fall asleep over many a mile of the road, or yoix 
never can pass that way. There are imperfect explanations : if you 
will forget the substantial and central thing to be explained and 
vindicated, then you may be content with certain superficial 
references, but w'hen you come to vital questions, heart enquiries, 
when you need an answer to a question shooting itself out of the 
very centre and sanctuary of the soul, you will not get a satisfac- 
tory reply. 

And many of those men who undertake to misrepresent the 
Christian cause, fall into this very matter of self- crimination : they 
are content to say, ‘ ‘ We were asleep, we had not insight enough, 
we are but imperfectly acquainted with that subject, we have not 
before us the nccessaiw information in some form or other they 
will use the explanation, “We were asleep." Christianity is 
never asleep, truth is never asleep, reality never sleeps, never 
slumbers ; reality is always the same, with a simple, straight- 
forward, graphic, yet oftentimes profound and mysterious tale to 
tell — but the mystery is only as the sky to the earth, a necessary 
part of the complete economy of things, but heightening itself 
•beyond the hands and eyes of impertinent enquirers. 

In the case of the second programme, we see the best and 
wisest way of treating the first. No notice was taken <f the plan of 
the enemy, no caution was given as to the craftiness of the men 
who were setting up a contradictory story. That is the wisdom of 
Christianity, not to be answering the enemy always, but to be 
telling its own tale, speakmg its own gospel, walking its own way, 


MATTHEW XXVIII. ir-20. 


healing the hearts wounded and cursed by sin. The Christian 
pulpit will become what it ought to be when it pays less attention 
to the men who hold by the first programme, and wdien it g(x:s 
straight forward on its great evangelistic and missionary tour, of 
telling the world that there is balm in Gilead, and that there 
is a Physician there. Men are not healed by argummi, men 
are not saved by happy in controversy. I have no mes- 

sage to any man w^ho is not desiring the message before I utter 
it. The gospel is an answer — ^you must provide the question. 
The gospel does not come down, saying, “ Let us start an argu- 
ment,” the gospel is God’ s answer to man s necessity. Therefore 
go ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature— 
every creature will not hear it, every creature will not respond to 
it, but you will find out in every house and town and land and em- 
pire where those are who are waiting for the consolation of Israel, 
and who are asking a question to wdiich there is no true answ'er 
but from the cross of Christ. And every man has work to do : 
Christianity starts men upon no little errands, Christianity has no 
merely short journeys for its propagandists to undertake, Every 
journey is a long one, though it may seem to be locally .short ; 
there is no stopping place on the line of Christian evangelists until 
the knowledge of the Lord spread itself over the globe a .9 the 
waters overflow in infinite billows the channels of the deep. 

And then behold the impiralion under which all this work ha.s 
to be conducted. ” Lo, I am with you all the days, even unto 
the consummation of the age.” He does not send us out atone ; 
he divides the burden ; he shares the peril ; he inspires our 
courage ; he is a present Captain, always in the thick of the light, 
and always so near that a whisper may reach him, or a glance of 
weariness and doubt bring from his radiant face a shining that 
.shall be as the dawning of a new day. Do we realise Si, present 
Christ ? Have we that acuteness and largeness of faith which can 
feel the Son of God at our very side.? Do we see him in the 
breaking of the family bread, do we hear him in the movements of 
the events of the day that is passing over us, do we catch glimpses 
of him in many a strange providence, and are we quite sure, by 
the happy realizations of spiritual affection, that he is within the 
reach, yea, within the beating of our own hearts ? If not, we have 
lost the original inspiration, we are repeating a lesson, not deliver- 



CHRISTIAN ELOQUENCE IN BENEFICENCE. 299 


ing a message ; we are uttering a statement in letters, and not a 
cry from a sanctified and impassioned heart. 

This is the programme of Christianity to-day. If the one pro- 
gramme has not changed, neither has the other. You will get 
into dangeroas places if you change one line of the original pro- 
gramme of youlr Saviour and Founder, as a Christian Church, 
Christianity comes to /ere' men as an arguTuent ; it may come to 
all men as a Uessbig. The light does not come as a puzzle in 
solar physics, it comes in. cheering brilliance and warmth to do 
manifold good in nature and in life. Few men may be theologians, 
but all men may be Chrislians, Go with the opposition, and you 
will have to evade and arrange arid manipulate so as to escape the 
difficulties of history and the pressure of immediate facts, but go 
with Christ, and you will teach and comfort and bless all nations. 
You may be weak in argument, but you may be mighty in prayer. 
The clever manager of words may outrun you in the race of 
eloquence, but when the heart is sad and the night of loneliness is 
without one star to break its infinite and intolerable monotony, 
then your comfort will be sought as men cry for water when they 
burn with thirst. 

Christianity will find its best eloquence in its beneficence. To do 
good is to repel every enemy and to answer every sneer. , I want 
us as Christians so to work, that men will be able to say, when 
they are tempted to abandon the church and leave Christian society, 
“ We are poor men, illiterate men, uneloquent men ; we cannot 
answer arguments ; but the Christians of this neighbourhood have 
been kinder to us than any other people. We know not what 
you say when you utter long words and refer to historical diffi- 
culties, but the woman who sat up with our dying child was a 
w'oman who could pray. We do not understand your chronology 
and ardimology and your scientific penetrations and oppositions ; 
you confuse us with such unfamiliar words; hut in sorronj it is 
the Christian who calls at this house pirsi, it is the Christian who 
stays longest, it is the Christian who speaks most sweetly, it is the 
Christian that puts into our minds the most elevating and soothing 
thoughts. ” So long as Christianity can elicit tei'Awwony like that, 
all opposition against it is a worthless taunt, a mockery that has 
no message for the heart a lie that turns black in the face whilst it 
utters its base message^,. 



XCVI. 


PRAYER. 

Almighty God, thou art slow to anger, but we are swift to do that 
which is evil. Because thy compassions fail not, therefore do we rebel 
against thee with a high hand and with an arm outstretched. Judgment 
is thy strange work, mercy is thy delight, and the heart of man is set in 
him to do evil, for he knows that the Lord will not smite until the last, 
and that his mercy endureth for ever. This we have learned through 
Jesus Christ thy Son, our one and only Saviour : he wept over us ; 
though we had stoned the prophets and killed them that were sent unto 
us, yet he wept over us as over those whom he would gladly have 
redeemed. Thou lovest the sons of men, thine heart is moved towards 
them in great love and in continual compassion and hopefulness. There- 
fore is thy providence a revelation of thy mercy", and therefore is every 
day a token for good unto our souls, if we could but read upon it thy 
sweet and gracious purpose. Thou hast no thought of evil towards Us, 
thine heart looks out upon us wistfully, with the yearning and expectation 
of love that cannot be satisfied until the last prodigal has returned and 
the whole household is complete. 

We come to thee now with songs of delight far above all words to utter 
— a love that has no speech because of thy lovingkindness and thy tpnder 
mercy. Thou hast stooped very low to find us, thou hast gone out of 
thy way to recover those who have strayed, thou hast lighted the house 
and swept it diligently to find the meanest piece that was lost. We were 
as sheep gone astray, now we are returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop 
of our souls, and safely enfolded upon the high mountains of Israel, vve 
will be glad in the Lord and praise him with a new song. Once we were 
blind, now we see, once we knew not what was above the blue sky which 
we called the day, now we see beyond it into the upper spaces and wider 
liberties of thy creation, and behold how high is God’s sanctuary and how 
wide the temple of the Lord. 

Bless us, we humbly pray thee, in the name of Jesus Christ the Priest 
and Saviour of the world, with daily revelation of truth, and daily delight 
in thy wisdom. Wean us from all forbidden things, overcome the fasci- 
nations of time and sense with some mightier attraction of thine own, 
destroy within us him who rules over our life, set up thine own kingdom 
in the heart and be our one Master. We , would be slaves of thine, we 
would be captives of the Lord, we would be bound hand and foot, head 
and heart, by the chains of thy love, and seek no other liberty than the 
range of thy will and purpose. For this desire we bless thee ; it is the 


PRAYER, 


301 


marvel of our misspent life : we knew not that thou wouldst bring us 
even so far as to lay down our will at thy feet. This is the Lord’s doing, 
and it is marvellous in our eyes. 

Continue thy ministry within the soul, break down every barrier, drive 
away every cloud, and cleanse the whole sanctuary of the life and make 
it a fit dwelling-place for the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Give 
us the eye which sees the inner meaning of things, give us the hearing 
ear and the heart which listens for the lowest tones of thy music and all 
the subtle suggestions of thy revelation in the Book, in life, in history, ' 
and in providence. Deliver us from supposing that we are bounded only 
by things seen and temporal, and give us such a consciousness of other 
presences and other distances as shall ennoble our whole thought and lift 
up our life to the heavenly level. 

We have done- the things we ought not to have done, and left undone 
the things that we ought to have done, and our lamentation is a sorrow 
that should have no end. But thou dost interrupt our reproaches and 
confessions with assurances of love and offers of pardon ; ere we have 
completed the tale of our shame, thou hast called for a robe to clothe us, 
for a ring for our finger, and thou hast lighted the house with a new glory 
and filled it with ineffable gladness. This is thy wondrous way, this 
the very mystery and glory of thy love ; because thy compassions fail 
not, therefore are we not consumed, therefore have we a great hope. 

Thou knowest what hearts are burdened, what lives are strained by 
difficulty and bewildered by perplexity ; thou knowest where the shadow 
of death has broadly fallen, and where the grave has been dug in the house- 
hold. Thou knowest those who are feeling inward pain and weakness 
and distress hitherto concealed, thou knowest all the wants of our life, its 
pain and its poverty are continual prayers unto the heavens. We humbly 
desire therefore that thou wouldst, in the name and for the sake of Jesus 
Christ, come to us with answers larger than our prayers, and with revela- 
tions that shall astound our vision by their beauty and magnificence. 

Let our houses be precious to thee, may they be homes indeed, wherein 
dwells the spirit of rest, and broods the angel of peace. Make our fire 
in the winter time, and fill our windows with light when the summer 
comes round, and out of every flowermay "we bring some new lesson of 
thy care. Let the little ones all live and grow strong and wise, and 
become sources of gladness in the house. Let the old grandfather and 
grandmother, those who represent the older generation, be comforted 
with very rich solaces, and be made quite young again — not in their flesh, 
iiut in their Chri.stian inspiration and hope. Dry our tears when we dare 
not touch them, soothe the grief too .sensitive to be approached by the 
kindest human love, and into the ear that is dying, pour the last earthly 
word of comfort, and speak of the resurrection and the life. 

As for our enemies, do thou forgive them with great pardons ; when 
the abjects gather themselves against us and we know it not, the Lord 
dispel their illusions, and preserve their lives. Amen. 


302 


MATTHEW HXXVIIL 


; REVIEW OF THE WHOEE. 

W E have come to the end of this gospel of Matthew, and if 
you ask me what I think of the gospel now that I have 
closed it, I will tell you. I am like a man who has been in a 
strange land, whose speech and usages he cannot wholly compre- 
hend, and about which there is a touch of infinite charm. All the 
people wore unfamiliar garments, no man spoke my native 
tongue, the whole population moved in urgent haste, and often 
whispered with keenest energy. Amongst them stood a Man like 
no other man I ever saw, with a face that burned, an eye that 
changed from pity to Judgment and from judgment to pity with 
startling rapidit}^, a voice in which thunders were chained and all 
the mysteries of music hidden. A voice marvellous ; now so like 
other voices that it moved no sense of wonder, and now so unique 
that all other voices sounded shallow and commonplace as com- 
pared with its compass and solemnity. A strange Man — now 
shrunk from like a mountain on fire, now sought as a garden of 
delight in which palms grew for wounded hearts, and flowers 
bloomed that were fit for festivals of unutterable joy. Loved by 
all women, kissed by all children, longed for by all sufferers, 
besought, eiitreated with tears, honoured, worshipped, hated with 
all the malignity of hell. 

His name was Jesus. He was a Man of strange ways : so fond 
of loneliness that he stole away secretly to the mountain long after 
the sunshine bad fled from its slopes and crags, and when the cold 
stars looked glittcringly upon the cold dew of the still night. 
There he was, there within the crags as within a holy clmrch, there 
on his knees, with his face upturned to the starry canopy, and his 
lips moving in the eloquent agony of speechless prayer. No 
human creature was at hand ; angels thronged the .stcp.s,. and the 
low winds brought fragrance from sweetest paradises, ami the 
planets attested the solidity and beneficent rigour of infinite law — 
but no man was there, no child, no woman, not Mary who bore 
him : he stood off like a Priest, he stood above, like a Sun that 
cannot be touched. ' * 

Then in the morning when I saw iiim on common ground 
again, how weird he looked, how solemn, how unlike all other 


THE NAME OF y ESC/S, 


303 


men, so old, yet so young, so commonly clothed, yet so dignified, 
speaking the language of all with an accent which none could 
imitate, as ready for good work as he had been ready for holy 
prayer. Men never knew what to call him, he was almost the 
anonymous one ; he was called “ JESUS ” by the angel, but to 
others he was all but Nameless, I never heard him called by his 
name to his face ; every one said thou, or he, or Rabbi, but no lips 
could be so far irreverent as to call him familiarly by his name, 
except when away from him, and then the name was spoken with 
tender gratefulness — “ A Man that was called Jesus said unto 
me,” — “ But Jesus said.” 

His shape was as a cloud that changes every moment into some 
new suggestion of magnificence or beauty. His movement was 
through an uncalculated orbit, his outlook rested upon points 
which no astronomy had mapped. Like a bird he sometimes 
came so near as to be almost familiar, then like a bird wuth out- 
spread wings that carried him to the entrances of other worlds. 
O those wings, wings of the soul, wings of alraightiness, wings 
that told all the world that he was here but for a time, and that 
he had brought with him the power to return — those wings that 
give the life that carries with them so much liberty, the soul-wings 
that bear him away above the range and above the uproar of the 
thunder, which makes the timid earth afraid. O that I had wings 
like a dove, then would I flee away and be at rest ! The sun of 
righteousness is risen with healing in his wings. 

If you ask me what further I think of the gospel now that it is 
closed, I will tell you. I shut my eyes and see it all, I betake 
me to some quiet dream-spot where the flocks lie down at noon, 
and in a waking dream I hear and see everything once more. 
What voices of the night are these like silver bells that sweetly 
sound } Is it the plash of some gentle stream flowing through 
gardens that slope towards the sun ? Is it converse between spirits 
that speak to one another some tender secret of the heart It is 
in very deed a song : it rises and falls with the rhythm of some 
other and infinite movement to which the throbbing stars beat 
time, and which all Heaven accepts as the law of its own security. 
What song is that.? It-is a birth-song : it is no prophecy of mere 
hope, it is the joy-song of ap inamediate blessing--" A. Child is 



304 


MATTHEW /-XX Vm. 


born, a Son is given : the second Adam has appeared to retrieve 
the {ortiines of the first, and to work out some unknown mystery 
of grace. Glory to God in the highest !” That .song leaves us 
until it becomes but a whisper in the air, further, further it goes 
— “ On earth peace, and good will toward men." That song 
comes downward, it broadens and it rolls and fills the whole earth 
with musical thunder. That was the song I heard. The first 
Adam came in silence, the second with songs of angels ; the first 
a dying body, the second a quickening spirit. Tie came with 
music, he came to make music, he loves music, he will reign till 
all' nations repeat his song and call him blessed. 

Such is the impression with which I came out of that gospel 
scene. Quickly the scene changes and enlarges, and many a won- 
der crowds upon my eyes. The Man who was born amid the songs 
of angels goes out to make the wholeworld glad. He himself 
will be the song. That is the purpose of our being, not to listen 
to music only, but to make it and to <5^ it. He is as a Father 
standing at the wide-open door, wistfully longing for the prodigal's 
return. Then swiftly he is a King that says he will make a mar- 
riage feast for his Son, and fill the whole house with radiant 
guests, and make it glow with .sacred fire. Then suddenly, he is 
as a mother that will gather all her children within her arms and 
press them to a heart that never felt towards them other than with 
unutterable love. She will give them rest, .wine, milk, and honey. 
Then he is as a tender nurse who will take into the custody of his 
love all little children and helpless lives. 

He does not care for mere N/erai consuiemy in the figures under 
which he represents him.self. He is a broken-hearted Father, 
bitterly disappointed because his last born is not at home, a great 
I/ing who takes out of his wardrobe all the wedding dresses 
and sends out invitations to the whole univer.se. JJ/othcr, and 
Shepherd, and Kurse, and Friend, and Teacher, — he will con- 
descend to assume any figure and condition that will touch the 
]iathos of the occasion with which he has to deal. Tell him that 
the brother is dead, and he will cry over the vacancy in the family 
circle, —but he will cry in fuller and bitterer flood.s over the city 
which has stoned the prophets and killed them who were .sent to it. 

So weak, yet so strong—amid the weakness of tears there is the 
energy of almighty power. The Mail touches the blind eyes and 


CHRIST'S ROYAL KINGDOM, 


30s 


they are blind no more. The deaf ear he unstops, and blesses it 
first of all with the music of his own voice, after which all other 
music must be commonplace. He turns the desert into a ban- 
queting hall, walks upon the sea, summons the dead from the 
winding sheet, and in the presence of his health all disease flies 
away, ashamed of its own corruption. He went about doing 
good. He came not to destroy men’s lives, but to save them. In 
a moment of supreme passion of love, he confounded all sense 
and reason and literal understanding by saying that he would give 
his flesh and his blood for the life of the world. We must be a 
long time with him before we can enter into the mystery of that 
gift. 

Again the scene changes before the vision of my memory, and 
I see a man who boldly announces that he has come to set up 
what he calls the kingdom of heaven upon the earth. Not to raise 
a house, but to establish a throne ; not to be one of many, but to 
be the all-including One ; not to consult other king.s, but to rule 
them ; not to offer homage, but to claim it from all masteries and 
dominions, from all chiefs and potentates. This Tilan’s subject 
<)1 speech is a kingdom, this Man’s kingdom is heaven, this Man’s 
heaven is not a distant city but a presence in the soul. It was the 
royal element in this Man’s teaching that troubled the great ones 
of his time ; it was the royal element that troubled Herod and all 
Jerusalem with him — he did not send to ask where the Shepherd 
was born, but where was born him that is King of the Jews. It 
was the royal element that threw Pilate’s mind into perplexity and 
involved the throne of Caesar in mysterioms and threatening clouds. 
Christ would be royal, there was royalty in his voice a.s he reviewed 
the morals of the ancient w'orld and replaced them by principles 
of his own ; there was royalty in his parables as he spread in them 
a feast for the hunger of all nations ; there was royalty in his spirit 
as he declined all flattery, resented all patronage, called all men 
to himself as the centre of completene.ss and rest. 

The element in his thought and action contradicted all 

that was mean, and lowly in his outward circumstances, and those 
circumstances in their turn seemed to mock with bitter irony the 
claim of royalty which he continually set up. Royal, yet he had 
not where to lay his head ; ro^l, yet he had not a stater for the tax ■ 


3o6 


MA TTHE W I~XXVin. 

gatherer when he called ; royal, but not recognized as one of the 
brotherhood of kings or invited to dine with that charmed circle. 
How then was he royal } In' the magnificence of his thought, the 
sublimity of his purpose, the infiniteness of his love, and the splen- 
dour of his priesthood. Royal, and therefore he could stoop ; 
royal, and therefore he could wash the disciples' feet ; royal, and 
therefore he could accept the cross and triumpli over its shame 
and pain. This is kinghood, this is royalty — not a decoration 
which perishe.s, but a splendour self-created and self-sustaining, 
evermore. 

We have lost the mw/ ekmenl in our preaching ; we arc now 
making apologies, we are now asking permissions, we are now 
requesting to be allowed that Christ should be heard along with 
teachers venerable by their antiquity and dignified by the general 
pureness of their tone. The preacher now has no kingdom to set 
up, but some little apology to offer. Now the cry i.s not “ Lift 
up your heads, O ye gates, and be yet lift up, ye everlasting doors, 
and the King of glory shall come in,” — it is .some weaker cry, 
some paltry tone of excuse, or some dainty endeavour to escape 
the tragedy of the occasion. Christianity is nothing if not a king- 
dom. This doctrine does but palter with tlie shattered fortunes 
of humanity, if it does not come w'ith royal credentials and offer 
royal bounties to the soul. Again and again, day by da}'', do I, 
in the hearing of my memory, listen to this weird, ' my.sterious 
Teacher, talking about “ the kingdom of heaven.” 

Then comes the strangest scene of all the scene.s so strange in 
this exciting gospel. No such spectacle ever appalled the human 
imagination ;■ the mere historian cannot touch it with his tool of 
cold iron, language dare not take within its prison bars a story so 
tragical as if it could hold it up. Every word has an almo.splicre 
of its own, between the lines deep rivers roll with apocalyptic 
images reflected from their gleaming waters. The very punctua- 
tion hides hints of mysteries yet to be explored, or marks our 
progress towards glories yet to be revealed. We are lost in worlds 
whose paths we have not known. . Marvellous vision, this. A 
prisoner, held in a cruel grip; a silent Man in the presence of 
imperial power, a Man deserted by the few followers whose uncer- 
tain worship seldom passed beyond the point of selfish of troulflecl 



A GRAND MAN. 307 

wonder. A great grim cross, stoutly built, and built with savage 
delight, and thrust into the stony ground w'ith the joy of cruel 
triumph. An unresisting victim, with nails driven through his 
hands and feet, with the crown of thorns crushed into his temples, 
with the spear thrust into his side. I see darkness at midday, a 
field oi solid rocks throbbing under my feet : above arc clouds 
through which innumerable eyes may be peering, and soughing 
around the whole circle of visible things are winds in which 
innumerable travellers seem to be hastening to the cross. Then a 
cry of orphanage, an uprising of the sheeted dead, the cry, “ It is 
finished,” and I see and hear no more — for the praying fails 
beneath the accumulated fear. Be quiet for a little while : in 
such a presence speech would be profane : but a little while be 
quiet — a day or two be quiet 

Then the light comes back, the blue sky sheds its blessing on 
the terror-stricken earth, and away yonder on a mountain stands 
the risen Man, possessed of all power, sending out his gospel to 
the whole world, and having spoken of his great last word of love 
he rises, he enters into a descending cloud sent down to receive 
him, as in a chariot, and into the skies where the angels sang the 
birth-song rises the Conqueror who has made that lofty song the 
possible music of all human life. Hark ! A grand Man. Even 
so, Amen. 

Son of man, what seest thou ? I see a handful of corn upon 
the top of the mountains scattered by a sower who went forth to 
sow. I see first the blade, then the ear, then the full corn in the 
ear : field after field of golden grain, all the hillsides rich with 
corn, all the valleys rejoicing in the abundance of its sunny 
harvest. I see reapers going forth to reap, I seethe shocks of 
corn fully ripe, I hem* the angels’ song — “ Harvest home. ” 

Son of man, what seest thou ? I see a good Shepherd going 
forth to seek the sheep that was gone astray. I watch him thread- 
ing his way through stony places and looking wistfully for some 
footprint to guide him, I see him climbing hills, crossing 
streams, and cleaving through rank brushwood. T see his eye 
brighten and his face flush as he lays the lost one on his shoulder 
and returns to the fold with, thankful, shepherdly joy. 



3o8 


MA TTHEW I-XXVIIL 


Son of man, what seest thou ? I see a Father, looking tenderly 
and wearily into far-off space, if haply he may catch sight of a 
figure w'cll known and long wished for. On his face are the stains 
of many tears, in his eyes is the glitter of an expectancy daily dis- 
appointed. Old age has come upon him with the prematureness 
of sorrow overmuch. He can find no home in the house though 
the house is ample and grand. Now he suddenly starts, now his 
breast heaves with emotion, he runs, he falls on his son's neck 
and kisses him, and with many a sob he says, “This my son 
was dead and is alive again, was lost and is found.” 

Son of man, what seest thou ? I see the shining of a great 
light, the outbursting upon all nations of the glory of the Lord. 
Gentiles are coming to his light and kings to the brightness of his 
rising. The abundance of the sea is' being converted, and the 
forces of the Gentiles are hastening to the cross. Midian and 
Ephah, Sheba and Tarshish, Kedar and Nebaioth are moved by 
mew sensations. City is saying to city, “ Let us go up speedily to 
seek the Lord of Hosts.” Men are beating their swords into 
ploughshares and their spears into pruning-hooks, and idols are 
being cast to the moles and to the bats. I hear a shout ; it out- 
swells the mean eloquence of the thunder, and -rises in to\vering 
pride of strength, “ Hallelujah ! The kingdoms of tliis world 
are become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ, for ever 
and ever. Hallelujah, Amen. O death, where is thy sting O 
grave, where is thy victory ? Worthy is the I.amh that \vas slain 
to receive power and riches and wdsdorn and strength and honour 
and glory and blessing, for ever and ever, Amen. Blessing and 
honour and glory and power be unto him that sittcth upon the 
throne and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. Hallelujah, 
Amen.” 

Despised and rejected of men, he is now the Light of the uni- 
verse and the joy of the whole creation. He sec.s of the travail of 
his soul and is satisfied, for his boundless Universe is a boundless 
Heaven. Sweet, sweet Gospel ! 


The following discourses are supplefnenie(.ry, yet illustrative of several paints 
in ike main line of inquuy, . 


TWO MOUNTAIN SCENES. 

Matt. iv. 8, 9. 

■’ The devil taketh him up into an exceeding high mountain ; and 
showeth him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them ; and 
saith unto him, All these things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down 
and worship me.” 

T O this proposition Jesus Christ returned an answer which 
caused the devil to leave him. He received a great offer 
and he declined it with holy sternness. It was truly a great offer 
— nothing less than “ all the kingdoms of the world and the glory 
of them and the return to be made was sentimental rather than 
practical, or at least would have been so regarded by any other 
man than Jesus Christ. The offer was Empire, and the price was 
Worship. Jesus Christ said No, and came down from the moun- 
tain as poor as he was when he was taken up. With what ease 
he could have had “ the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of 
them,” and what good he could have done if all things had been 
tinder his control! Yet he said No; and in after days he who 
might have been King of the world said, “ The foxes have holes, 
and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of man hath not 
where to lay his head.” So much, you say, for throwing away 
the great opportunities of life ! Read again — 

“Then the eleven ' disciples went away into Galilee, into a 
mountain where Jesus had appionted them ; . . . and Jesus came 
and spake unto them, saying. Ail power is given unto me in heaven 
and in earth” (Matt, xviii. i6, i8). 

Put these two mountain scenes together, and consider all that 
has happened between the one occasion and the other. If you 
thus lay hold of the case in all its bearings, some such thought as 
this will run through your mind — You can take the world on the 
devil's terms, so simple, so easy ; or you can say A^o to the devil, 
and come down to poverty, to hard work, to sorrow, to sacrifice. 


310 


MATTHEW JV. S: 9. 

and through that rugged course you can find your way back to 
the mountain clothed with larger power, even with much of 
heavenly and earthly dominion put into your hands. 

And it comes very much to this in life. To every man the 
devil is saying, Accept the world on my terms ; fall down and 
worship me, and I will give you riches, fame, power, or whatever 
you think will make your life happy. Such a temptation conie.s 
in some form and in some degree to every heart, does it not ? 
Now' in direct opposition to this, Jesus Christ says— Take no 
thought for your life ; seek ye first the kingdom of God and his 
righteousness, and all these prizes and honours, so far as they are 
good, will be added to you : the devil took me up into an exceed- 
ing high mountain, and offered me the kingdoms of the world 
and the glory of them if I would fall down and worship him ; I 
said M to his offer, and I came down from the hill to live a life 
of sacrifice, patiently and lovingly to do the work of him that sent 
me ; and in the long run I ascended another mountain, from 
which 1 could see more kingdoms and greater than before, and 
instead of the rulership of one world, all power in heaven and in 
earth was given unto me : he that would save his life shall lose it, 
he that will lose his life for my .sake shall find it ; that which thou 
sowest is not quickened except it die ! 

Considering the peculiarities of the human mind, so far as we 
know them, the appeal of the devil has one supreme advantage 
over the appeal of Christ — it is not only addressed to the senses, 
but it promises instant gratification : no time need be lost; there 
is the prize, and here is the direct road to its • attainment ! 
Whereas in ihe appeal of Christ we come upon all the difllculties 
of delay and suffering, to which is added a scarcely confessed 
suspicion of possible miscarriage and disappointment The devil 
promises you for to-day; and for to-day Christ seems to promise 
nothing but tears and thorns and crucifixion, ‘ ‘ Wide is the gate 
and broad is the road that leadcth to destruction, and many there 
be that find it” See how true it is in all life that when a prize is 
within view we are impatient of delay. Thus, if you stifle the 
expression of your convictions, you may have a certain honour 
almost instantly ; if you utter and defend your convictions, you 
may have to wait seven years for that same honour 1 If you lull 
your conscience into slumber, j^ou make your fortune in a twelve- 



THE MORALtSTS EXPLANATIONS. 311 

month : if you obey your conscience, you may never make a 
fortune at all ! Truckle, and be rich ; resist, and be poor : go 
with the w^orld, and be flattered ; go against it, and be scorned. 
Who can hesitate between contrasts so broad ! 

If we call in the moralist to help us in this difficulty, he will 
probably direct our attention to facts as the best elucidation of 
principles, and may challenge us to consult the unquestionable 
and solemn testimony of human experience as a final authority 
within the region of reason. He will be likely to tell us in the 
first place that all these promises of short cuts to supreme position 
and influence are lies. He will acknowledge, indeed, that there 
are short roads to ownership, notoriety, and self-importance ; but 
these he will carefully distinguish from the supremacy that is solid 
and enduring and beneficent. He will, too, damp the ardour of 
the young by assuring them that realities are often the exact 
opposite of appearances, and may startle them still further by the 
assurance, which he will be able to justify by many examples, 
that it is possible for a man to be the slave of the very things 
which he seems to own and rule. Look at the price required fer 
the supremacy offered to Christ — “ If thou wilt fall down and 
worship me !’ ’ But consider what it is to worship at the wrong 
altar ! It is to debase the affections, to bring the best energies of 
the soul under malign influence, and to forfeit the power to enjoy 
the very things which it is supposed to purchase. Worship 
expresses, though it may be feebly, the worshipper’ s .supreme 
ideal of life ; if, therefore, it be offered to an evil spirit, the whole 
substance and course of life will be deeply affected by the error. 
What if the very act of false w'orship disqualify the soul for relish- 
ing any supposed or undoubted joy .? Offer a man long draughts 
of the choicest wines if he will first drench his mouth with a .strong 
solution of alum, and what are the choicest wines to him then ? 
They cannot penetrate to the palate, they are absolutely without 
taste, and they mock the appetite they were meant to gratify. So, 
if a man put his moral nature under false conditions, and create 
anarchy between himself and the principle of eternal righteousness, 
no matter what fortune or honor may accrue to him, his power of 
serene enjoyment is gone, and he becomes burdenetl and ])lagued 
by his very successes. This will be the first point insisted upon 
by the moralist ; in the plainest words he will say — “ The promise 



310 MATTHEW IV. 

and through that rugged course you can find your way back to 
the mountain clothed with larger power, even with much of 
heavenly and earthly dominion put into your hands. 

And it comes very much to this in life. To every man the 
devil is saying, Accept the world on my terms ; fall down and 
worship me, and I will give you riches, fame, power, or whatever 
you think will make your life happy. Such a temptation comes 
in some form and in some degree to every heart, does it not? 
Now in direct opposition to this, Jesus Christ says — Take no 
thouglit for your life \ seek ye first the kingdom of God and his 
righteousness, and all these prizes and honours, so far as they are 
good, will be added to you : the devil took me up into an exceed- 
ing high mountain, and offered me the kingdoms of the world 
and the glory of them if I would fall down and worship him ; I 
said No to his offer, and I came down from the hill to live a life 
of sacrifice, patiently and lovingly to do the work of him that sent 
me ; and in the long run I ascended another mountain, from 
which 1 could see more kingdoms and greater than before, and 
instead of the rulership of one world, all power in heaven and in 
earth was given unto me : he that would save his life shall lose it, 
he that will lose his life for my sake shall find it ; that which thou 
sowest is not quickened except it die ! 

Considering the peculiarities of the human mind, so far as we 
know them, the appeal of the devil has one supreme advantage 
over the appeal of Christ — it is not only addressed to the senses, 
but it promises instant gratification : no time need be lost ; there 
is the prize, and here is the direct road to its • attainment ! 
Whereas in the appeal of Christ we come upon all the difficulties 
of delay and suffering, to which is added a scarcely confessed 
suspici(3n of possible miscarriage and disappointment. The devil 
promises you for to-day ; and for to-day Christ seems to promise 
nothing but tears and thorns and crucifixion. “ Wide is the gate 
and broad is the road that leadeth to destruction, and many there 
be that find it." See how true it is in all life that when a prize is 
witliin view we are impatient of delay. Thus, if you stifle the 
expression of your convictions, you may have a certain honour 
almost instantly; if you utter and defend your convictions, you 
may have to wait seven years for that same honour ! If you lull 
your conscience into slumber, ypu make your fortune in a twelve- 



THE MORALISTS EXPLAN A TJONS. 3 1 1 

month : if you obey your conscience, you may never make a 
fortune at all ! Truckle, and be rich ; resist, and be poor : go 
with the world, and be flattered ; go against it, and be scorned. 
Who can hesitate between contrasts so broad ! 

If we call in the moralist to help us in this difficulty, he will 
probably direct our attention to facts as the best elucidation of 
principles, and may challenge us to consult the unquestionable 
and solemn testimony of human experience as a final authority 
within the region of reason. He will be likely to tell us in the 
first place that all these promises of short cuts to supreme position 
and influence are lies. He will acknowledge, indeed, that there 
are short roads to ownership, notoriety, and self-importance ; but 
these he will carefully distinguish from the supremacy that is solid 
and enduring and beneficent. He will, too, damp the ardour of 
the young by assuring them that realities are often the exact 
opposite of appearances, and may startle them still further by the 
assurance, which he will be able to justify by many examples, 
that it is possible for a man to be the slave of the very things 
which he seems to own and rule. Look at the price required fer 
the supremacy offered to Christ — ‘ ‘ If thou wilt fall down and 
worship me !” But consider rvhat it is to worship at the wrong 
altar ! It is to debase the affections, to bring the best energies of 
the soul under malign influence, and to forfeit the power to enjoy 
the very things which it is supposed to purchase. Worship 
expresses, though it may be feebly, the worshipper’ s supreme 
ideal of life ; if, therefore, it be offered to an evil spirit, the whole 
substance and course of life will be deeply affected by the error. 
What if the very act of false worship disqualify the soul for relish- 
ing any supposed or undoubted joy .? Offer a man long draughts 
of the choicest wines if he will first drench his mouth with a strong 
solution of alum, and what are the choicest wines to him then .? 
They cannot penetrate to the palate, they are absolutely without 
taste, and they mock the appetite they were meant to gratify. So, 
if a man put his moral nature under false conditions, and create 
anarchy between himself and the principle of eternal righteousness, 
no matter what fortune or honor may accrue to him, his power of 
serene enjoyment is gone, arid he becomes burdened and plagued 
by his very successes. This will be the first point insisted upon 
by the moralist ; in the plainest words he will say — “ The promise 



312 


MAITHEW IV. 8, 9. 


is very great, but it is a lie to begin with, and the man who sells 
his soul to get it will soon find that he is neither more nor less 
than a dupe of the devil.” 

But what of the facts which seem to contradict this theory of the 
moralist ? “I have seen the \viched in great power, and spread- 
ing himself like a green bay tree : their eyes stand out with fatness ; 
they have more than heart can wish ; they are not in trouble as 
other men.” Do they not seem to have gotten the kingdoms of 
the w'orld and the glory of them ? In answering this inquiry the 
moralist will insist that such facts, exactly illustrate what he has 
Just said — viz., that some men are the slaves of the very things 
which they seem to owm and rule. He will contend that technical 
possession is not full ownership, and he will make his appeal to 
final and decisive results rather than to temporary appearances and 
relations. For example, he will acknowledge that the wicked 
have been in great power ; but he will show that they have 
“ passed away,” and that they have not been found even by those 
who most diligently sought for them ; he will acknowledge that 
the wicked have sometimes had more than heart can wish, but he 
will prove that they have always been set in ‘ ‘ slippery places, ’ ' 
and that their ” end is destruction. ” He will not confine himself 
within narrow limits in giving his judgment, but will include 
within his survey spaces and times needful for securing a just per- 
spective. It is quite true that ‘ ‘ if in this life only we have hope, 
we are of all men most miserable " but if we bring considerations 
of eternity to bear upon the discipline of time, even now we may 
have joy, and may even ” glory in tribulation also.” 

Now look at the other side of the case. Jesus Christ resists the 
temptation to give his soul for gain, and he goes down the hill 
poor, lonely, and apparently helpless. He brings back nothing 
but his unimpaired integrity ; he is whole of heart, — and that is 
all you can say about him, unless you add, what is really the same 
thing in other words, that his faith in God and his idea of worship 
are pure and wise. His course seems for a time troubled wuth 
the frown and judgment of God, for few friends come to his side, 
there is no joy in his lot, his work is hard, and the return of his 
toil is poor. He calls himself a King, and men laugh at him ; 
he says he is the Son of God, and men take up stones to stone 


WORSHIP ABOVE EMPIRE. 313 

him. Is it not, then, quite plain that he lost his chance when he 
said No on the hill, and that he must take the consequences of his 
obstinacy.? A man who would so argue would seem to have a 
good deal of sound sense on his side ; at any rate, he might refer 
to so-called facts with very emphatic confidence. He might al- 
most feel called upon to treat with positive mockery the words of 
Christ, “ Seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, 
and all these things shall be added unto you,” — for more obvious 
irony never provoked the laughter of mankind. And still the 
shadows thicken upon the gloomy scene ; poverty is made poorer 
by loss upon loss ; and further on his oldest friends drop off, and 
the disciple he loves the most instinctively assumes an attitude of 
departure. Plainly enough, this Man who set Worship above 
Empire sacrificed his fortune to his .sentiments, and lost a crc^wii 
to save an idea. If there be anything more on the dark and 
downward way of his ill-luck, it cannot be other than a Cross— -a 
Cross with aggravations too ; and in its agony he will learn that 
violent sentiments have violent ends. So it would seem ! We 
are told that the earth is round ; but there are great crags and pits 
on its rugged surface for all that. We are told that Christ had a 
kingdom, when it is quite certain that he had not so much as a 
home. These are great contradictions, and it is simply in vain 
for us to try to force a reconciliation ; reconciliation can only be 
wrought, if wrought at all, by time, often long and dreary. 

' ‘ The eleven disciples went away into Galilee, into a mountain 
where Jesus had appointed them ; . . . and Jesus came and spake 
unto them, saying. All power is given unto me in heaven and in 
earth.” — And there is nothing of boast or vaunt in the Lord’s 
sweet tone. It is as if the sown wheat had said in golden harvest, 
“ Behold, I have been brought up from the depths of death, and 
my life is an hundredfold more than before.” It is thus, through 
all the ages, that the good man comes to his strength and crown, 
^ — ^through pain and tears, through nights of gloom and day.s of 
toil, and grief that makes the heart grow old, and forsakenness 
that makes a man afraid of his own voice, so weird and so mourn- 
ful is life in its emptiness and silence ! It is a long way, you see, 
and some men die before they get a glimpse of its sunny end. 
How, then, as to the truth of the doctrine that to be right l.s to be 


I 


314 MATTliE W IlKZ, 

rich ? To test that doctrine you must get into the very heart of 
the sufferer himself. He will show you the compensations of a 
righteous life ; he will tell you how sweet is the bread eaten in 
secret, how holy and all-comforting is the approval of a good con- 
science, and how infinite is the independence of the soul whose 
trust is in God. In such a case the poverty is wholly on the out- 
side : the soul is clothed in more than purple and fine linen, and 
is rich with more than gold. Outside, things are rough enough 
lindoubtedly ; the storm does not spare the roof, nor do the rags 
keep away the biting wind, yet somehow the man who is right has 
a quiet and thorough mastery over the circumstances which fret 
and vex the mere surface of his life. The king is within. The 
fountain of his joy is not dependent on the clouds, but on “ the 
rivey of God, which is full of water. ” “ The ungodly are not so, 

but are like the chaff which the wind driveth away.” 

Whilst all this is true, and is sealed as such by the oath of a 
number which no man can number, it is also outwardly true, so 
to speak ; that is to say, goodness rises to its right position in the 
world and takes the throne of supreme and imperishable power. 
In the last result it is goodness that conquers and rules. “ The 
righteous shall flourish like the palm tree, he shall grow like a 
cedar in Lebanon,” “ He shall be as a tree planted by the 
waters, and that spreadeth out her roots by the river, and shall not 
see when heat cometh, but her leaf shall be green. ” ‘ ‘ Say ye to 

the righteous that it shall be well with him : for they shall see the 
fruit of their doings. ’ ’ Now and again life suddenly opens, and 
we see flashes and glimpses of what is coming upon the world. 
In the midst of tumult and blasphemy, so mad that we think there 
is no more chance for goodness, we see such homage paid to right 
as gives hope of its final conviction and universal sway. There 
are conflicts in which character determines the issue. In times 
of panic goodness is relied upon. In affliction and sorrow and 
ruin, it is the good man who is sent for. When the fierce wind 
throws down strong walls, and the whole air is black with cruel 
plague and pest, sparing neither old nor young, neither woman 
nor child, he who prays best is king. So, even in the outer 
world, and in tangible and visible ways, goodness comes to recog- 
nition and honour, in addition to its being accompanied by inward 
and spiritual satisfactions. 



CORRECT PRINCIPLES, 


315 


After this course of thinking we should be able to set down for 
human guidance one or two principles which seem, at least, to. 
reach the point of certainty. Such as : — 

First ; Right ideas of worship will show the exact line of per- 
sonal denial and sacrifice. Be right in heart towards God, and 
you will know what to do in the time of flattering offers and 
splendid opportunities. 

vSecond : It is through iemptaiion that we learn the true value of 
many convictions and habits. From our point of view it may 
seem a small thing to give up worship that we may win kingdoms ; 
it might seem indeed as if we were getting the kingdoms for next 
to nothing. The devil did not reckon so. He aims to get our 
worship, for he who has the heart has all ! 

Third : Self-denial, in the name and strength of God, may be 
a long time in coming to fruition in honour and dominion, — at 
least visibly, as we have just .said. In the case of Christ it took 
nearly three years to die and rise and ripen, but in its ripening it 
filled heaven and earth 1 “If we suffer with Christ we shall also 
reign with him.” 

Fourth: Whatever we have, much or little, of comfort, or 
honour, or influence, let it be as a flower ripened in the sun ; 
something coming up out of a deep true character ; beauty added 
to strength. Woe to the bloom that is artificial ! 

In the long run, then, rve shall get our right position ; our sor- 
rows will become our joys ; our sacrifices will be turned into our 
victories ; and, truly, in a sense impossible to express in words, 
we shall not serve God for nought. To suffer the right spirit is 
our daily difficulty. It is easy to suffer defiantly ; it is almost 
comfortable to suffer ostentatiously ; but to suffer as if we were 
not suffering, even with meekness, quietness, and long patience, 
to enter into the “ fellowship” of Christ’s suffer'ngs, and to work 
out our course just as he did, \vho is sufficient .? Bravado will 
come to nothing. Selfish martyrdom will have no holy resurrec- 
tion. Morbid pride in the neglect and disparagement accorded 
by the public will end in no ble.ssing. Unrepining resignation, 
deep and loving trust in God, earnest diligence in all duty, loyal 
obedience to every sign of our Father’s will, — out of this discipline 
will come sweetest joy^s, honours as the stars for number, and 
peace deep as the calm of heaven. 


JESUS OHHIST’S CLAIM POE. HIMSELF. 

“I proceeded forth and came from God,” — J ohn viii, 42 . 

S HALL I startle you if I say, notwithstanding the multitude 
of books written upon the life of Christ, there is yet not 
only room but necessity for a volume to be written on that unex- 
hausted theme? We have had outward lives of Christ enough, 
perhaps more than enough : lives that tell us about places and 
dates and occurrences ; books of beautiful colouring, high descrip- 
tion of locality and scenery, and the like. All the circumstantial 
occurrences of the life of the Son of God have been given us with 
tedious and painful minuteness and repetition by bookmakers of 
various degrees. What then is this other book we want ? A 
complement, a completion, and an explanation of all other books, 
viz., “ The Inner Life of Jesus Christ, the Son of God.'’ Not a 
life of circumstances, but a life of thoughts, purposes, feelings, 
aspirations, desires ; the inward, spiritual, metaphysical, eternal 
lite of Christ. Can it ever be written ? It will be often attempted 
— it will never be done, for no limited book can exhaust an illimi- 
table subject. 

Until we study this inner life of Christ deeply, all the outward 
life of Christ will be a plague to our. intellect and a mortification 
to our heart : we shall always be coming upon things we cannot 
understand and cannot explain ; not only so, we shall be coming 
upon thing,s that seem to confront the understanding and to defy 
the intelligence of men. But if we gfet into sympathy, with the 
inward spiritual life of Christ, then we shall do what Christ did — 
move out upon these outward and visible things and see them in 
their right relations and colours and proportions. The inward 
always explains the outward ; why should it not be so in this 
greatest case of all ? Come to the outward only, and you will 
have controversy, difficulty, discrepancy, intellectual annoyance, 
moral surprise, and perhaps spiritual disappointment. But begin 


POSSIBLE DECEPriON. 


317 


at the other end — get to know the man's soul, get into sympathy 
with his purpose, see somewhat of the scope and the outlook of 
his mental nature, and then you will take up the miracles as a very 
little thing. 

Let me now give you, roughlj^, some hints of the kind of thing 
that is wanted. Suppose we saw one of the miracles of Christ. 
So far control your mind as actually to realize that you are present 
at what was called, in the days of Christ, the raising of the dead. 
Let us make this as realistic as we can : the dead man is here, the 
living Christ is here, the mourning friends are here — and presently 
the dead man rises and begins to speak to us, and we have seen 
what is called the miracle of resurrection. But now, is it trick or 
miracle you have seen ? Is it an illusion or a fact ? How am I 
to determine this question I cannot determine it in itself. 
"Why Because my eyes have been so often deceived. I have 
seen what I could have declared to have been the most positive 
and absolute facts, and yet when the explanation has been given I 
have been obliged to confess that I was deceived and befooled by 
my own vision. If it has been so in a hundred cases, wh}' not so 
in this ? At all events, there is that suggestion which may be 
pressed upon me until it becomes a temptation, and the temptation 
may be urged upon me so vehemently and persistently as almost 
to shake and destroy my faith. I can declare that I saw a man 
get up — but the conjurer comes to me and saj's, “ I will show 
you something equally deceiving.” I go, and I see his avowed 
trick : it does baffle me and surprise me exceedingly, and if he 
then shall follow up that conquest, and shall say, “It was just the 
same with what you thought the raising of the dead,” he will leave 
me intellectually in a state of self-torment. I shall still think I 
saw the event, but he xvill continue to perplex my vision by a 
thousand tricks, and show me how impossible it is for any man to 
trust his eyesight 

Then what am I to do ? .Leave the outward altogether. Watch 
the man who performed the miracle — listen to him : if his 
thoughts are deep and pure, if his mental triumphs arc equal to 
his physical miracles, then admire and trust and love him. Take 
this same conjurer just referred to. When he is on the stage, and, 
so to speak, in character, he seems to be working miracles : they 
are miracles to me. Therefore, indeed, 1 go to sec them, and 


JOHN VIII. 42, 


have no other reason than to be baflaed and surprised and con- 
founded, and to have my keenest watchfulness returned to me 
without the prize which it coveted. His tricks outrun my vision 
—my eye cannot follow his supple hand. How then ? When he 
comes off the stage and begins to talk on general subjects I begin 
to feel my equality with him rising and asserting itself. On the 
stage I could not touch him — watching his hand I could not follow 
its manipulations at all. But when he comes away from his 
official character and his professional region, and begins to speak 
upon subjects with which I am familiar, I sound the depths of his 
mind, and get the exact measure of his character, and then he 
becomes clever, artful, surprising, delightful — ^biit only a wizard, 
only a conjurer ; wonderful with his wand in his fingers, nothing 
without it. 

So when I go to Christ as a mere stranger, I see him raising the 
dead, opening the eyes of the blind, and I say, “We have seen 
these things attempted before, and very wonderful successes have 
followed the wand of the wizard and the word of the enchanter. 
This man may be but cleverest of the host, prince of princes, 
Beelzebub of the Beelzebubs. I will, therefore, not go further 
into this case ; I have no time to examine this man’s credentials, 
I must be about another and a higher order of business ’ but 
when he begins to talk I am arrested as by unexpected music, I 
say to him, “ Speak on.” His words are equal to his works. 
He is the same off the platform as on it. Not only do I say, ‘ * I 
never saw it on this fashion before;” but I also say, “I never 
heard it on this fashion before, ’ ’ I listen to his thoughts, to his 
purposes, to his desires, and I find that he is as inimitable in his 
thinking as he is in his w'orking and acting. What then } I am 
bound to account for this consistency. All other men have been 
manifest exemplifications of self- inequality. We know clever men 
who are fools, strong men who are weak, eloquent men who 
stammer, men who are great in this direction, small in some 
other, self-contradictions, self-anomalies ; and this w'ant of self- 
consistency and self-coherence is at once a proof of their being 
merely men. But if I find a Man in whom this fact of inequality 
does not exist, wdio is as great in thinking as in working, who says 
that if I could follow him still higher I should find him greater in 
thinking than it is possible for any mere man to be in acting ; 


319 


THE PLACE OF THE MIRACLES. 

then I have to account for that. consistency which I have met 
nowhere else, and to listen to this Man’s explanation of it : “I 
proceeded forth and came from God “lam from above 
that explanation alone vrill cover all the ground which he boldly 
and permanently occupies. 

It will be infinitely interesting 'to study the inner life of Christ ; 
to make ourselves, so far as possible, as familiar with his thoughts 
as we are with his works. And if we do this, we shall come to 
set the same value upon his miracles that he himself did. What 
value did he set upon his miracles for their own sake ? None. 
When did he ever say, ‘ ‘ Behold this mighty triumph of my 
power, ye sons of men Never. "When did he sound a trumpet 
and convoke a mighty host to see the loosing of a dumb tongue, 
and the opening of a blind eye ? Never. When did he ever 
make anything of his miracles other than something merely 
elementary and introductory, and of the nature of example and 
s^vmbol ? Never. How was this ? Because he was so much 
greater within than he was without. If he had performed the 
miracles with his fingers only, he might have been proud of them ; 
but when they fell out of the infinity of his thinking, they were 
mere drops trembling on the bucket : they were as nothing before 
him. We might as well follow some poor breathing of ours and 
say, “ Behold, how wonderful was that sighing in the wind I" 
It is nothing to us, because of the greater life. And these 
miracles are puzzles, enigmas, confounding surprises to people 
who will come to Christ, along the line which begins in the out- 
w^ard, in the visible, in the circumstantial. If ever they can get 
hold of his heart, and speak to him face to face for five minutes, 
they will feel the heaving of his great sympathetic bosom ; the}'- 
w'ill see the miracles as he saw them, then they will appear to be 
very little things, momentary spasms, examples to guide children 
through the grammar of a higher law, mere exemplifications, 
symbols, types of the infinite and the inexpressible. 

It is very remarkable that this Man once said, “ Greater works 
than these shall ye do but I will ask you to find a passage in 
which he ever said, “ Greater thoughts than these shall ye think." 
I cannot find such a passage. You must not forget ihat'm your 
argument about Christ’s divinity, when he piled up his miracles, 
raising the dead, opening the eyes of the blind, feeding the hungry 



3i8 


JOHN VJIl 


have no other reason than to l3e baffled and surprised and con- 
founded, and to have ray keenest watchfulness returned to me 
without the prize which it coveted. His tricks outrun my vision 
— my eye cannot follow his supple hand. How then ? When he 
comes off the stage and begins to talk on general subjects I begin 
to feel my equality with him rising and asserting itself. On the 
stage I could not touch him — watching his hand I could not follow 
its manipulations at all. But when he comes away from his 
official character and his professional region, and begins to speak 
upon subjects with which I am familiar, I sound the depths of his 
mind, and get the exact measure of his character, and then he 
becomes clever, artful, surprising, delightful — ^but only a wizard, 
only a conjurer : wonderful with his wand in his fingers, nothing 
without it. 

So when I go to Christ as a mere stranger, I see him raising the 
dead, opening the eyes of the blind, and I say, ‘ * We have seen 
these things attempted before, and very wonderful successes have 
followed the wand of the wizard and the word of the enchanter. 
This man may be but cleverest of the host, prince of princes, 
Beelzebub of the Beelzebubs. I will, therefore, not go further 
into this case ; I have no time to examine this man’s credentials, 
I must be about another and a higher order of business;” but 
wfflen he begins to talk I am arrested as by unexpected music. I 
say to him, “ Speak on.” His words are equal to his works. 
He is the same off the platform as on it. Not only do I say, ‘ ‘ I 
never saw it on this fashion before;” but I also say, “I never 
heard it on this fashion before. ’ ’ I listen to his thoughts, to his 
purposes, to his desires, and I find that he is as inimitable in his 
thinking as he is in his working and acting. What then ? I am 
bound to account for this consistency. All other men have been 
manifest exemplifications of self- inequality. We know clever men 
who are fools, strong men who are weak, eloquent men who 
stammer, men who are great in this direction, small in some 
other, self-contradictions, self-anomalies ; and this want of self- 
consistency and self-coherence is at once a proof of their being 
merely men. But if I find a Man in whom this fact of inequality 
does not exist, who is as great in thinking as in working, who says 
that if I could follow him still higher I should find him greater in 
thinking than it is possible for any mere man to be in acting ; 


3^9 


THE PLACE OF THE MIRACLES, 

then I have to account for that. consistency which I have met 
nowhere else, and to listen to this Man’s explanation of it ; “I 
proceeded forth and came from God “I am from above 
that explanation alone udll cover all the ground which he boldly 
and permanently occupies. 

It will be infinitely interesting* to study the inner life of Christ ; 
to make ourselves, so far as possible, as familiar with his thoughts 
as we are with his works. And if we do this, we shall come to 
set the same value upon his miracles that he himself did. What 
value did he set upon his miracles for their own sake ? None, 
When did he ever say, “Behold this mighty triumph of my 
power, ye sons of men ?” Never. When did he sound a trumpet 
and convoke a mighty host to see the loosing of a dumb tongue, 
and the opening of a blind eye ? Never, When did he ever 
make anything of his miracles other than something merely 
elementary and introductory, and of the nature of e.xample and 
symbol ? Never. How was this ? Because he was so much 
greater within than he was without. If he had performed the 
miracles with his fingers only, he might have been proud of them ; 
but when they fell out of the infinity of his thinking, they were 
mere drops trembling on the bucket : they were as nothing before 
him. We might as well follow some poor breathing of ours and 
say, “ Behold, how wonderful was that sighing in the wind !*' 
It is nothing to us, because of the greater life. And these 
miracles are puzzles, enigmas., confounding surprises to people 
who will come to Christ, along the line which begins in the out- 
w'ard, in the visible, in the circumstantial. If ever they can get 
hold of his heart, and speak to him face to face for five minutes, 
they will feel the heaving of his. great sympathetic bosom ; they 
will see the miracles as he saw them, then they will appear to be 
very little things, momentar}^ spasms, examples to guide children 
through the grammar of a higher law, mere exemplifications, 
symbols, types of the infinite and the inexpressible. 

It is very remarkable that this Man once said, “ Greater works 
than these shall ye do but I will ask you to find a passage in 
which he ever said,, “ Greater thoughts than these shall ye think.” 
I cannot find such a passage. You must not forget Eiaf in your 
argument about Christ’s divinity, when he piled up his miracles, 
raising the dead, opening , the eyes of the blind, feeding the hungry 



miraculously, unloosing dumb tongues and unstopping deaf cars ; 
when he aggregated them all into one sublime spectacle, he said, 
“ Greater works .than these shall ye do but never did he say, 
“ Greater thoughts than these shall ye think, greater words than 
these shall ye speak, greater purposes than these shall ye con- 
ceive.” There he touched the unsearchable riches of his own 
nature, as in the miracles he pointed to circumstances and to 
events which would receive larger unioldment as the ages went on. 

Now' let us look at this inner life of Christ, from two or three 
points. I watch this Man day bf day, and I am struck with 
wonder at his amazing power, and the question arises, What is 
the impelling sense of his duty ? Why does he do these things ? 
And he answers, frankly, ‘ ‘ Wist ye not that I must be about my 
Father’s business.^” Never did prophet give that explanation 
before. Flis working from his Father’s point of view, in the light 
of his Father’s will ; it is the paternal element that is moving him. 
He has given me that as his key ; I will put it into every lock of 
his life to see whether he has entrusted me with the proper key or 
not. I defy the world to find him wrong as to the use of this key. 
Put it where you like, the lock answers it ; and is no credit to be 
g\-en to a Speaker who, at twelve years of age, took the key from 
off his girdle, put it into the hands of inquirers, and told them to 
go round the whole circle of his life with that key in their hands ? 
He was but a boy when he gave up that key — he was but twelve 
years old — approaching manhood by Jewish reckoning, but merely 
a child in years. Can he keep up the high strain ? Li.sten : 
” My Father worketh hitherto, and I work.” ” I and my Father 
are one.” Can he sustain that high key when he is in trouble ? 
Listen : ” Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me.” 
Can he go higher still.? Listen; “Father, into thy hands I 
commend my spirit.” 0 ye who know the modes of music, tell 
me, is this hanuony? The key-note is, “Father;” away the 
Anthem rolls, high as heaven, deep as hell, tortuous as the paths 
of the forked lightning, and yet with infinite precision it returns 
to its initial note. Give Christ credit for this. He was but a 
Galilean peasant ; give him what honour is due for preserving his 
rhythmic consistency through a course, not rugged only, but most 
tragical and unparalleled. 

Arguingfrom that point, another question suggests itself. If 



CHRIST'S nOMINANI' l-EKLIHG. 


321 


this Man is about his Father’s business, what is his supreme 
feeling ? What answer would you expect to an inquiry like that, 
after the self-explanation which Jesus Christ has given? Is his 
supreme feeling a concern for the diignity of the law ? Is he 
jealous with an infinite jealousy for the righteousness of God? 
Does he come forth from his hiding-place saying, “ I ani jealous 
for the holine^ of my God ; I must vindicate the righteousness of 
the Unseen and Eternal One?J’ No. W’’hat is the dominant 
feeling of this Man Christ Jesus It is named again and again in 
the New Testament. No change ever occurs in the term, and I 
will ask you to say how far it corre.sponds with the first declara- 
tion, “Jesus was moved with compxVSSion. ’ ’ Ye musicians, tell 
me if that be consonant and harmonious? “ Wist ye not that I 
must be about my Father’s business ? Jesus was moved with 
compassion.’’ It was always so ; the word “ compassion” occurs 
in no solitary instance alone, though its occurrence in one instance 
would still have been argument enough. But from beginning to 
end of his life he is moved with compassion. “Jesus, here are 
some thousands of people that have been with thee three days and 
have nothing to eat.” Does he wait for us to say that? No. 
“ But Jesus was moved with compassion when he remembered ” 
that the multitudes were in that condition. Coming out once, 
and looking upon the crowds, “ He was moved with compassion, 
for they were as sheep not having a shepherd,” W’hen he was 
walking after a funeral to the grave, “Jesus wept.” And when 
people came to him they seemed to know this sympathetically, 
for they said, “Jesus, Son of David, have mercy upon us, have 
compassion on us, thou Son of God.” He speaks like a Son, 
and is thus faithful to a Failier s message. 

What explanation does he give of his own miracles ? Once he 
gave us an explanation, as it were, incidentally and unconsciously, 
but we caught the w-ord, and it saved us from unbelief and 
explained all mysteries. How was that long-ailing woman cured ? 
“ Virtue hath gone out of me,” He did not say, “ I have per- 
formed this with my fingers ; this is an act of manipulation which 
no other man ever learned to do ; it was by swiftness and sup- 
pleness and dexterity, and by a mysterious flashing of the fingers 
over certain parts of the affected, body, ” No, but he perceived 
that virtue had gone out of him. No trickster, but a mighty 



322 


JOHN VIILa%. _ 

sympathiser, — no manipulator, but infinite in the exercise and 
processes of his redeeming power. Whatever he did took some 
thing out of him. Behold the difference between the artificial and 
the real. What did our* redemption cost ? The healing of one 
poor sufferer took “ virtue” out of him. What did the redemp 
tion of the world take out of him when he said, My Got ^ m} 
God, why hast thou forsaken me ?” The last pulse gone. s le 
self-consistent still ? Still ! 

And to what are all his triumphs eventually referred? To ns 
Soul Not to his intellectual ability— not to his skill of fingei^ 
not to his physical endurance, but to his Soul—'^rv undefina c 
term, the symbol of an infinite quantity. “ He shall see o tie 
travail of his soul and shall be satisfied.” ou know the meaning 
of the word in some degree. One man paints with paint— 
another paints with his soul. One is a clever mechanic anot ler 
an inborn and indestructible genius. One man speaks vit ns 
teeth and tongue and palate — another speaks with his soul . t ej 
use the same words, but not the same, as Hermon was not t e 
same with the dew off ; as the bush was not the same befoie t e 
fire came into it. You say one man sings artificially, mec am- 
cally, correctly — every tone is right- ; the proper balance, tie 
proper measure, the proper quantity : artificially the exercise is 
beyond criticism, but still the people sit unmoved. Another man 
takes up the same words and the same notes, and the people are 
stirred like Lebanon by a wind, like Bashan when the storm 
roars. How is it ? The one man is artificial, the other is real 
— the one man has learned his lesson, the other man had 
the lesson awakened in him — it was there before, and an angel 
passed by and said, ‘ ‘ It is morning : awake and sing. This 
Christ, this dear Son of God, shall see of the travail of his soul, 
of the outgoing of his blood— he sows the earth with the red seed 
of his blood and he shall see the harvest and be satisfied. He was 
often wearied. with his journeying : w'hen w'as he wearied Avith his 
miracles ? tlis bones were tired : when was his mind enfeebled ? 
The instalments of articulation might be exhausted, but when 
did the word ever come with less than the old emphasis — the fiat 
that made the sun ? 

Let us now ask — What did this man claim for himself P It will 
assist us in our study if we hear from his own lips a distinct state- 


AA' ALMOST REVELATION. 


323 


ment of what he does claim on his own account,. Reading in the 
book of Exodus about the great God, I find that he gave his name 
as “ .1 AM,’* that he amplified that name into, “ I AM THAT I 
AM,” We could make nothing of that name ; it was too remote 
for us • our genius had never been in such high regions, never 
scaled altitudes so perilous. We could therefore but wonder. 
The name sounded grandly ; it had in it all the boom of an in- 
finite mystery, and we were content with it, because the condescen- 
sions which that same God made to this human life of ours were 
so mighty yet so pitiful, so wondrous in their sweep and yet so 
compassionate in their fingerings that we had begun to think, 
though the name was mysterious, the grace was familiar enough. 
A marvellous word was that spoken to Moses — “I AM;” it 
seemed as if it were going io be ^ revelation, but suddenly it 
returned upon itself, came back to its centre, and finished with — • 
“ THAT I AM !” As if the sun were just about to come from 
behind a great cloud, and suddenly, after one dazzling gleam, hide 
itself behind a cloud deiiser still. The fulness of the time had 
not yet come. God’s “hour” was not yet. He had said, “ I 
AM,” but ivhai he was he did not further say. By-and-by more 
will be said. It will be interesting, therefore, to inquire whether 
Jesus Christ connects himself with that mysterious name, ” I AM 
THAT I AM.” If I can trace his talking, his thinking, his 
preaching, so as to find one point in connection between himself 
and that great name, then a new and large argument will take its 
inception, and a new and subtle evidence will be put in that this 
Man was more than man — ^as mysterious as the Name, perhaps as 
gracious. Let us see. 

I cannot read the fife of< Christ without constantly coming upon 
the expression, ” I AM.” Reading it, I say, I have met these 
words before, and w'onder where. My memory bethinks itself, 
and I hasten back into the grey old pages of the ancient time, and 
find that the Lord revealed himself unto Moses as ” I AM THAT 
I AM.” I want to know, therefore, if this great ladder, the top 
of which is in heaven, can by any means find a place upon the 
earth ; can it come down, that I may touch it ? Yes. Jesus adds 
to the ” I AM ” little words, simple earthly words, nursery terms, 
school ideas — brings down the “ I AM” so that we may touch 
Its lower meaning, and hear its earthly messages. It will, then, 


JOHN VIII. 42. 


324 

be most interesting to see how this is done, and to listen to this 
modified music of the Eternal. 

What does Jesus say after the words “ I am f” He says every- 
thing that” human fancy ever conceived concerning strength, and 
beauty, and sympathy, and tenderness, and redemption. He 
absorbs the whole. He leaves nothing for you and me except as 
secondary owners, except as those who derive their status and their 
lustre from himself. Thus, “ I am . . . ihe Vine," What a 
stoop ! Could any but God have taken up that figure .? Think 
it out You have heard it until you have become familiar with it 
— forget your familiarity, think yourself back to the original line, 
and then consider that One has appeared in the human race, who 
says without reservation or qualification of any kind or degree, “ I 
am the Vine.” Thus is the mysterious simplified; thus is the 
abstract turned into the concrete and the inner into the visible, 
the simple, and the approachable. Will he ever say ” I am" 
again? Many a time. Let us hear him. “lam ihe Light. " 
Ah, we know what the light is ; it is here, and there, and every- 
where— takes up no room, yet fills all space ; warms the planets, 
yet does not crush a twig. The “lam” fell upon us like a 
mighty thundering. “lam the Light” came to us like a child’s 
lesson in our mother's nursery. Thus doth he incarnate or 
embody or personify himself — thus doth the ladder rest in the 
mean dust, \vhilst its head is lifted up above the pavilions of the 
stars. 

Will he .say “ I am” any more? Often. How? Listen : 
“lam ihe Door." Dare any but himself have taken upon him 
so mean a figure ? “ Ah,” said he, “ it is not a mean figure if 

you interpret it aright. A door is more than deal. A door is 
more than an arrangement swinging upon hinges. A door is 
Welcome, Hospitality, Approach, Home, Warmth, Honour, Son- 
ship — I am the Door.” Still more ; “ I am the Bread, I am the 
Wafer, I am the Good Shepherd, I am the Way, I am ihe Truth, I 
am ihe Life." When I see how this Man absorbs all beauteous 
figures, all high and tender emblems, I begin to think that there 
is nothing left for us by which to distinguish ourselves figuratively 
and typicall}'. If we take any of these words, they must be taken 
as with his signature upon them, having a first lien and a prior 
claim ; we are but intermediary and temporar}', and altogether 


Wi/srs CLAIM FJiOM MEM. 325 

subordinate in our stewardship and right of status. How any 
man could be a man only, and yet take up these figures, it is 
impossible for me to believe. It is easier for me to say, “My 
Lord and my God,“ than to say, “ Equal with me ; better only 
in the accidents of the case. ' ’ 

Seeing that Christ claims so much for himself, it will be equally 
interesting, and will be the complement of the same subject, to 
start a second inquir}% namely, Whai does he clam from men ? 
He claims everything. Sometimes in mean mood of soul I have 
wondered at his divine voracity. For once, a woman came to him 
who had only one box of spikenard, and he took it all. I was 
amazed — half distressed. I never saw such impoverishment made 
before. He did not say, “ Give me part of it/’ but took it every 
whit, and the Avoman had no more left of that precious nard. 
Could you have done that 1 Would your humaniiy have allowed 
you to do it ? Surely, you would have said, “ Part of it, — just a 
little ; you are so kind as to offer me a donation out of your one 
box of spikenard, let me take a little myself — I must not have it 
all," But this Man, what said he I He said, “ Let her do it — 
I will have it all, substance and fragrance too." And another 
woman — she might have touched his heart as she came along, for 
she was poor and poorly clothed, and had on a widow’ s weeds — I 
expected that he would have said, “ Poor woman, we cannot take 
anything from you." No; she came along, took out her two 
mites, which make one farthing, put them in, and he took them 
both ! Is he man 1 Is that humanity 1 Strange man ; marvel- 
lous exceeding above all other men ; not only did he take them, 
but he said, ‘ ‘ She hath done more than anybody else who came 
up to the treasury : she hath cast in all her living." 

Is he doing the selfsame thing in our own day .? Verily he is ! 
Look at this family, father and mother, with a boy and a girl as 
their sweet children. How many things has that boy been, in his 
father's hopeful dreams ! A lawyer and a judge ; then a clergy- 
man and a bishop ; then a merchant, a politician, a statesman, 
and a prime mini.ster ! But one day the mother says that she feels 
“something is going to happen ;" a vague expression, but full 
of deep and sad meaning to her own soul. She tells her husband 
that “ something is going to happen," and he smiles at the shape- 
less and nameless fear. And what does happen .? A proposal 



326 


JOHN VHI. A2. 


that the boy should become a missionary ! What ! the only son ? 
Yes ! “It cannot be," says the stunned father ; “no, no, it 
must not be." For many an hour there is silence ; ay, for days 
nest to nothing is said, but many a wistful look is exchanged. 
At length the mother says, ‘ ‘ I have been thinking and praying 
about this, and I remember that good Mr. Wesley used to open, 
the Bible to see what answer God sent him to his prayers, and I 
have got my answer to-day. After prayer I. opened the Bible, and 
my eyes could see no other words but these : ‘ Even so, Father, 
for so it seemeth good in thy sight’ He must go.” The father 
is silent A great weight of grief burdens his heart He, too, 
goes to pray — goes a hale man under fifty — comes back in an 
hour an old man, crushed, blanched, withered, and grey, “but 
more than' conqueror, " and he, too, says the child — the one son, 
the heir, the first-born — ^ must go. And Christ takes him ! 
Humanity would have spared him when so many large families 
could have furnished a missionary, but takes him ; the God 
that took the spikenard and the mites. 

It will be curious and interesting now to start a third inquiry to 
this effect : How did the people who were round about, and who were 
not malignantly disposed, tvho constituted the better class of His contem- 
poraries, regard Christ Here is one typical man — a man of 
letters and of local renown, careful and exact in speech, somewhat 
timid in disposition, yet marked by that peculiar timidity which is 
capable of assuming the most startling boldness. Fie climbs his 
way up to Christ, opens the door in the dark, goes up to him, and 
says in an undertone, lest the enemy should hear — “ Rabbi, thou 
art a teacher come from God." Evidence of that kind must not 
go for nothing. Send men of another type of mind to him — men 
of the world, shrewd, keen men. Here are several of them return- 
ing from an interview with the Son of God. T hail them in 
English terms, and say, “ Gentlemen, what say you “ Never 
man spake like this Man.” Add that to the evidence of Nico- 
demus. Here are women coming back from having seen the 
Lord ; tears are in their eyes. What will they say ? Never yet 
did woman speak one word against the Son of God ! Mothers, 
did you see anything to blame? “ Nothing." Women of pure 
soul— sensitive as keenest life— what saw ye? “The Floliness 
of God," Pass him on to a judge — cold, dispassionate, obser- 



The tEachinc reveals the teacher. 


zn 

vant, not easily hoodwinked. What sayest thou, Eomaii judge ? 
“ I find no fault in him." What is that coming to the man now, 
while he is talking.? A message. What saith the message,? It 
is a message from the judge’s tvife. “ Have thou nothing to do 
with this just person, for I have suffered many things this day in a 
dream concerning him." Let him go— nail his right hand, nail 
his left hand, nail his feet, lift high the dreadful tree, crush it into 
the rock, shake every nerve and fibre of his poor body, let him 
writhe in his last agony, and will anybody speak about him then .? 
Yes. The centurion beholding this, accustomed to the sight of 
blood, knowing how men deport themselves in judgment halls and 
in prisons and in the supreme crisis of existence, said — " Truly 
this Man was the Son of God. ’ ’ Observe what he claimed for 
himself — what he claimed from others. Put these testimonies of 
observers one after the other, accumulate them into a complete 
appeal, and then say whether it be not easier to the imagination 
and the heart and the judgment to saj^, " My Lord and my God," 
than to use meaner terms. 

Another question arises : From such a Man what teaching may 
he expected ? Given, a man distinguished by such attributes and 
elements as I have endeavoured simply to indicate, to find out 
what kind or manner of teaching and public ministry we may 
expect from him, I shall first expect exteniporaneousness. He 
cannot want time to make his sermons, or he is not the man he 
claims to be. He is not an essayist. He will not be a literary 
speaker ; there will be a peculiarity, a uniqueness, a personality 
about him not to be found otherwhere. Does he retire to his 
study, that he may write out elaborate sentences full of nothing 
but ink ? Will he come before me as a literary artist, with well- 
poised sentences, beautiful periods, sounding climaxes, leaving the 
impression that he has wasted the midnight oil, and taken infinite 
pains to please those who went to hear him .? There is nothing 
literary about the style of Christ ; it is simple, graphic talk, much 
broken to our minds, occasionally incoherent, rapid in transitions, 
utterly wanting in all elaboration, and the balance prized by men 
who have nothing else tb do than to live by their folly. I shall 
further expect insiantaneousness of reply by Christ Jesus if Pie be 
God. God cannot want time to think what he will say. Does 
this Man ever ask for time ; does he ever adjourn the interview .? 


338 


yOHN VIII. 42. 


He answers immediately, and he answers finally. He never asks 
for time to bethink himself, to refer to the authorities, to consult 
and connote the precedents. He does not say, " You have posed 
me by an unexpected question - I must retire and give this inquiry 
my profoundest consideration.” Never ; and he was but a car- 
penter. He had just thrown the apron from his waist; he was 
hut a peasant. Rabbinical culture he had none, high connection 
disdained the mention of his name, and yet there was an instan- 
tancousness about him to which I can find no parallel but in the 
“ Let there be light, and there was light. ” Give every man credit 
for his ability ; give this Man, carpenter and peasant of Galilee, 
credit for having extorted from his enemies the acknowledgment, 
‘‘ Never man spake like this Man.” 

What do I find in this Man’s teaching.? High allegory, types 
of things unseen, incarnation.s of the spiritual, embodiments of the 
invisible, parables beautiful as pictures, wide as philosophies, 
lasting as essential truth. Strange man— marvellous productions 
of a barren soil. Why, he himself was an incarnation. What 
was his ministry .? An incarnation too. What had he to do with 
the men who heard him, and all succeeding generations ? He 
had to embody, to physicalise and bodily typify the kingdom of 
God ; hence he said, “It is like a grain of mustard seed ; like a 
net cast into the sea ; like treasure hid in a field ; like leaven hid 
in three measures of meal.” “ It is like unto” — when he said 
that, what did he do .? He repeated his own birth. He renewed 
his own incarnation, he was born again in every parable that 
escaped his lips. 'lo embody the bodiless, to typify in allegory 
and figure the infinite and the inexpressible, was the all-culminat- 
ing miracle of this pea.sant of Galilee. Then I ask myself, “ Is it 
consistent with all I have heard about him.?” And I am com- 
pelled to say it is exquisitely in consonance with all we have yet 
seen of His character and studied of His speech. A Man like this 
coming up from unbeginning time must be extemporaneous in 
his speech, instantaneous in his reply, and allegorical and typical 
and symbolical in his method of presenting truth, for he knows 
the essential, and alone can give it beauty and expression, and 
movement and colour. Give him the credit due to his power ! 

Jesus Christ's is the kind of teaching that survives all the 
changes of lime. It is seminal teaching ; it is not like a full- 


THE INCARNATION OF DOCTRINE. 


329 


blown garden, it is like treasures of living seeds and roots, and 
therefore it abides for ever. Where are the grand and stately and 
polished sermons of the great doctors of the Church ? Do you 
know.? I do not. But they were grand, were they not .? Why 
didn’t you keep them then.? But they were stately, inaje.stic, 
complete, cathedral -like, strong in base, e.Kquisite in pinnacle, 
almost fluttering in the delicacy of their architecture ; indeed, why 
didn’t you take better care of them.? Where are they.? Gone 
into a stately past — majestic shadows of a majestic oblivion. 
What lives .? Suggestiveness, what is called incoherence, w’ant of 
finish, want of polish ; the great mighty oak, the everlasting 
Bashan ; not the cabinet makers’ pretty and expensive fabrication. 

Now I will come to the final point, and it shall be of the utmost 
severity in its relation to this argument. The question I put is 
this : Did this Man Christ Jesus live up to his own principles P I 
can imagine persons of a certain kind of mind suggesting that the 
speeches and parables, and conversations generally of Jesus Christ, 
conveyed very high theories, very sublime philosophies of things, 
but were too romantic to be embodied in actual behaviour. The 
question I press upon you is this, so far as the evidence in the 
Book goes, Did this Man Christ Jesus embody his o%vn doctrine ? 
What .said he .? “ Bless them that persecute you. ’ ’ Did he do it .? 

Let one of his disciples answer. “When he was reviled, he 
reviled not again ; w’hen he suffered, he threatened not" What 
said he .? “ Pray for them that despitefully use you and persecute 

you." Did he do it .? One of his historians says that in his last 
agony he -prayed, when he had no hand to stretch out upward to 
his God, “Father, forgive them, for they know not what they 
do." Is this to go for nothing'? Are -we at liberty to dismiss 
this witness and say he does not know of that which he testifies, 
or that which he affirms? Be careful, for if you cannot confer a 
character you have no right to take one away. 

I call you to this living Christ ; I will try to go nearer to him 
than ever I have been before ; I will call for him to come nearer 
to me, and I will press still nearer. He knows me, he speaks to 
me, there is a masonry between us for which you have no word or 
symbol : a grip of the hand he only can give, a symbol that hath 
morning in it, and hope and immortality, secret messages, trans- 
missions in cipher which he makes the devil himself bring. Can 


330 


JOHN VIII, 42. 


I give him up ? Can I sell him for thirty pieces of silver ? Can 
I exchange him for some other master ? Oh, then the sun would 
bring no morning with it, raid day would be but a great black 
cloud, and the summer a mocking promise without an answer. 
To whom, then, could I tell my sin;: to whom could 1 pray my 
prayers ; to whom could I empty my heart in darkness and in 
close and absolute solitude, after I have looked all round the 
horizon to see even if an angel be there to watch the secret inter- 
view ? Nay, I must serve him still, preach him still, and if he say 
tome, “Wilt thou go away?'* I will answer in words I cannot 
amend, “To whom can I go? Thou only hast the words of 
Eternal Life !“ 


PRAYER. 


O THAT this day we might see the Lord and have our whole mind filled 
with his light and joy ' Lord, dost thou ask us what we would have at 
thine hands ? Our answer is, Lord, that we might receive our sight 1 
When men cry unto the Lord in their trouble, thou dost deliver them out 
of their distresses ; in this hope we come now before the Lord, and even 
whilst we speak our hearts feel the burden rising. Sweet is the day of 
the Lord, quiet and tender in its sacred peacefulness, opening into the 
very heavens and showing us the New Jeiusalem as the city in ivhich we 
shall no more be threatened by fear and humbled by weariness. For 
every blessing we offer thee our praise. Thou didst lead us through the 
solitary way, and thou hast spared us from the shadow of death. Our 
souls are thine , our bodies are thy habitation. Thou are mindful of uS 
with great care, and thy banner over us is love. O that we knew how to 
praise thee aright, that our hearts might not suffer pain because of the 
weariness of our worship. Thy judgments are very terrible, but thy 
mercies are greater still. Our life is full of the mercy of the Lord, and 
our days are made bright by his goodness. Lord, let not our feet stray 
from the path of thy will Lord, comfort us, encourage our souls in the 
day of fear, and let our weakness hide itself in thy great power. We lay 
down our own wisdom as ignorance, and run away from our towers as 
from defences that will crush the life that built them, We come to Jesus. 
We stand beside the Saviour We know the power of his blood. Lord, 
help us. Lord, send upon us the blessing of thine infinite pardon. Lord, 
show us the light of thy face. We daily see how great a gift is life ; we 
know it not, we have not seen the divine secret, we feel the pulse beat, 
but we see not the power by which it is moved. We are our own 
mysteries. Life itself is a religion. Life is a continual prayer. How 
weak we are, yet how strong ! We cannot just now bear the full daylight, 
yet we shall pass the sun on our upward way to the glory to come, and bis 
great lustre shall be as a spark vanishing in the ever-enlarging vastness 
of thy universe. When we think thus of thy kingdom our light affliction 
is but for a moment. Thy kingdom, Lord, how great, how bright, how 
strong ! May we one and all have a place in that everlasting house. 
Thy mercy is greater than our prayer, and therefore do we hope even 
where we cannot reason. Send the gospel to our lost ones, and bring our 
wanderers home. Visit our sick chambers and whisper to our sick ones 
the messages of consolation, so that their very weakness may itself 



332 


JOHN VI. 35. 


become a privilege, and their loneliness become the sanctuary within 
which thou wilt meet them. We put our own life into thy keeping. We 
lay aside our own poor help as a temptation, and we accept thy strength 
as our perfect ability. O thou God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
when shall we be wholly swallowed up in thy great love ! When will the 
devil leave us, and none but holy angels be at hand '. How long the 
tempter tarries ! He wears out our strength ; he lures our fancy ; he 
vexes our prayers ; he tortures our very communion with thyself. Jesus 
of the wilderness, Jesus of Calvary, help us or the enemy will prevail. 
He is so strong, so swift, so wise ; yet we can do all things through 
Christ which strengtheneth us, therefore do we pray—Jesus, save us, or 
we perish 1 Amen. 

BREAD AND WATER. 

“ I am the bread ... I am the water.” — ^J ohn vi. 35, etc, 

T he subject is clearly, Bread and Water. You call th/ese 
common things, and my object will be to show that their 
commonness is not a defect, but an excellence ; that their very 
excellence has occasioned their commonness ; and that their com- 
monness corresponds to a common want in the constitution of 
mankind. I will take the simple idea of bread and water, and 
apply it socially m the first place and trace it upward to its highest 
and divinest meaning. 

Let us look in upon the greatest feast ever spread for the refresh- 
ment and delight of kings. All delicacies shall be there that can 
be found in wood and air and sea : the richest wines shall sparkle 
and foam and glow upon the sumptuous board ; and the fragrances 
arising from this luxurious feast shall excite and regale the appetite 
of kungr}' men. Now what have we there ? What is the funda- 
mental idea ? What is the nucleus of the abounding and tempt- 
ing feast ? Surprising as it may seem, the whole thing is but an 
adaptation of bread and water ! It is bread and water decorated ; 
bread and water more or less adulterated ; bread and water sup- 
posed to be at their best as to refinement, and richness, and power 
of gastronomic temptation and satisfaction. And if you could 
follow the sated guests into their privacy you would hear them say, 
in effect, ‘ ‘ All this fine living is well enough now and then, but 
only now and then, after all ; let us have something plain and 
substantial,” in a word, let them have bread and water. What is 



THE CONTINUANCE OF NECESSARIES. ■ 333 

this prodigious art of the high cook ? He is bound, like other 
popular slaves, to produce something fresh ; without novelty he 
sinks into a common baker; a new relish may mean a new for- 
tune ; a new gravy may give him a country house and a footman ; 
a new adaptation of an omelette may enable him to start a shoot- 
ing box, —but it. is bread and water that he works upon ; bread 
and water are the basis of his fortune ; he lives by mystifying the 
public, and mightily laughs at the trick by which he has made 
men think that bread crumbs have some connection with far-off 
spice groves and Ceylon breezes. Offer your guests plain bread 
and water, and they will not often call your way ; but dress up the 
bread and water, torture them, colour them, spice them, and they 
will praise the delicacy and excellence of the viands.. But bread 
and water survive ! These are the things that cannot be shaken. 
Empires of soups and entrees, wines and liqueurs, rise and fall, 
but the steady old friends bread and water remain as the unadorned 
and ever wholesome gifts of God. Ay, poor cook, clever 
trickster, half a creator, under all thy enchantments and wizardries 
there are the plain bread and water ; disguise them, bribe them, 
paint them, and wreathe around them all manner of cunning 
ornamentation, they are but bread and water ; the image and the 
superscription are the cook’s, but the bread and water themselves 
are God’s ! Name the dishes that delighted Babylonian gluttons, 
and rehearse the menu which made the Egyptian gourmands 
smack their sensual lips ; you cannot ; these are forgotten 
delights, paste-boards that perished in the fire ; but bread and 
water come steadily along the ages, over the graves of empires and 
the ashes of royalty, having escaped the tortures of the cruelest 
cooks and shown themselves to be the primary and necessary gifts 
of God. 

Well, the application of this is obvious in higher spheres of life, 
such, for example, as the culture and .satisfaction of the intellect. 
Reading and writing are the bread and water of the mind. Give 
a child the power of reading and writing and let him do the rest 
for himself ; it is worth doing (at least some of it), and let him 
find it out and he will value it the more. Your duty is done in 
giving the reading and the writing, the intellectual bread and 
water. But fine cookery is imitated in fine intelligence and with 
like results in some cases, namely mental indigestion and ill- 


334 


JOHN VI. 35. 


health. Hence, we have imperfect French, caricatured German, 
and murdered music, and the native tongue and the native history 
are passed by as quite secondary if not beneath contempt. It is 
better to chatter French in a way which nobody can understand 
than to speak good plain exact English, is it not .? We must be 
fine at all costs. We must have a few knick-knacks on the 
mantelpiece, even if we have not a bed to sleep on. We must 
be able to say, Parhz-vous Frangaise even if we cannot pay our 
debts. When will people learn to prize bread and water ,? When 
will they see that it is better to know a little well, than to know 
next to nothing about a good deal ? O when ? This is not a 
little matter, it is a matter of great importance, from the fact that 
it is an index of character. I do not laugh at a man whose learn- 
ing ends at the multiplication table, but I may laugh with grim 
amusement at a man who speaks hotel French and then spells 
October with an h. Give your children intellectual bread and 
water without grudging, that is to say, give them a thorough 
grounding in the beginnings and elements of knowledge, and let 
them do the rest for themselves. 

These illustrations prepare the way for the highest truth of all, 
namely, that Jesus Christ is the bread and water without which we 
cannot live. He never says he is a high delicacy, a rare luxury, a 
feast which the rich alone can afford ; he says that he is bread and 
water, he likens himself not to the luxuries but to the necessaries 
of life, and in so doing he shows a Avisdom, a reach of mind, a 
grasp of human nature, Avhich should .save him from the attacks 
of malignant men. An adventurer ' would not have seen in 
metaphors so humble a philosophy so profound. Adventurers 
like big words and glaring figures ; they speak great swelling 
words of vanity ; they search heaven and earth for effective figures ; 
they disdain the sling and the stone. Not so with Jesus Christ ; 
he is Bread, he is Water, he is Light, he is the Door, he is the 
Shepherd, and these words, so simple, stretch their meaning 
around the whole circle of human life, and by their choice alone 
is the supreme wisdom of Jesus Christ abundantly attested. 

Let us go further into this matter by a little detailed inquiry and 
illustration, 

I. Man needs Jesus Christ as a necessity and not as a luxury. 
You may be pleased to have flowers, but you must have bread. 



THINGS ESSENTIAL. 335 

Christ presents himself as exactly fulfilling this analogy. Our 
whole life is based on one or two simple but necessary lines ; we 
must have /bod, we must have shelter, we must have security. But 
into how many glorifications have all these simple necessaries 
passed ! We have just spoken about food. Now look at shelter, 
how styles of architecture have grown out of that idea ! We talk 
of Doric, and Grecian, and Gothic ; of Norman arches and Corin- 
thian capitals ; and indeed we have a long and perplexing nomen- 
clature, all coming out of the fact that man must have a place to 
go into when the weather is rough and when sleep is needed. 
Out of the need of shelter has come the science or art of architect- 
ure ! Is this wrong .? Most certainly not. It is a trait of civil- 
isation. It is a sign of refinement and progress. But let an 
architect of high fancy be called in to build you a house, he gives 
you a fine elevation, a noble porch, a splendid dome ; but in the 
fever of his fancy he has forgotten the foundations, overlooked 
the drainage, omitted the joists, and made no provision for the 
escape of the smoke. How then ? Of what avail is it that there 
is much elaboration of cunning masonry on the front of the 
house ? You could have done without the stone faces above the 
mull ions, but you cannot do without the chimneys and the joists. 
It is exactly after the bearing of this analogy that Jesus Christ has 
often been presented in preaching and in books. He has been 
offered as an ornament merely. He has been preached as the 
most curious and entertaining of all riddles. He has been treated 
as the successor of Plato, or Solon, or Seneca. In this way, 
generally indeed intended to be respectful, the whole purpose of 
his coming into the world has been overlooked. He has not been 
presented as bread and water, or the very first and most indispen- 
sable necessity of life ; he has been treated as a phenomenon ; 
cabineted as a rarity in human history ; labelled as a remarkable 
specimen ; and in this way even some of his admirers have igno- 
rantly betrayed and dishonoured the Lord. Jesus is not a phe- 
nomenon, he is bread : Christ is not a euriositj', he is water. As 
surely as we cannot live without bread we cannot live truly without 
Christ ; if we know not Christ we are not living, our movement is 
a mechanical flutter, our pulse is but the stirring of an animal life. 
It is in this way, then, that Jesus Christ is to be preached. It is 
even so I would preach him now. I would call him the water of 


336 


JOHN VI. 35. 


life ; I would speak of him as the true bread sent down from 
heaven ; I would tell men that it is impossible to live without 
him ; I would say, with heightening passion, with glowing and 
ineffable love, that he only, even the holy Christ of God, can 
satisfy the hunger and the thirst of the soul of man. In this way 
1 claim a distinct vocation as a preacher. I am not one amongst 
many who try to do the world good ; as a Christian preacher, or 
a preacher of Christ, I offer the only thing that can vitally and 
sufficiently touch the world’s condition, and thus the position of 
the Christian preacher is absolutely without similitude or parallel, 
in that the choice he offers is life or death, salvation or ruin, 
heaven or hell. 

2. What has been the effect of omitting to declare Christ simply 
as bread and water.? Leaving the simplicity of Christ w^e have 
elaborated theological sciences, established and promulgated with 
solemn sanctions the most intricate creeds ; we have worked out a 
very high and cunning symbolism ; we Have filled the church with 
incense, with garments of many colours and many significances, 
ceremony after ceremony we have contrived ; we have called 
councils, synods, and congresses ; we have constituted splendid 
hierarchies, with mitres and crooks, and clothing precious with 
gold and glaring with ardent colour. All this have we done, 0 
Son of God, though thou didst call thyself bread and water ! We 
have gathered around thee liturgies and suffrages and gowns and 
bands and surplices and chants and censers and albs and stoles and 
chasubles, though thou didst call thyself Bread and Water ! We 
have drawn a long and often mutinous procession of reverends and 
most reverends and right reverends and very reverends, and doctors 
and deans and eminences and hoHnessesand suffragans and novices 
and licentiates, though thou didst call thyself bread and water ! 
Horrible, indeed, and quite infinite is the contemptibleness of all 
this, and shall I not even say the sin ? Suppose some inquiring 

stranger looking on and asking. What does all this mean .? I 

should answer, not without sharpness and indignation, It means 
that man is a fool, and that he prefers vanity to truth. This is 
not the Saviour. This is not the w^ay to God. This is not the 

door of heaven. This is incubus and rubbish and abomination. 

Christ is bread ; Christ is w'ater ; Christ is the one answer to thy 
difficulties, the one healer of thy yyounds, the one Saviour of thy 



WHAT RATIONAL CRITICISM LEAVES. 337 

soul. Oh, but the curse of this mischief is terrible to contem- 
plate ! Poor souls are left to believe that they can only get to 
Christ by seeing ministers and priests and bishops, by learning 
catechisms, by swallowing dogmas they neither understand nor 
appreciate, and by * listening to the mumbling and muttering of 
certain ecclesiastical^ men in livery. Oh the horribleness ! Oh 
the blasphemy ! Is not the devil laughing the while and filling 
his cruel hand with additional prey ? My friend, man eager to 
know the truth, Christ is bread ; Christ is water ; he is nigh thee ; 
take the pure Bible and read it for thyself, read it in solitude, read 
it with earnest desire to know its living claim upon thyself, and 
thou shalt see the Lord, and feel the Cross, and eat the heavenly 
bread, 

3. Plistory furnishes a most graphic confirmation of these views. 
John Stuart Mill says, “ Let rational criticism take from us what 
it may, it still leaves us the Christ.” Exactly so ; it still leaves 
us the bread and water ! It still leaves us all we want. It takes 
away all human conceits and decorations, and it leaves the living 
bread. It mortifies the theological cook and confectioner, it 
humbles the decorator of tables, but it leaves the living water 1 
Theological revolutions have come and theological revolutions 
have gone ; timid souls have trembled as if the sanctuary had been 
destroyed, but when the noise has passed and the cloud has rolled 
off, behold the bread and water remain, and Welcome is written 
on the tables of the Lord 1 Men cannot get rid of Christ simply 
because they cannot get rid of themselves. Marvellous is it to 
watch how the Lord allows the chaff to blow away, but saves every 
grain of the precious wheat ; and quite marvellous, too, is it to 
see how some nervous people think that the wheat is lost because 
the chaff has been scattered by the wind. The Lord will lose 
nothing. Society revolutionises itself, but society still lives. 
Theologies, eastern and w-estern, w^ear themselves out, but the 
bread and water are still there, incorruptible and unlimited. Do 
we fear the dissolution of the earth because an owl’s nest has 
fallen ? Will the sun not rise to-morrow because a candle has 
been blown out ? Bethink thee, faithless soul, they are but acci- 
dents that change, the essentials abide, 

“ Unhurt amid the war of elements. 

The wreck of matter and the crash of worlds,” 


338 


JOHN VI. 35. 


I fancy we should change our standpoint in viewing all the 
revolutions and disasters that occurred within the limits of Chris- 
tendom. Hitherto we have thought of them as the results of 
intellectual pride or spiritual insubordination. We have mourned 
overmen as fallen creatures because they have risen against the 
systems in which they were reared. But possibly we are wrong. 
It may be Christ himself who is at work. He is the great Re volu- 
tionist. This may be Christ’s own way of clearing off the rubbish 
which has been piled upon his holy name. Christ pulls down 
papacies, and hierarchies and rituals, that he may show that these 
are not needful, that all human contrivances are departures from 
his Divine simplicity, and that he wishes to be known through all 
ages and amongst all men as the Bread and Water of human souls. 
He knows that our temptation is to make more of externals than 
of realities, hence he turns his providence again.st us, hurls down 
our cathedrals and temples and ministers, and says he will be 
known only as Bread and Water, not as a compound of coloured 
and poisonous confection. O the deceitfulness of the human 
heart in this matter of serving Christ ! We tell lies to ourselves 
about it. We talk about e7iriching our sendees, ennobling our 
architecture, educating our ministers, creating universities, found- 
ing endowments, originating retreats of elegant leisure for the 
production of technical literature. Rubbish, all of it ! Christ 
asks nothing of the kind at our hands. He prefers his own Spirit 
to our cuVure. “It is not by might nor by power, but by my 
Spirit,” saith the Lord. “ Bring no more vain oblations ; incense 
is an abomination unto me ; the new moons and sabbaths, the 
calling of assemblies, I cannot away with ; it is iniquity even the 
solemn meeting.” What, then, are we to do.? “Wash j'ou, 
make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from before 
mine eyes ; cease to do evil, learn to do well ; seek judgment, 
relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow.” 
Thus we are driven back to simplicity ; our “ culture” is thrown 
down and dashed to pieces as’ a potter’s vessel, and nothing stands 
but the bread and the water, the first verities, the essential graces, 
of the Lord’s Christ, 

I care not how rich our music, how noble our architecture, how 
imposing our method of worship, if all this be kept strictly in its 
proper place. I love beauty ; I am moved to passion and heroism 



MISCALLED CULTURE. 


339 


by inspiring music ; I would make the Lord’s house glad with 
every expression of love ; but this done, I would write on the 
doorposts, on the roof, and on every panel, the words of Jesus ; 
“ In this place is one greater than the temple/’ I prefer knowl- 
edge to ignorance, but I prefer holiness to either. Culture, when 
not a chattering and fussy prig, may be right noble and even 
majestic ; but nothing is so cold as culture, and nothing so mean, 
when not inflamed and impassioned by the Spirit of Christ. To- 
day the pulpit is in danger of being killed by miscalled culhire. 
Men think that because they have been to college five years they 
ought to be preachers, which is as logical as to say that a man who 
has driven an omnibus five years ought to be able to take a ship 
across the Atlantic. The Lord continually dashes these culture- 
pots to pieces like a potter’ s vessel, by making preachers of his 
own, and clothing them with mysterious but most beneficent 
power. 

We must go back to bread and water Our dainties must be 
given up. Our habits are too luxurious ; we are killing our 
souls with sweet poisons ; we are, by oiir fabrications and 
masonries and fine fancies, exalting ourselves above the Lord ; ao 
I would call myself back to the simplicity of Christ, and find all I 
want in his grace and truth. 


PRAYER. 


Almighty God, we have come up out of the world into the church, a 
holy and chosen place, to make mention of thy goodness, to recall thy 
mercies, to meditate upon thy word and to have our spiritual strength 
renewed. We have also come up to the Cross that we may have our 
sins taken away, not by ministry of man, nor by ceremonial of church, 
but by the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb slain from the founda- 
tion of the world. We bless thee that the Cross is more than our guilt— 
that the blood of Christ abounds where our sin abounded once, and that 
Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Son of Man, the King, is able to destroy 
our sin and to cause it to be remembered no more for ever. We love the 
Saviour — we love him most when our torment is intolerable : it is then 
we see what he really did as the atonement and the propitiation for the 
sins of the world. We love his words— we love the tones of his voice, 
we love the smiling of his gentle face : but oh what words can tell the 
d§pth and passion of our love when we see our sin as it really is, and we 
feel our helplessness, and then behold the outstretched Priest, the dying 
Sacrifice, It is then our hope returns, and then doth our heart glow with 
fire from Heaven. 

We rejoice that we care for thy word and for thy worship : this feeling 
elevates our whole nature, brings up our entire strength to its finest 
energy, and enables us with triumph, with holy scorn, to stand above the 
temptations and the lures of this world and all that is lowest in our own 
life, and to seize the enjoyments and securities of heaven. Thy word 
clears the future— it levels the hill that keeps away from our vision the 
delights and the beauties of the Coming Land. It levels up the deep 
places and overbridges the yawning chasms and gulfs, that we may reach 
towards the heavenly and eternal. Lord,, evermore show us the meaning 
of thy word — may it be to us a word of ever-enlarging significance. We 
can never fully realise all its purpose — its sacredness will be an eternal 
mystery ; still may we be drawn forward by that great, kind, loving word 
to some deeper knowledge and some higher excellence. 

We are tired of ourselves— the world is a weariness to us— its prizes are 
deceits, its delights are mockeries : it draws us forward by many a fasci- 
nation only that.it may sting us with many a disappointment. Behold 
the earth under our feet is hollow as a tomb that is waiting to enclose the 
living. There is nothing true but God : there is nothing lasting but thy 
light— there is nothing sufficient but thy grace. Thou hast placed us in 
this world of beginnings and shadows and alphabets— forbid that we 



PRAVm. 341 


should regard it as the only world ; help us to look upon it as a porch to 
the universe, the opening of the infinite spaces and liberties of thy king- 
dom. And thus seizing the present, we shall hold it with a light hand, 
and reserve our veneration and our loyalty for things eternal and com- 
plete. 

We desire as heads of houses to bless thee : bread has been upon our 
table and our cup has overrun. Thou hast defended our habitations, 
thou hast been merciful to every member of the household ; the master 
and the servant bless thee, the old man and his grandchild thank the 
same God. Receive therefore our homage as heads of houses, members 
of families, fathers, mothers, children, servants — may we unite in singing 
high psalms, may our hearts find an outgoing in the same hallowed sup. 
plication. Wherein we have suffered, help us to see the Lord’s hand in 
it : suffer us not to look upon our disappointments as complete in them- 
selves : may we look upon life as a whole, see the relation of its various 
parts, feel that no one member of it is complete in itself— -may we 
measure all things by the eternal, may we desire the decisions and judg- 
ments of God, and not the conclusions of our own false understanding, 
Help us in all things to resign our life, our will, our work into thy hands, 
thou King of kings, thou Lord of lords. 

Whether our days be few or many we cannot tell — we would not know. 
The Son of Man must come when he pleases, not when we desire ; may 
we be ready for his coming with welcomes, with the entire hospitality and 
bounding delights and desires of our expectant souls, so that he may have 
a full incoming into the habitations of our hearts. We put all our con- 
cerns into thine hands — the letter difficult to answer, the appeal for which 
we have no present response, the sorrow for which we have not yet 
found a balm, the tears that scald us in their running, the life that is 
ebbing away, the business that seems to be receding us notwith- 
standing our patience and industry — we put our whole case into thine 
hands, saying, “ Undertake for us, lead us as thou wilt.” 

Now let us continue thy praise with increasing delight, search into the 
mysteries of thy word as men search in fields In which pearls are hidden, 
in which silver is to be found, — and thus may the morning worship and 
meditation make us strong for the contests and the endurances of the 
coming week. Amen. 

THE PRECIOUS BLOOD OP CHRIST. 

” The precious blood of Christ, ”~i Peter i. ig. 

M y heart's desire, ever since I became a preacher of the 
Holy Word, has been to make known to men that there 
is no salvation but by blood, and not by blood only, but by the 
particular blood named in the text — even the precious blood of 


342 


1 PETER / 19. 


Christ. I am afraid that in these latter days some of us have tried 
to find out some other word to iise instead of this word hhod. 
We shrink from it. A dainty piety has forced upon us a dainty 
vocabulary. As the intensity of our love has gone down, the 
intensity of our speech has gone down along with it We speak 
of the life of Christ and the Icme of Christ, but we too seldom speak 
of the precious blood ot Christ ■ that would seem to our frigid piety 
to be an exaggeration, and our frigid piety is encouraged by our 
deceitful fancy, that tells us that love is a larger term than blood, 
and should always be used instead of it. Beware of the tempta- 
tions of a worldly fancy. If your piety become the creature or the 
plaything of your imagination, you will commit the keeping of 
your soul to the most capricious and the most irresponsible of all 
powers. We need some term that lies away infinitely beyond the 
airy and clqudy region of fancy ; a broad and emphatic word — a 
word that carries its own single and definite meaning so plainly 
that mistake is impossible, and that sacred and inviolable term is 
blood. The world over, that word has but one meaning. Even 
the word love may be tortured into ambiguity by men skilful in 
definition, but the word blood is too simple, too energetic, too 
solemn, to take upon it the faintest gloss of the most reluctant 
expositor. It is blood ; it is precious blood ; it is the blood of 
Christ ; it is the blood that cleanseth from all sin ; and to attemper 
its passion by|he use of supposed equivalents, is to trifle with the 
supreme purpose of God in seeking the salvation of mankind. In 
a case like this, even reverent paraphrase is in danger of becoming 
almost profane. What other word can take the place of the word 
blood d Even love itself is a w'ord with many aliases, or a w^ord 
which admits of many changes and partial substitutes ; it is regard, 
it is affection, it is sympathy, it is forbearance, it is friendship, it is 
but how will you replace the word blood d It stands alone. 
It will not clothe itself in the disguises of various terms. Its 
unquenchable ardour, bums through the snow which you scatter 
upon its summit. No winter can loiter upon those ardent slopes. 
If you mean to tax your fancy for the production of equal terms, 
you must go elsewhere, for the term blood can accept no humilia- 
tion and pander to no disguise, 

I. We are sometimes asked to admit that it cannot be what is 
called real, literal, or merely physical blood. Why should it not 


INNER H'mAiVINGS. 343 

be real blood, the actual blood of the actual body ? Let us take 
care lest our vulgar conceptions deprive us of gracious meanings 
and privileges. It naay be our notion that is at fault, and not the 
Word of God. The reference is unquestionably to the real blood 
of Jesus Christ, “ who his own self bare our sins in his own body 
on the tree.” Who shall say that his bodily blood wns limited, 
and could therefore have but limited application .? Verily herein 
we are straitened, not in Christ, but in ourselves ; yes, even in the 
very imagination which is supposed to create for itself such wide 
liberty ! If the people could find no limit in the handful of bread 
with which Christ satisfied the throng, as the poor woman could 
find no limit to the oil blessed by the prophet, who shall take 
upon him to say that it was a shallow and measurable stream that 
flowed from the heart of Christ .? Did he not work miracles upon 
his own body ? Did he not conceal it ? Did he not cause it to 
pass untouched and unhurt through the angry host upon the hill ? 
Did he not keep it from sinking in the sea .? And can he not 
crown these wvonders by giving us his blood to drink? “How 
can this man give us his blood to drink ?” We never could tell 
Christ did his mighty works, but, praised be his sweet and 
tender name, dear Jesus, Heart of God, he did them, and therein 
is our joy satisfied ! Oh, my brethren, to me the controversy is 
mean which contends that Christ does not give us his flesh to eat 
and his blood to dfink, in the sacred ordinance of the Supper. 
He who maintains the contrary can make the vulgar stare by his 
tricks in the use of words, and can impale on harmless horns the 
argument which he opposes, but he has never plumbed the depths 
of Christ's power, he has never known what alone can appease the 
heart's violence of grief, nor has he entered into the holiest of all, 
wherein the corruptible letter clothes itself vvith the incorruptible 
spirit. When. my heart is stung to death by its own remorse on 
account of sin, when hell is moved from beneath to receive me as 
fit only for its devouring flames, I am in no mood to be satisfied 
with types and symbols ; a real want demands a real remedy, a real 
sinner calls for a real Saviour, and real sin can be met only by real 
blood : in that infinite distress you must not meet me with 
etymologies and verbal dexterities, you must let the tormented 
soul have free access to the precious blood of Christ. I know well 
that the literalist can vex me with truisms, and confound my poor 


3 + 4 - 


i PETER I ig. 


learning by his brilliant ignorance ; he can tauntingly ask me, 
How can this man give you his blood to drink ? and I have nc 
answer in words ; he entangles me in the thicket of his alphabet 
and holds me as his prey, but deep down in the contrite licart, in 
the solemn sanctuaries never defiled by common speech, I know 
that Christ’s word is better than man’s, when he says, “Except 
ve eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have 
no life in you. ’ ’ If you ask me whether a morsel of sacramental 
bread is the actual body of Christ, my senses combine in a unani • 
mous protest against an absurdity so manifest ; but in this holy 
exercise I do not walk by sight, but by faith ; , my senses have slain 
me aforetime, so that I cannot allow them to usurp a function 
they have so disastrously abused ; I will not allow them to speak 
in this sanctuary ; they can but degrade its sacredness ; they 
have been liars from the beginning, and in all heavenly mysteries 
they are liars still, — I will listen only to the voice of the dying, 
mighty, holy, infinite Saviour— “ Whoso eateth my flesh and 
drinketh my blood, hath eternal life ; for my flesh is meat indeed, 
and my blood is drink indeed ; he that eateth my flesh and 
drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me and I in him.” 

By no priestly incantation is common bread transformed into 
the body of Christ. I know nothing of sacerdotal magic! My 
soul resents with horror too solemn to be merely contemptuous 
the suggestion that priestly wizardry is needffil to my participation 
in the blood of Christ. But this is my faith, the faith that brings 
things of heaven near, the faith that consecrates the very dust of 
earth, that if in the burning agony of my contrition, shame, and 
helplessness I put forth a trembling hand, and seize the common 
bread which makes the body live, and eat it for love of Christ, it 
will be to me the very flesh of the Son of God, a real appropriation, 
a holy sacrament, foolishness to the cold low w'orld, but wisdom 
divine and comfort infinite to the hungering and dying heart. I 
will then know, not by some intellectual feat, the deep meaning 
of Christ’s w'ords .' “ This is the bread which cometh down from 
heaven, that a man may eat thereof and not die. I am the living 
bread which cometh down from heaven ; if a man eat of this 
bread he shall live for ever : and the bread that I will give is my 



COM^CIO l/S OF SIN. 


345 

spiritualising power. We are sometimes under the spell of two 
voices, and hardly know to which to yield. The one voice says, 
Spiritualise everything ; clothe the stones of the field with mystic 
meanings ; fill the winds with voices from worlds unknown ; and 
turn the stars into eyes of holy watchers not yet named of man. 
The other voice says, Beware of making the simple mysterious ; 
avoid the attenuation which destroys solid meanings; take the 
very first signification that occurs to the earnest mind, and suspect 
all explanations that are far to seek. These contrary voices make 
themselves distinctly heard in the interpretation of this text : the 
one voice exhorts us to escape the narrowness of a literal meaning, 
and the other exhorts us not to lose the real and the true in some 
vain search for the speculative and the doubtful, A realising faith 
does not make things less, it makes them more vivid, it sets them 
before the eyes with true naturalness, and constrains their hidden 
meaning into bold and noble expression. I would, then, pray to 
have a realising faith when I think of the blood of Christ ; the life- 
blood ; the blood that cleanses from all sin ; the blood of sprink- 
ling ; the blood of atonement ; the blood of the everlasting 
covenant. I w'ould see it as blood. The gros.sness is not in the 
blood, it is in myself. The blood is holy. Is there aught in the 
great universe Ji? holy as the blood of Christ.^ But we cannot 
realise the blood until we have realised the sin. Where there is 
no conviction of sin — conviction amounting to the very anguish 
of the lost in hell — there can be no felt need of so extreme a 
remedy as is offered by the outpouring of the blood of Christ. A 
self-palliating iniquity may be cleansed by water. The light 
dust which bespots the outer garment may be removed by gentle 
means. When a man feels that he has not sinned deeply he is in 
no mood to receive what he considers the tragic appeals of the 
gospel ; they exceed the case ; the}^ destroy themselves by exag- 
geration ; they speak with self-defeating violence. But let another 
kind of action be set up in the heart ; let the man be brought to 
talk thus wdth himself — “ I have sinned until my very soul is 
thrust down into hell ; my sins have clouded out the mercy of 
God, so that I see it no longer ; I have wounded the Almighty, I 
have cut myself off from the fountain of life, I have blown out 
every light that was meant to help me upward, I am undone, lost, 
damned,’' — and then, he needs no painted cross, no typical sacra- 


346 


\ PETER I 


ment, no ceremonial attitude, no priestly enchantment, he can be 
met by nothing but the sacrificial blood, the personal blood, the 
living blood, the precious blood of Christ. 

How far it is possible to sustain in constant experience those 
keen and vivid realisations of the blood of Christ is known to us 
all. Considering the infirmities of the flesh, the deceitfulness of 
the world, the subtle and persistent temptations of the enemy, the 
continual vexations, anxieties, frets, and chafmgs of a life that is 
one daily struggle, it is not too much to say that we could not 
bear the incessant realisation of all that is suggested by the expres- 
sion “ the blood of Christ.” But if this is our weakness, and it 
surely is, what shall we say of the strengthening might that is 
stored up for us in Christ ? We can do all things through Christ 
which strengtheneth us ! For observe, that though the painful 
sacrifice of Christ makes an unendurable strain upon our feelings 
at one period of our spiritual history, it becomes to us the ten- 
defest solace, the richest grace, the sweetest reflection, and the 
serenest rest, as we advance in our holy cour.se. No longer are 
our sensibilities torn by it. No more do we see the wild but 
passing cruelty of man ; the crucifixion becomes an Atonement, 
and then on the divine side we see the pity, the righteousness, 
the wisdom, and the love of God, and then can we say — 

“ For ever here my rest shall be 
Close to his bleeding side, 

This all my hope and all my plea, 

For me the Saviour died.” 

3. The practical effects of realising all that is meant by “ the 
blood of Christ” are most useful. The text ceases to be a mere 
expression, and becomes a most solemn and all-determining fact. 
It becomes indeed the regulative power of our whole life. See, 
for example, how it reduces us to a state of most utter and abject 
help]e.ssness in the matter of self-salvation ! If we could be saved 
b}’' the shedding of blood only, how could we save ourselves If 
Christ had saved us by some lower method, we might have been 
tempted to think that our redemption lay within our own power. 
But when it required the outpouring of every drop of blood that 
was in the fountain of his great heart, either he made a fatal mis- 
take in his method or we make a fatal mistake in supposing that 
we could have redeemed ourselves. Immediately following this 



THE EVER-FLOWING BLOOD, 


3A7 


reflection is the thought that if so much was done for us, what is 
there that we can do in return? “ How much owest thou my 
Lord ?” 

“ Love so amazing, so divine, 

Demands my soul, my life, my all.” 

We are not our own ; we are bought with a price ; therefore w’c 
are to glorify God in our bodies and in our spirits, which are 
God’s. “I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of 
God that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable 
unto God, which is your reasonable service.” My soul, canst 
thou reckon a debt so immense ? Hast thou a pen that can be 
dipped in a sea of ink and a hand that can wield it until the day 
of death, that the sum may be set down in the face of heaven ? 
My tongue refuses the intolerable burden of complete acknowledg- 
ment. My age would wither away before the growing tale was 
well begun. I owe all to Christ, There is nothing mine but my 
hateful sin. He found me ; he loosed my bonds ; he paid my 
debt ; he sounded the depths of all my woe ; he ransomed me 
with blood ! “I will offer to him the sacrifice of thanksgiving, 
and call upon the name of the Lord. ' ’ How poor my best return ! 
How mean my gifts ! How weak my service ! But as he met 
me in the helplessness of my sin, so rvill he meet me in the 
imperfection of my work. He ^frill make it worthy with his own 
merit ; he will complete it by his own might ; he will sanctify it 
by his own holiness. The blood of Christ ! It did not flow on 
one day, it florvs evermore ! My soul, is thine but a geographical 
Calvary; oris it a Golgotha of the spirit, the place where thy 
church is founded and where thy heaven begins ? Have we out- 
lived the efficacy of the blood of Christ, and is the tale of his 
Cross a sound from which all the music has gone for ever ? We 
need the sun to-day as we have ever needed it ; the wind is still 
the breath of health to our dying bodies ; still wc find in the earth 
the bread without which we cannot live ; these are our friends of 
whom we never tire ; can it be that the only thing of which we are 
weary is God’s answer to our soul’s deepest need? Shall we 
keep everything but the blood of Christ ? Shall the Cross go, and 
the sun be left? Verily, as the sun withdrew at sight of that 
Cross and for tlie moment fled away, he would shine never more 
were that sacred tree hewn down by furious Man. The blood of 


348 


I PETER /. 19. 


Christ is the fountain of immortality ! The blood of Christ, — it 
makes the soul’s summer warm and beauteous ! The blood of 
Christ, it binds all heaven, with its many mansions and throngs 
without number, in holy and indissoluble security ! My soul, 
seek no other stream in which to drown thy leprosy. My lips, 
seek no other song with which to charge your music. My hands, 
seek no other task with which to prove your energy, I would be 
swallowed up in Christ, I would be nailed to his Cross. I 
would be baptized with his baptism. I would quail under the 
agony of his pain that I might triumph with him in the glory of 
his resurrection, 0 my Jesus ! My Saviour ! Thine heart did 
burst for me, and all its sacred blood flowed for the cleansing of 
my sin, I need it all. I need it every day, I need it more and 
more, 0 search out the inmost recesses of my poor wild heart, 
and let thy blood remove every stain of evil. 

“ E’er since by faith I saw the stream 
Thy flowing wounds supply, 

Redeeming love has been my theme, 

And shall be till I die.” 

Mighty Saviour ! repeat all thy miracles by taking away the 
• guilt and torment of my' infinite sin ! 



JUDAS ISCARIOT: A STUDY OP CHARACTER. 


I T will help me very greatly in my delicate work of examining 
the character of the betrayer of our Lord, if there be an 
understanding between us, that it is not presumptuously supposed 
on either side that every difficulty can be explained, and that 
perfect unanimity can be secured on every point ; and especially 
if it be further understood that my object is not to set up or defend 
any theory about Judas Iscariot, but solemnly to inquire whether 
his character was so absolutely unlike everything we know of 
human nature as to give us no help in the deeper understanding 
of our own ; or whether there was not even in Judas something 
that, at its very worst, was only an exaggeration of elements 
or forces that may possibly be in every one of us. We abvays 
think of him as a monster ; but w'hat if we ourselves be — at least 
in possibility— as monstrous and as vile ? Let us go carefully 
through his history, and see. My purpose is to cut a path as 
straight as I may be able to go, through the entangled and thorny 
jungle of texts which make up the history of Iscariot, I propose 
to stop here and there on the road, that we may get new views 
and breathe perhaps an uncongenial air ; and though we may 
differ somewhat as to the distance and form of passing objects, 1 
am quite sure that when we get out again into the common high- 
wa)^s w^e shall resume our unanimity, and find it none the le.ss 
entire and cordial because of what we have seen on the unaccus- 
tomed and perilous way. First of all, then, let us try to get a 
clear knowledge of the character of Judas Iscariot, the disciple, 
and apostle, and betrayer, of the Son of God. 

; I. Expository. 

“ Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil ?' ‘ 
(John vi. 70). — Who, then, will say that the men wnth whom 


350 


JOHN VI 70. 


Christ began his new kingdom were more than men, —not bone of 
our bone and flesh of our flesh, but a princely sort, specially 
created and quite away from the common herd in sympathy and 
aim ? He chose twelve men who fairly represented human nature 
in its best and worst aspects, —they represented gentleness, ardour, 
domesticity, enterprise, timidity, courage,— and one of them is a 
devil Not a devil in the sense of being something else than 
human. Judas was a man like the others, but in him there was 
a pre-eminent capacity for plotting and attempting the foulest 
mischief. We are certainly not to understand that our Lord chose 
twelve men who, with one exception, were converted, intelligent, 
sanctified, and perfect ; nor is it by any means certain that our 
Lord chose even the most intellectual and influential men that it 
was possible for him to draw into his service. I do not know that 
we are entitled to regard the. Apostles as in all respects the twelve 
best men of their day ; but I think we may justly look upon them 
as an almost complete representation of all sides of human nature. 
And as such they utterly destroy the theory that they were but a 
coterie, — men of one mean stamp, without individuality, force, 
emphasis, or self-assertion ; padding, not men ; mere shadows of 
a crafty empiric, and not to be counted as men. On the contrary, 
this was a representative discipleship ; we were all in that elect 
band ; the kingdom of God, as declared in Christ Jesus, would 
work upon each according to his own nature, and would reveal 
every man to himself. A very wonderful and instructive thing is 
this, that Jesus Christ did not point out the supremely wicked 
man, but merely said, “ One of you is a devil” Thus a spirit 
of self-suspicion was excited in the whole number, culminating in 
the mournful “ Is it I ?” of the last Supper ; and truly it is better 
for us not to know which is the worst man in the church, — to 
know only that judgment will begin at the house of God, and to 
be wondering whether that judgment will take most effect upon 
ourselves. No man fully knows himself. Jesus Christ would seem 
to be saying to us — At this moment you appear to be a child 
of God : you are reverent, charitable, well-disposed ; you have a 
place in my visible kingdom, — even a prominent place in the 
pulpit, on the platform, at the desk, in the office ; appearances 
are wholly and strongly in your favour, yet, little as you suspect 
it, deep under all these things lies an undiscovered self — a vcio* 



THE SOVEREIGNTY 01 CHOICE. 351 

devil, it may be ; so that evenj|/<?«, now loud in your loyalty and 
zealous beyond all others in pompous diligence, may in the long 
run turn round upon your Lord and thrust a spear into his heart ! 
—Can it be that the foremost sometimes stumble ? Do the strong 
cedars fall? May the very star of the morning drop from the gate 
of heaven? Let the veteran, the leader, the hoary Nestor, the 
soldier valiant beyond all others, say, “ Lord, is it I?” Which 
of us can positively separate himself from Judas Iscariot and 
honestly say — His was a kind of human nature different from 
mine ? I dare not do so. In the betrayer I would have every 
man see a possibility of himself, — himself, it may be, magnified in 
hideous and revolting exaggeration, yet part of the same earth 
heaved, in the case of Judas, into a great hill by fierce heat, but on 
exactly the same plane as the coldest dust that lies miles below its 
elevation. Iscariot’s was a human sin rather than a merely per- 
sonal crime. Individually I did not sin in Eden, but humanly I 
did ; personally I did not covenant for the betrayal of my Lord, 
but morally I did, — I denied him, and betrayed him, and spat 
upon him, and pierced him ; and he loved me and gave himself 
for me ! 

Of course the question will arise. Why did our Lord choose a 
man whom he knew to be a devil ? A hard question ; but there 
is a harder still — Why did Je.sus chooseyou ? Could you ever 
make out t/iat mystery ? Was it because of your respectability ? 
Was it because of the desirableness of j'our companionship ? Was 
it because of the utter absence of all devilishness in your nature ? 
What if Judas did for you what you were only too timid to do for 
yourself ? The incarnation with a view to human redemption is 
the supreme mystery ; in comparison with that, every other diffi- 
culty is as a molehill to a mountain. In your heart of hearts are 
you saying, “ If this man were a prophet, he would know what 
manner of man this Judas is, for he is a sinner ?” O thou self- 
contented Simon, presently the Lord will have .somewhat to .say 
unto thee, and his parable will smite thee like a sword. 

“ The Son of man goeth as it is written of him ; but woe unto 
that man by whom he is betrayed. ", — I think we shall mi.ss the 
true meaning and pathos of this passage if we regard it merely as 
the exclamation of a man who was worsted for the moment by 


353 


MATTHEW XXV/. 24. 


superior strengtli, but who would get the upper hand by-and-bp, 
and then avenge his humiliation. These words might have been 
uttered with tears of the heart— Woe will be the portion of that 
man who betrays me ; yea, woe upon woe, even unto remorse and 
agony and death ; the chief of sinners, he will also be chief of 
sufferers ; when he sees the full meaning of what he has done, he 
will sink under the intolerabte shame, he will give blood for blood, 
and be glad to find solace in death. 

And if our hearts be moved at all to pitifulness in the review of 
this case, may we not find^somewhat of a redeeming feature in the 
capacity for suffering so. deep and terrible .? Shall we be stretch- 
ing the law of mercy unduly if we see in this self- torment a faint 
light on the skirts of an appalling cloud ? I do not find that 
Judas professed or manifested any joy in his grim labour ; there 
is no’ sound of revel or mad hilarity in all the tragic movement ; 
on the contrary, there is a significant absence, so far as we can 
judge from the narrative, of all the excitement needful for nerving 
the mischievous man to wprk out purposes which he knows to be 
wholly evil, All the while, Judas would seem to be under a 
cloud, to be advancing stealthily rather than boisterously ; he was 
no excited Belshazzar whose brain was aflame with excess of wine 
— though he, too, trembled as if the mystic hand were writing 
letters of doom upon the old familiar scenes : so excited is he that 
a word will send him reeling backward to the ground, 'and if he 
do not his work “ quickly" he will become sick with fear and be 
incapable of action ; as it is, he has only bargained to ‘ ‘ kiss’ ’ the 
Victim, not to clutch him with a ruffian’s grasp. Then came 
the intolerable woe ! 

This great law is at work upon our lives to-day. Woe unto the 
unfaithful pastor ; woe unto the negligent steward ; woe unto the 
betrayer of sacred interests; woe unto them that call evil good 
and good evil ; — to all such be woe ; not only the woe of outward 
judgment— Divine and inexorable —but that, if may be, still 
keener, sadder woe of self-contempt and self-damnation. With 
such sorrow no stranger may intermeddle. The lesson to ourselves 
would seem to be this — Do not regard Divine judgment merely 
as measure for measure in relation to your sin, — that is to say, so 
much penalty for so much guilt; it is more than that— it is a 
quickening of the man into holy resentment against himself, an 



HEALTHY PAIN OF CONTRITION. 


arming of the conscience against the whole life, a subjective contro- 
vers}' which will not be lulled into unrighteous peace, but will rage 
wrathfully and implacably until there shall come repentance unto 
life or remorse unto death. Shall I startle you if I say that there 
is a still more terrible state than that of such anguish as Iscariot's ? 
To have worn out the moral sense, to have become incapable of 
pain, to have the conscience seared as with a hot iron, to be “ past 
feeling, ’ ’ —Ikal is the consummation of wickedness. That there 
is judicial and outward infliction of pain an account of sin, is of 
course undoubted; but whilst that outward judgment may 
actually harden the sinner, the bitter woe which comes of a true 
estimate of sin and of genuine contrition for its enormity may 
work out a repentance not to be repented of. If, then, any man 
is suffering the pain of just self-condemnation on account of sin ; 
if any man's conscience is now rising mightily against him and 
threatening to tear him in pieces before the Lord, because of secret 
lapses or unholy betrayals, because of long-sustained hypocrisy or 
self-seeking faithlessness, 1 will not hurriedly seek to ease the 
healthy pain ; the fire will work to his purification, and the Refiner 
will lose nothing of the gold but if any man, how' eminent 
soever in ecclesiastical position, knows that he has betrayed the 
Lord, and conceals under a fair exterior all that Ezekiel saw in the 
chamber of imagery, and is as a brazen wall against every appeal — 
hard, tearless, impenetrable, unresponsive — I do not hesitate to say 
that I would rather be numbered with Judas than with that man. 

“ It had been good for that man if he had not been born.” — 
Then why \vas he born ? is the question, not of impatient igno- 
rance only, but of a certain moral instinct which God never fails to 
respect throughout the whole of His intercourse with mankind, 
and which he will undoubtedly honour in this instance. Take 
the case as it is ordinarily put : Judas, like the rest of us, had no 
control over his owm birth ; he found himself in a world in whose 
formation he had no share ; he was born under circumstances 
which, as to their literal and local bearing, can never be repeated 
in all the ages of time. So far as we can gather from the narrative, 
Jesus spoke to him no word of sympathy, never drew him aside, 
as he drew Peter, to tell him of preventing prayer, but to all 
appearance left him to be the blind and helpless instrument of the 


354 


MATTHEW JCXVI. 2^. 


devil, and then said, ‘ ‘ It had been good for that man if he had 
not been bom/’ This cannot be the full meaning of the words. 
Instantly we repeat the profound inquiry of Abram, ‘ ‘ Shall not 
the Judge of all the earth do right ’ He may, and must, tran- 
scend our understanding ; he will, by the very nature of the case, 
dazzle and confound our imagination by the^ unsuspected riches 
and glory of his many mansions ; but he must not trouble our 
sense of right if he would retain our homage and our love. Per- 
sonally, I can have no share in the piety that can see any man 
condemned under such circumstances as have just been described ; 
it is not enough to tell me that it is some other man and not 
myself who suffers, — a suggestion ineffably mean even if it were 
true ; but it is mi true ; I do suffer : a tremendous strain is put 
upon my sensibilities, and I cannot, without anguish, see any man 
arbitrarily driven into hell. Upon his face, writhing in unutter- 
able torture, is written this appeal, “ Can you see me, bone of your 
bone and flesh of your flesh, thus treated, weighed down, crushed, 
damned, by a power I am utterly unable either to placate or 
resist?” That man may be my own father, my own child, my 
most familiar friend ; and though he be a stranger, of name 
unknown, he has at all events the claim of our common 
humanity upon me. I have purposely put the case in this strong 
way, that I may say with the more emphasis that I see no such 
method of government revealed in the narrative now under con- 
• sideration. If I saw anything like it in any part of the Word of 
God, I should say, ” My understanding is at fault, not God’s jus- 
tice ; from what I know of his method within' the scope of my 
own life, I know and am sure that righteousness and judgment 
are the habitation of his throne, and that his mercy endureth for 
ever.” I see things that are mysterious, incomprehensible, 
baffling ; I come upon scriptures which utterly defy all scholars 
and interpreters ; but this is the confidence that I have — “ the Judge 
of all the earth will do right.” As to the particular expression in 
the text, two things may be said : first, it is well known that the 
Jews were in the habit of saying, “ It had been good for that man 
had he not been born,” — it was a common expression of the day, 
in speaking of transgressors, and did not by any means imply a 
belief in the final destruction or damnation of the person spoken 
of ; and secondly, this passage has again and again exactly expressed 



THE ACCEPTANCE OF INTENTION. 


3SS 


ffur own jfeeling in many crises of our own life : it must be for ever 
true that non-existence is better than sinfulness. When the lie 
was on our lips, when part of the price was laid down as the 
whole, when we dishonoured the vow we made in secret with 
God, when we rolled iniquity under our tongue as a sweet morsel, 
—at time it had been good for us if we had not been born. 
Such, indeed, is the only form of words equal to the gravity of the 
occasion ; — better we say, again and again, not to have been born 
than to have done this ; if this be the end of our being, then has 
our life been a great failure and a mortal pain. I hold that 
these words were spoken not so much of Judas the man as of 
Judas the sinner, and that consequently they apply to all evil-doers 
throughout all generations, and are in reality the most tender and 
pathetic admonition which even Christ could address to the slaves 
of sin. 

We may get some light upon this expression by considering the 
fact that “ it repented the Lord that He had made man.” In 
studying all such passages we must have regard to the order of 
time. St. Paul said, “ If in this life only we have hope, we are 
of all men most miserable — so, if we break off our own life at 
certain points, we shall say the same thing of ourselves ; and if we 
interrupt human history, so that one fact shall not be allowed to 
explain another, it would be easy to find sections which would 
prove alike the disorder and malignity of the Divine government. 
We know what this means in some of the works of our own hands. » 
Thus, for example : You undertook to build a house for the Lord, 
and your heart was full of joy as you saw the sacred walls rising in 
your hopeful dreams ; but when you came to work out your pur- 
pose, you came upon difficulty after difficulty, — promises were 
broken, contracts were trifled with, the very stars in their courses 
seemed to fight against you, and at length, after many disappoint- 
ments and exasperations, you said, “ It repents me ; it gives me 
pain, it grieves me, that I began this house.” Such is the exact 
state of your feeling at that particular moment. But other influ- 
ences were brought to bear upon the situation, resources equal to 
the difficulty were developed, and when the roof covered the walls, 
and the spire shot up into the clouds, you forgot your pains and 
tears in a great satisfaction. You will say that God foresaw all the 
difficulty of rebuilding the living temple of manhood, that the 


JOHN XII 6. 


iS6 

whole case was clearly before him from eternity ; that is, of course 
true ; but the pain of ingratitude is none the less keen because the 
ingratitude itself was foreknown. Take the case of Jesus Christ, 
God manifest in the flesh, as an illustration ; he foresaw all the 
triumphs of his cross — all heaven thronged with innumerable 
multitudes out of every kindred and people and tongue — yet he 
prayed that the cup might pass from him, and he needed an angel 
to help him in the time of his soul’s sorrow. In magnifying God’s 
omniscience we must not overlook God’s love ; nothing, indeed, 
could surprise his foreknowledge, yet it grieved him at the heart 
that he had made man ; and he called upon the heavens to hear, 
and upon the earth to be astonished, because his children had re- 
belled against him 1 

“ This he said, not that he cared for the poor, but because he 
was a thief, and had the bag, and bare what was put therein, ’ ' — 
It is more to the credit of the Apostles themselves that this should 
be regarded as an after-thought than as an undoubted conviction, 
or an established fact, at the time that Judas sat with them at the 
Paschal Supper, or even at the time that he asked why the oint- 
ment was not sold for the benefit of the poor. This is the more 
evident from the fact that the writer indicates Judas as the betrayer, 
whereas at the moment of the test his identity was not established. 
There is no mysterj’ about the insertion of this e.xplanatory sugges- 
tion, for we all know how easy it is after a character has fully 
revealed itself to go back upon its separate acts and account for 
them by their proper motives — motives unknown at the time of 
the action, but plainly proved by subsequent revelations of charac- 
ter. This was probably the case in the instance before us : else 
why did the disciples allow Judas to keep the bag } Why did they 
not humble and exhaust him by an incessant protest against his 
dishonesty.? And why did not our Lord, instead of mildly 
expostulating, say to Judas as he once said to Peter, “ Get thee 
behind me, Satan.?” Here, then, is a great law within whose 
operation we ourselves may be brought,— the law of reading the 
part in the light of the whole, and . of judging the isolated act by 
the standard of the complete character. , Illustrations of the work- 
ing of this law will occur to you instantly. Let a man eventually 
reveal himself as having unworthily filled prominent positions in 



AFTER-EXPLANA TIONS. 


357 


the Church— le.t his character be proved to have been corrupt, and 
then see what light is thrown upon words and deeds which at the 
time were not fully understood. How abundant then will be such 
expressions as these in recounting his utterances : — 

“ He advised prudence and care and very great caution in work- 
ing out Church plans; he counselled concentration; he depre- 
cated romantic schemes ; this he did (as we now can see), not that 
he was a lover of Prudence or a worshipper of Wisdom, but be- 
cause he was a thief, and he feared that bold and noble schemes 
would shame him into reluctant generosity. ” 

“ He urged that the church should be built with the least 
possible decoration or ornament ; he spoke strongly against 
coloured glass and elaborate enrichment : and this he did (as we 
can now see), not that he was devoted to Simplicity or absorbed 
in spiritual aspiration, but because he was a thief, and feared that 
every block of polished marble would increase the sum which his 
respectability would be expected to subscribe. 

“ He denounced all heretical tendencies in the Christian minis- 
try ; he knew heterodoxy afar off ; he never ceased to declare 
himself in favour of wbat he supposed to be the Puritan theology ; 
and this he did, not that in his heart of hearts he cared for the 
conservation of orthodoxy, but because he was a thief, and had a 
felonious intent upon the reputation of independent thinkers whose 
shoe's lachet he was not worthy to unloose." 

All this comes out after a man has revealed himself as Judas 
did. But let me also say that the “ thief " may be dictating our 
speech even when we least suspect it, certainly where there may 
never be such a disclosure as there was in the case of Judas, 
There are conditions under which we hardly know what influence 
it is that colours our judgment and suggests our course, — ma}' it 
not be the “thief” thus underlies our consciousness, and so 
cunningly touches our life as never to excite our suspicion or our 
fear.? We know how subtle are the workings of self-deception, 
and perhaps even the godliest of us would be surprised to know 
exactly the inspiration of some of our most fervent speeches,— 
surprised to find that though the outward orator seemed to be an 
earnest man, the inner and invisible speaker is the “ thief ’’ that 
prompted Judas ! Who, then, can stand before the Lord, or be 


358 


MATTHEW : XXVI. 14, 15. 

easy in the presence of his holy law? ' It is under such inquiries 
that the strongest man quails, and that the swiftest of God’s 
messengers humbly prays, “Enter not into judgment with thy 
servant, O Lord ; for in thy sight shall no flesh living be justified.” 

“ Then one of the twelve, called Judas Iscariot, went unto the 
chief priests, and said unto them. What will ye' give me, and I 
will deliver him unto you ?” (Matt, xxvi, 14, 15). Why should 
there have been any bargaining or why should these have been 
any difflculty about the arrest of Christ ? We must look to an 
earlier verse for the solution. The chief priests, the scribes, and 
the elders, had met for consultation in the palace of the high 
priest, Caiaphas, and the principal question was, not how they 
might take Jesus, but how they might take him “ by subtilty,” 
by craft, deceit, guile, as if they would have secretly murdered 
him if they could, — murdered him in the darkness, and in the 
morning have wiped their mouths as innocent men ! Judas 
would appear to have gone to them secretly, and offered himself as 
one who knew the haunts and times and methods of Christ ; and 
in doing so he showed the weak and vicious side of his nature, 
his covetousness, his greed, his love of money, — and herein his 
guilt seems to culminate in an aggravation infernal and unpardon- 
able. But are we ourselves verily clear in this matter ? Are we 
not every day selling Christ to the highest bidder ? When we 
stifle our convictions lest we should lose a morsel of bread ; when 
we are dumb in the presence of the enemy lest our words should 
be followed by loss of domestic comfort or personal honour ; when 
we soften our speech, or hide the Cross, or join in ungodly 
laughter that we may avoid an ungodly sneer, we are doing our 
own way the very thing which we rightly condemn in the character 
of Judas. 

“ Then Judas which had betrayed him, when he saw that he 
was condemned, repented himself, and brought again the thirty 
pieces of silver to the chief priests and . elders, saying, I have sinned 
in that I have betrayed the innocent blood : and he cast down the 
silver pieces in the temple, and departed, and went and hanged 
himself” (Matt, xxvii. 3-5). Is there not a tone in these words 
with which we are familiar? Is there not, indeed, something of 


359 


SPIRITt/AL jPENETRATJON. 

our own voice in this mournful story? Let us look at it care- 
fully ; — 

“When he jczu,"— that, at least, is familiar ! Not until our 
actions are set a little ofil do •we see all their relations and all their 
meaning ; in their progress -we are too near them to get their full 
effect ; if we take but one step back we shall be affrighted by the 
very actions of which the doing gave us a kind of frenzied joy. 
We make our own ghosts. We shut the eyes of our minds whilst 
we are doing certain things ; and when the last touch is given to 
the deed, we are taught by the bifterness of experience that Temp- 
tation destroys our sight and that Guilt restores it Recall the 
case of Adam and Eve, — “ And the eyes of them both were 
opened !“ Very short and cloudy is the sight of the body : how 
keen, how piercing, is the sight of a self-convicted soul ! Before 
that discerning vision the air is full of eyes, and the clearest of all 
days is dark with menaces and gathering thunders. 

“ When he saw that he was condemned .” — At that moment the 
surprise of Judas himself was supreme and unutterable : evidently 
he did not expect that this catastrophe would supervene ; he may, 
indeed, have said to himself — ^as a man of inventive and daring 
mind would be likely to say — -I am quite sure, from what I have 
seen of his miracles, that he will prove himself more than a match 
for all his enemies ; he has done so before, and he will do it again ; 
they said they would cast him down from the brow of the hill, but 
he went through the midst of them like a beam of light, and when 
they took up stones to stone him, their hands were held fast by 
that strong will of his ; he has provoked them to their face, 
heaped up all their sins before them, taunted and goaded them 
to madness, and yet he' held them in check and played with them 
as he listed : it will be so again • besides, he may just want a plan 
like mine to bring things to a point ; I will put him into the 
hands of these men, then will he shake them off, proclaim his 
kingdom, drive away the spoiler from the land of the Hebrews, 
and we shall come into the enjoyment of our promised reward. — 
Judas may not have used these words, but in effect they are being 
used by sinners every day ! This is the universal tongue of self- 
deception, varying a little, it may be, in the accent, but in sub- 
stance the same all the world over ; a putting of one thing against 


MATTHEW XXVH 3 , 4- 


360 

another, a balancing of probabilities, an exercise of self-outwitting 
cunning ; a secret hope that something can be snatched out of the 
fire, and that the flames can be subdued without undue damage, 
— this is the method of sinfulness of heart, a method confounded 
every day by the hand of God, yet every day coming up again to 
fresh attempts and renewed humiliations. 

“ When he saw that Ije was condemned he repented himself. ’ ' — 
Is there not hope of a man who is capable of any degree of repent- 
ance, even when repentance takes upon itself the darker shade of 
horror and remorse ? I know what the word is w'hich is translated 
“ repented," and I remember with joy that it is the word which is 
used of the son who said he would not go, and afterwards repented 
and went ; it is the word which Paul used of himself on one occa- 
sion in writing to the Corinthians. But even if the word be 
rendered “was filled with remorse and shame and despair," I 
should say, “So much the better for Judas." Under such 
circumstances I should have more hope of a man who had 
absolutely no hope of himself, than of a man who could suffi- 
ciently control himself to think that even such a sin — infinite in 
wickedness as it must have appeared to his own mind — could ever 
be forgiven. It is easy for us who never experienced the agony to 
say what Judas ought to have done : how he ought to have wept 
and prayed and sought forgiveness as we now should seek it, — we 
cannot intermeddle with his sorrow, nor ought we harshly to judge 
the method of his vengeance. 

“ I have sinned in that I have betrayed the innocent blood." — 
Not, “ I was hurried into this by others not, “ Others are as 
much to blame as I am but, “I did it, and I alone." Not, 
“ I have made a mistake ;" not, “ This is a great error on my 
part;" but, “I have sinned," — the very word which he might 
have heard in his Lord’s parable of the Prodigal Son, — the word 
which our Father in heaven delights to hear ! “ If we confess our 

sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, for his mercy 
endureth for ever.’/ “ If thy brother turn again; saying, I repent, 
forgive him Judas repented himself! How often shall I 
forgive him.? Seven times. Seventy times seven !" And shall 
I forgive him the less because his repentance has deepened into 
remorse, and he has lost all hope of himself? Surely the more 
on that very account And if he slay himself because of his sin 



THE SUICIDE OF JUDAS. 


361 

against me ? Then must I think of him with still tenderer pity, 
nor cloud his memory with a single suspicion. And here let me 
say, as to the spiritual application of this matter, I have no faith 
in the moral value of fine-drawn distinctions between repentance 
and despair ; my belief is that until we reach the point of self- 
despair as to our sin against Christ, we can never know the true 
meaning or realize the true joy of repentance. That Judas should 
have slain himself with his own hand is, in my view of the case, 
wholly in his favour. It must have appeared to him, indeed, to 
be the only course open to him ; floods of tears he could never 
set against the blood of an innocent man ; to cry and moan and 
weep bitterly, would be just to aggravate the appalling crime. 
With a stronger light beating on our life than ever Judas was per- 
mitted to enjoy, guarded by all the restraints of Christian civiliza- 
tion, living under the ministry of the Holy Ghost, we are by so 
much unable to sympathize with the intolerable horror which 
destroyed the self-control of the Betrayer of our Lord. So far as I 
can think myself back into the mental condition of Judas, his 
suicide seems to me to be the proper completion of his insufferable 
self-reproach. And yet that self-control was preserved long enough 
to enable Judas Iscariot to utter the most effective and precious 
eulogium ever pronounced upon the character of Jesus Christ. 
How brief, how simple, how complete — “ innocent blood !" If 
the proper interpretatiori of words is to be found, as it undoubtedly 
is, in circumstances, then these two words are fuller in meaning 
and tenderer in pathos than the most laboured encomium could 
possibly be. Consider the life which preceded these words, and 
you will see that they may be amplified thus ; “1 know Jesus 
better than any of you can know him ; you have only seen him in 
public, I have lived with him in private ; I have watched his words 
as words of man were never watched before; I have heard his 
speeches meant for his disciples alone ; I have seen him in poverty, 
Aveariness, and pain of heart ; I have heard his prayers at home ; 
I trusted that it had been he who would have redeemed Israel 
from patriotic servility ; I curse myself, I exonerate him, — his is 
innocent blood !" How glad would the Jews have been if Christ 
had been witnessed against by one of his own disciples ! They 
would have wmlcomed his evidence; no gold could have 
adequately paid for testimony so direct and important ; and Judas 


362 


yOHN XVII 12. 


loved gold. Yet the holy truth came uppermost ; Judas died not 
with a lie in his right hand, but with the word of truth upon his 
lips, and the name of Christ was thus saved from what might have 
been its deepest wound. 

‘ ‘ Those that thou gavest me I have kept, and none of them is 
lost, hut the son of perdition.” — At the first glance these words 
would seem to put the fate of Judas Iscariot beyond all contro- 
versy, yet further consideration may show how mercy may magnify 
itself even in this cloud. Judas is called “ the son of perdition 
true, and Peter himself was called Satan by the same Lord. And 
if Judas was “ the son of perdition,” what does Paul say of all 
mankind ? Does he not say, “ We are by nature the, children of 
wrath, even as others ?” But in this case “ the son of perdition” 
is said to be “lost;” but does the word lost necessarily imply, 
that he was in hell ? “ We have all erred and stra)'ed like lost 

sheep “the Son of man came to seek and to save that which 
was lost/’ and, “there is joy in the presence of the angels of 
God over one sinner that repenteth [Judas repented himself], more 
than over ninety and nine just persons that need no repentance. ” 
It is our joy to believe that wherever repentance is possible, mercy 
is possible ; and it is heaven' to us to know that where sin 
abounded, grace did much more abound. And are we guite sure 
that there is no ray of hope falling upon the repentant and 
remorseful Judas from such words as these ; “ And this is the 
Father’s will which hath sent me, that of all which he hath given 
me [and that he gave him Iscariot is clear from the very passage 
we are now considering] I should lose nothing, but should raise it 
up again at the last daj^” (John vi. 39)? But there is still more 
light to be thrown on this great gloom. Take this pa.ssage (John 
xviii. 8, 9), “Jesus answered, I have told you that I am he : if 
therefore ye seek me, let these go their way ; that the saying 
might be fulfilled which he spake, Of them which thou gavest me 
I have lost none.” Now suppose that the rufiians had answered, 

No, we will not let these go theii way ; we will slay them witli 
the sword at once,”— would it follow that Jesus Christ had lost 
his disciples in the sense of their having been destroyed in un- 
quenchable fire? The suggestion is not to . be entertained fora 
moment, yet this is the very “ saying” which is supposed to deter- 



3^3 


TO HIS OWJI PLACE, 

mine the damnation of Judas! As I read the ^Yhole history, I 
cannot but feel that our Lord was specially wistful that his dis- 
ciples should continue with him throughout his temptation, should 
watch with him, that in some way, hardly to be expressed in 
words, they should help him by the sympathy of their presence^ — 
in this sense he was anxious to ‘ - lose none ' but he did lose the 
one into whom Satan had entered, and he refers to him not so 
much for his own sake as that he may rejoice the more in the 
constancy of those who remained. But the whole reference, as it 
seems to me, is not to the final and eternal state of men in the 
unseen world, but to continuance and steadfastness in relation to 
a given crisis. 

“ This ministry and apostleship from which Judas by transgres- 
sion fell, that he might go to his own place” (Acts i. 25). — One 
reputable scholar has suggested that the words “go to his own 
place” may refer to Matthias, and not to' Judas ; but the sugges- 
tion does not commend itself to my judgment. I think we 
should lose a good deal by accepting this interpretation, I hold 
that this is an instance of exquisite delicacy on the part of Peter ; 
no judgment is pronounced ; the fall is spoken of only as official 
and as involving official results, and the sinner himself is left in 
the hands of God. It is in this spirit that Peter speaks of 
Judas ; — 

“ Owning his weakness, 

His evil behaviour, 

And leaving with meekness 
His sins to his Saviour.” 


II. Practical. 

Such a study as this can hardly fail to be fruitful 'of suggestion 
to the nominal followers of Christ in all ages. What are its lessons 
to ourselves, — to ourselves as Christians, ministers, office-bearers, 
and stewards of heavenly mysteries ? 

1. Our first lesson will be found in the fact that when our Lord 
said to his disciples, “ One of you shall betray me,” every one of 
them began to say “ Is it I Instead of being shocked even to 
indignation, each of the disciples put it to himself as ‘^possibility; 


364 MATTHEW XXVI 

“ It viay be I ; Lord, is it I ?” This is the right spirit in which 
to hold all our privileges. We should regard it as a possMUy that 
the strongest may fail, and even the oldest may betray his trust. 
“ Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall” Do 
you suppose that there was but one betrayal of the Lord once for 
all, and that the infamous crime can never be repeated ” I tell 
you, nay!” There are predictions yet to be realized — “There 
shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in 
damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them — 
“ Lord, is it I ?” It shall surely be more tolerable for Judas 
Iscariot in the day of judgment than for that man I Living in the 
light of Gospel day ; professing to have received the Holy Ghost ; 
ordained as a minister of the Cross ; holding office in the Christian 
Church ; — is it impossible for those who were once enlightened, 
and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of 
the Holy Ghost and have tasted the good word of God, and the 
powers of the world to come, if they shall fall away, to renew them 
again unto repentance ; seeing that they crucify to themselves the 
Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame? “ Lord, is 
it 1 ?” “ In the last days perilous times shall come : men shall 

be TRAiTOKS,” — “Lord, is it I?” Governing our life by this 
self-misgiving spirit, not thinking all men sinful but ourselves, we 
shall be saved from the boastfulness which is practical blasphemy, 
and our energy shall be kept from fanaticism by the chastening 
influence of self doubt. Looking upon all the mighty men who 
have made shipwreck of faith and a good conscience— Adam, 
Saul, Solomon, Judas— let us be careful lest after having preached 
to others w'e ourselves should be cast away. It is true that we 
cannot repeat the literal crime of Judas, but there are greater 
enormities than his ! We can outdo Judas in sin 1 “ Whosoever 

speaketh a word against the Son of man it shall be forgiven him, 
but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost it shall not be for- 
given him, neither in this world nor in the world to come” (Matt, 
xii. 32). We cannot sell the body, but we can grieve the Spirit 1 
There can be no more covenanting over the Lord's bones, but we 
can plunge a keener spear into his heart than that which drew 
forth blood and water from his side ; we cannot nail him to the 
accursed tree, but we can pierce him through with many sorrows, 
Judas died by the vengeance of his own hand ; of how much sorer 



PRACTICAL LESSONS. 365 

punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worth}', who hath 
done despite unto the Spirit of Grace? Judas shall rise in judg- 
ment with this generation, and shall condemn it, because when ho 
saw the error of his ways he repented himself, and made restitution 
of his unholy gains : but we have rolled iniquity under our tongue 
as a sweet morsel, we have held our places in the sanctuary while 
our heart has been the habitation of the enemy ! It will be a fatal 
error on our part if we suppose that human iniquity reached its 
culmination in the sin of Judas, and that after his wickedness all 
other guilt is contemptible in magnitude and trivial in effect, Jesus 
Christ teaches another doctrine ; he points to a higher crime, — 
that higher crime, the sin against the Holy Ghost, he leaves with- 
out specific and curious definition that out of its possibility may 
come a continual fear, and a perpetual discipline. Grieve not 
the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of 
redemption ! 

2. Our second lesson is a caution against mere intellectual 
sagacity in directing the affairs of the Christian kingdom. It is 
admitted on all hands that Judas Iscariot was far ahead of the 
other apostles in many intellectual qualities, yet “ Judas by trans- 
gression fell.” How self-controlled he was, how stealthy was his 
step, how lingering and w'alchful his cunning ! And if Whately 
and De Quincey be right in the suggestion that he merely wanted 
to force the Lord to declare Himself the Prince of princes and 
make Israel glad by despoiling the oppressor, it discovers the 
instinct of statesmanship, and shows how his strategic ambition 
sought to ensnare the Roman fowler in his own net. Judas is 
supposed to have reasoned thus with himself : This Jesus is he 
who will redeem Israel ; the whole twelve of us think so ; yet he 
hesitates, for some reason we cannot understand ; his power is 
astounding, his life is noble ; this will I do, I will bring things 
to a crisis by going to the authorities and making them an offer ; 
I believe they will snatch at my proposition, and when they come 
to work it out he will smite them with his great power, and will 
avenge the insult by establishing his supremacy as King and Lord 
of Israel. — As a matter of fact we know that this kind of reasoning 
has played no small part in the history of the Church. The spirit- 
ual kingdom of Christ has suffered severely at the hands of men 



366 


JOHN vno. 


who have been proud of their own diplomacy and generalship ; 
men fond of elaborating intricate organisations, of playing one 
influence against another, and of making up for the slowness of 
time by dramatic surprises alike of sympathy and collision. It is 
for this reason that I cannot view without alarm the possible misuse 
of congresses, conferences, unions, and councils : these institu- 
tions will only be of real service to the cause of the Cross in 
proportion as spiritual influence is supreme ; — once let political 
sagacity, diplomatic ingenuity, and official adroitness in the man- 
agement of details become unduly valued, and you change the 
centre of gravity, and bring the Church into imminent peril. 
Unquestionably human nature loves dexterity, and will pay high 
prices for all kinds of conjuring, and loudly applaud the hero who 
does apparent impossibilities ; and from this innate love of mere 
cleverness may come betrayals, compromises, and casuistri.es, 
which crucify the Son of God afresh. Judas looked to the end to 
vindicate if not to sanctify the means ; and this is the policy of all 
dexterous managers, the very soul of Jesuitry, and a chosen 
instrument of the devil. I do not pray for a leader, fertile in 
resource, supple and prompt in movement ; my prayer is for a 
man of anotlier stamp, even for an Tnspirer, who, by the ardour 
of his holiness, the keenness of his spiritual insight, and the 
unction of his prayer, shall help us truthward and heavenward ; 
and under his leadership we shall hear no more about secularities 
and temporalities, but every action — the opening of the doors and 
the lighting of the lamps of the sanctuary — shall be done by hands 
which were first outstretched in, prayer. Not the crafty Judas, but 
the loving John will help us best in all our work ; not the man 
inexhaustible in tricks of management, but the man of spiritual 
intelligence and fervour, will deliver us most successfully in the 
time of straits and dangers, Managens, leaders, draughtsmen, 
and pioneers, we shall of course never cease to want, and their 
abilities will always be of high value to every good cause ; yet one 
thing is needful above all others — closeness to the dear Lord, and 
daily continuance in prayer. 



EPILOGUE. 


I.ARGER DEFimTIONS. 

B ecause certain people had given Jesus Christ bread when 
he was hungr}% drink when he was thirsty, and clothing 
when he was naked, and because they had called upon him when 
he was sick, and wsited him when he was in prison, therefore they 
were called to enter into the kingdom prepared for them from the 
foundation of the world. That is one side of the context. And 
because other people had omitted to do the whole of these things, 
they were pronounced accursed, and sent away into everlasting fire, 
prepared for the devil and his angels. That is the other and 
completing aspect of the case. Then the conditions of entering 
into the kingdom prepared for good people frorn the foundation 
of the world are exceedingly simple, and the conditions upon 
which people are rejected from that kingdom, are, apparently, at 
least, most insufficient and inequitable. Because you have given 
a loaf to a beggar, thrown an oiit-w'orn garment upon the shoulders 
of some shivering pauper, and have done both things so carelessly 
as actually to have forgotten that you had ever done them, there- 
fore you may enter the kingdom prepared for you from the 
foundation of the \Yorld, and be happy in the enjoyment of eternal 
life. This, perhaps, you could understand, acknowledging the 
simplicity of the case, and wondering much concerning that sim- 
plicity. But you could not so well and comfortably comprehend 
the other side of the case— namely, that because a man has not 
given a loaf or a garment, therefore he should go aw^ay into outer 
darkness, wffiere there is weeping and gnashing of teeth, and into 
everlasting punishment, a state typified by the worm that dieth not 
and the fire that is not- quenched. If you read that in the news- 
paper, you w^oidd say this is unjust : if any magistrate in England 



368 


MArrHRW XXV. 35-40. 


attempted to do anything of this kind, the whole country would 
rise in moral indignation and rebellion against injustice so mon- 
strous and aggravated. 

Thus we are brought into a very critical condition of mind in 
relation to this text. Nothing can be simpler than the terms : 
there is no long word here within whose tortuous scope men may 
wriggle and make mistakes, and come to false conclusions. This 
part of the Testament might be cut out as an elementary lesson for 
young readers. It becomes, therefore, of supreme importance 
that w'e should really understand this matter, lest some of us 
should be trusting false refuges in relation to the coming of the 
kingdom, and others should be so infinitely distressed by a sense 
of injustice at the very outset as to be utterly discouraged from 
making any attempts at a lofty and noble life. What is to be 
done I You have to do here what you have to do along the whole 
line of the Christian kingdom : if you will do it, you are equal to 
every emergency, triumphant in every controversy, and perfectly 
at rest regarding the equitability and benevolence of the divine rule 
of mankind. What you have to do is to enlarge the terms. 
Observe, I will not have a word changed : I call for expansion of 
meaning, for the natural development of the words, for enlarge- 
ment of definition, and then God’s providence is illuminated and 
commended for its justice and nobleness, and for the very neces- 
sity of those principles which it elevates and enforces and honours 
with final and complete vindication. The Christian faith is to 
take its place amid all the controversies of the times, by changing 
nothing essential, touching nothing vital, but by enlarging its 
terms so as to comprehend all unsuspecting occurrences, all start- 
ling accidents, all varieties of the highest and most urgent thinking 
of the times. 

If you take the word hunger, you naturally limit it to the 
demands of the physical appetite. A child will tell you what 
hunger means : ask your least child who can speak, what do we 
give to people who are hungry, and the child will say “ Bread.” 
That is only the beginning of the definition, and the difficulty I 
have with many persons in the study of this divine kingdom, is 
that having got the alphabet, you cannot get them into the con- 
struction and combination of syllables. They will hang on by 
the mere alphabet, and therefore what is Aeir Christianity ? A 



EPILOGUE. 369 

rattle of letters, not high, resonant, infinite music. Is the child’s 
definition of hunger correct? It is perfectly correct as far as it 
goes- but what is hunger ? Many a man has risen from a king’s 
feast hunger-bitten, with a thirst unquenchable burning in him. 
How so ? Have the viands been insufficient? Nothing of the 
kind ; the startled table groaned under- the load of luxury. Were 
the wines few or poor ? Nay, vintages are poured out through the 
channels of that banquet- room. What was wanting ? Bread for 
a keener hunger, water for an unappeasable thirst. “ Behold the 
days come, saith the Lord, that I will send a famine upon the 
land : not a famine of bread nor a thirst of water, but of hearing 
the word of the Lord.” We have all been amply satisfied with 
our morning repast : there is no man here, probabl}-, with a crav- 
ing hunger within him, w’hich he at all events has not the means 
of appeasing. Yet it is possible that the richest man amongst us, 
the man that has left a table loaded that he might return to a table 
still more laden — it is possible that even such a man may know 
“ the curse of a high spirit, famishing because all earth but sickens 
it.” Now that we are throwing out the meanings thus legiti- 
mately, so as to take in the whole line of human want, we begin to 
enlarge the terms of the trial, so as to meet the terms of the award. 

First then, in reference to the giving of actual bread— bread as 
usually understood. Most unquestionably there is a distinct 
reference to that gift : that is the very basis of the judgment : that 
is the initial and necessary line of the whole movement— for if you 
would not give natural and ordinary bread, you would not give the 
higher necessaries to the hunger and the thirst of mankind. 
Imagine not, therefore, that I am liberating any man from the 
responsibility of giving natural bread to natural hunger ; that must 
be assumed initially, intermedially, and finally — no change or 
modification can be allowed there. If you ask me to justify the 
enlargement of my terms, I justify the enlargement by a reference 
to your own experience and, your owm consci ousness. The word 
hunger is variously used in Holy Scripture, as is the word thirst. 

‘ ‘ Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for 
they shall be filled.” Let us visit this man, sitting on his velvet 
cushion upon his luxurious carpet, with his hand upon a bell 
which, touched, will bring a hundred servants around him, with 



370 


MATTHEW XXV. 35-40. 


pictures, horses, and large estates, and gold hardly to be counted. 
Happy man? Never has one moment’s happiness. Satisfied? 
Burning with an intolerable hunger and thirst. What wants he ? 
You must find that out. He wants one word of love, one assur- 
ance of sympathy, one breath of condolence, one prayer of inter- 
cession— he hungers to know himself.: he says, “ I cannot tell 
what I am, what I feel ; I am tormented, distressed : I feel in my 
heart an aching void." If you would sit down beside that man, 
and break the bread of the Kingdom of Heaven to him, and give 
him to drink of the water of which Christ said, if a man drink he 
shall never thirst again, you would leave that man behind you 
satisfied, delighted, thankful; you would have come within the 
sweep of the infinite meaning of this marvellous passage. To 
satisfy the hunger of men is to be on the way to the approval of 
heaven. 

Let us visit another soul amply supplied with all things material 
and temporal — a man to whom you can do no favour in the ordi- 
nary sense of that terra. He has more than he can eat and drink 
of a physical kind : his house is large enough, his resources are 
more than abundant, they are redundant to the utmost plentiful- 
ness. If you gave him more gold he would not know that you 
had given it to him. What can we do for this man ? Listen to 
him, He is the victim of superstition, of narrow notions, of false 
ideas, of bigoted conceptions, of sectarian sympathies : he is in 
prison, his soul is in bondage. Reveal the truth to him, show 
him how little he has yet seen, teach him how to take up his 
stakes and put them further out, how to lengthen his cords, take 
in more roofage, give him a peep over boundaries that have already 
shut him in — what have you done to that man ? You found him 
in prison, you opened the door and sent him into a wide and 
glorious and incorruptible liberty. We have never been in prison, 
in the ordinary sense of the term, and, therefore, I contend we 
must not have the Kingdom of Heaven shut up within a few terms 
that are necessarily limited : we must find for the limited word an 
illimitable meaning, and thus the Kingdom of Heaven shall over- 
lap the kingdom of earth, and the greater, shall include the less. 

If we make a third call, the case will be still more complete. 
It shall be upon a person who has gone the round of the whole 



EPILOGUE, 


371 


scheme of things in society — a man who has drunk every cup, 
tasted to exhaustion every enjoyment, who has had men-servants 
and women-servanfe, and the delights of the sons of men, and 
musical instruments of all sorts, gardens, and pools of water — who 
has been in the giddy swirl and riot of conventional happiness, 
gone through it all, and set down the drained goblet with a curse. 

“ What are you, sir ?” I say to this man, who has passed the 
whole round of earthly and sensual delights. He says, “lam 
sick, sated, nauseated, poisoned. ’ ’ Will you take again the goblet 
you have set down ? Never. What ails thee ? Sickness — death. 
Ah ! let me speak to thee : there is another world, a faith-world, 
where souls live, where Hope rekindles her lamp, w'here the spirit 
can be satisfied, where ideas are enlarged, and answered by ever- 
completing revelations, a kingdom thou hast never been m, bread 
thou hast never eaten, water thou hast never tasted. The king of 
the fair land sends me to thee, sick one, and dead, and says, 
“ Compel him to come in.“ Wilt come ^ He says, “ Will you 
take me?’' I answer, “I will.” He says, “ I will arise and go 
to my Father, and will say unto him. Father, I have sinned ; there 
IS nothing on thy side to be accounted for, explained or justified, 
the burden is on me and on me alone.” He goes : his sickness 
is forgotten : a new and healthy appetite stirs every faculty of his 
nature. He wus sick and in prison — ^}mu visited him— so you 
have enlarged the number of the guests that throng the house of 
the Saviour. 

I begin now, with these incidents before me, to see that the 
upshot of this, if ever it came to a great Assize, must be very 
solemn ; for this hunger was no passing appetite, this thirst was 
no flake of fire that could be put out with a drop of water, this 
nakedness’ was no exposure of the skin, this sickness was no affec- 
tion of the physical functions.' It was a hunger of the soul, and a 
thirst of the spirit, and a nakedness of the whole nature, and the 
whole head was sick, and the whole heart was faint ; and if you 
can find a man who can answer these necessities and destitutions, 
you will find a man worthy of a kingdom, be it infinite in meas- 
urement, be it lasting as eternity ; you will indeed deserve the 
“ Well done,” which is Heaven. 

The other side of the cas^ i? thus abundantly provided for. 



372 MA TTHE W XXV. 41-46. 

The difficulty of everlasting punishment is now no difficulty at all, 
but a necessity. For what would the case be then — who are they 
that go away .? According to the terms set folth in the Scripture 
before us, as enlarged according to human experience and con- 
sciousness, there arc people wffio have done nothing, answered no 
cry of the spirit, appeased no desire of the soul, healed no affection 
of the conscience, thrown no light of liberty upon the judgment 
of men, neglected every one, answered no prayers, heeded no 
cries, satisfied no wants — my friends, to what can they go ? When 
the solemn answer comes, “To everlasting punishment," the 
conscience says, “Severe, but right." The hunger of the uni- 
verse for uprightness and justice is answered and satisfied in that 
going away. I believe in everlasting punishment. I cannot 
define it, nor will I have any ordinary human definition thrust 
upon me. I only know this, that it must be something fearful 
beyond the imagination of man to conceive. It is not everlasting 
because it continues three hundred centuries rather than three 
hundred days. That is a question of time : everlasting is a 
quality as well as a quantity. Eternal is more than duration, it is 
duration forgotten, duration sunk in an agony or delight. Joy 
has no time, misery has nothing but time. 

How large the field of service is : hunger, thirst, nakedness, 
sickness, imprisonment, destitution of every kind— there is room 
enough in that field for your talent and mine, and the resources 
of the individual and the whole commonwealth. Find yoirr 
corner — work it well. If it be the giving of natural bread, God 
bless you — it is much needed. If it be the giving of ideas, 
God bless you— they are the true bread which cometh down 
from heaven. If it be the giving of symf)athy, God bless you 
— it is wanted, for the sick heart dies of the poisoned confec- 
tions of time. It is just the field Christ himself occupied ; Jesus 
Christ has written his own history in these words : he did noth- 
ing else for three years than what he describes , the righteous as 
having done in these verses — he went about doing good. If 
the people were hungry he said, “Give them to eat." If they 
were thirsty of spirit, feeling the keen, necessities of the heart, he 
sat down upon the mountain and opened his mouth and taught 
thern. If they were deluded, victimized, ensnared by temptations^ 



EPILOGUE. 


373 


traditions, and if they were befooled and misled by incompetent 
teachers, he liberated them from their prison of inadequate per- 
ceptions and perverted ideas and introduced them into the glori- 
ous liberty of the children of God. 

This leads me to say that no man can occupy this field except in 
Christ' s spirit. It is not an inviting held ; no man goes to the 
hospital for a day of recreation, he goes to teach, to heal, to miti- 
gate pain. No man would go to the lunatic asylum for the pur- 
pose of spending a half-holiday. He goes to see if anything can 
be done, if any poor wretch can yet be saved from the outermost, 
—and as he goes in the angels sing “ Glory to God in the highest : 
on earth peace and good will towards men. ’ ’ If you have not 
Christ’s spirit, you soon tire of dealing with the hungry, thirsty, 
naked, sick, imprisoned, miserable. There is nothing in these 
things themselves to fascinate the taste, to engage the affections, 
to conciliate the esteem and fire the energy of the human heart. 
These things are repulsive in themselves ; unless we get the right 
view they will shock us and affright us and repel us, and we shall 
seek health and beauty and plenty and freedom, and call these 
flings our delights. 

So then the case is not so simple as you at first thought it to be. 
It is not the thrusting a loaf into the hands of a beggar and there- 
fore going to Heaven. It is not a sinful life for seventy years, and 
then calling in some poor wretch off the streets and giving him a 
goblet of water, and then saying, ‘ ‘ There now, I am going 
straight up to glory.” I thought it must be deeper than that : I 
felt that that was wrong ; I know it now. What has the Christian 
teacher done this morning— changed a single word t Not one. 
Altered the venue.? Not for a moment. Rewritten the Bible.? 
Not a verse of it. What then ? What eveiy^ Christian expositor 
and every Christian controversialist must do : then he will take the 
spoil from mighty kings : he must enlarge his definitions, thrust 
out his terms to their full signification, and he will find that the 
kingdom of heaven is wide enough to include all science, all poli- 
tics, all hunger, all thirst, all misery, all need— that it is akingdoi? 
of kingdoms, as its Lord is King of kings. 


END or VOL. III. 



