DUKE 

UNIVERSITY 


DIVINITY  SCHOOL 
LIBRARY 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2017  with  funding  from 
Duke  University  Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/worksofrevjohnwe32wesl 


K S 


THE 


W O R 

OF  THE 


Rev.  JOHN  WESLEY,  M.  A. 


Late  Fellow  of  Lincoln-College , Oxford. 


-Volume  XXXII. 


BRISTOL: 

Printed  by  WILLIAM  PINE,  in  JVine-StreaL 
MDCCLXXIV. 


* 


f 


< X 


“’VfHiSr 

[ 3 ■ J 

WS-/3  W-5* 


A N 

E X 

T R 

A 

C 

T 

O F T H 

E 

Rev. 

Mr.  John 

We 

SLE  y’s 

J 0 

U R 

N 

A 

L, 

From  May  27,  1765, 

to 

M A Y 

18, 

1768. 

Number  XIII. 

Monday,  May  27,  176,5, 

T Took  my  leave  of  Londonderry.  Mr.  Knox 
fent  his  fervant  to  condudi  me  to  Sligo,  being 
now  as  affeftionate  as  Mr.  K,  of  Sligo  was  the 

A s fir  ft- 


[ 4 1 

firfl  time  I was  there.  Keeping  a fleady  pace, 
we  rode  fifteen  miles,  fo  called,  in  four  hours 
and  an  half,  and  came  at  noon  to  Ballimafay. 
Here  we  were  fhewn  into  a room,  where  lay  a 
young  man,  brought  near  death  by  a vomiting  of 
blood.  Perhaps  we  were  brought  into  this  room, 
at  this  time,  to  fave  a poor  man’s  life.  As  we 
were  riding  through  the  mountains  in  the  after- 
noon, we  overtook  one  who  was  jull  come  from 
Derry,  and  had  heard  me  preach  all  the  time  I 
was  there,  both  in  the  evening  and  the  morn- 
ing. I talked  plainly  both  to  her  and  her 
hufband,  and  they  exprefTed  all  poffible  thank- 
fulnefs. 

At  five  we  reached  Donnegal,  the  county 
town.  What  a wonderful  fet  of  county  towns  are 
in  this  kingdom!  Donnegal,  and  five  more, 
would  not  altogether  make  up  fuch  a town  as 
Iflingtom,  Some  have  twenty  houfes  in  them, 
Mayo  three,  and  Letrim,  T think,  not  one.  Is  not 
this  owing  in  part  to  the  ficklenefs  of  the  nation, 
who  feldom  like  any  thing  long,  and  fo  are 
continually  feeking  new  habitations,  as  well 
as  new  fafhions,  and  new  tiifles  of  every 
kind  ? 

Tuefday  28.  We  breakfafled  at  Bellifhannon, 
I believe  tie  largefi  and  pleafantefl  town 
in  the  county.  Beyond  it,  a good-natured 
man  overtook  me,  with  whom  I talked  largely 
and  clofely.  Pie  feemed  much  affefted ; if  it 

continues, 


[ 5 ■] 

continues,  well  : if  not,  I am  clear  ol  his 
blood. 

About  twelve  we  flopped  at  a little  houfe.  But 
a cloud  of  fmoke  foon  drove  us  out  of  the  firft 
room,  into  another  where  the  landlord  lay,  with 
a grievoully  bruifed  and  {welled  leg.  I directed 
him  how  to  cure  it,  and  thence  took  occafion  to 
give  him  fome  farther  advice.  Several  eagerly 
lillened  as  well  as  himfelf.  Perhaps  lotne  will  re- 
member it. 

In  the  evening  I took  my  ufual  {land  in  the 
market-houfe  at  Sligo.  But  here  how  was  the 
fcene  changed  ! 1 have  feen  nothing  like  this 
fince  my  entranceinto  the  kingdom.  Such  a total 
want  of  good  fenfe,  of  good  manners,  yea,  of  com- 
mon decency,  was  fhewn  by  notafew  of  the  hear- 
ers! It  is  good  to  vifit  Sligo  after  Londonderry  : 
honour  and  difhonour  balance  each  other.  Have 
we  done  nothing  here  yet  ? Then  it  is  high  time 
to  begin,  and  trv  if  fomething  can  be  done  now.- 
In  the  two  following  days  I fpoke  as  ftiongly  as  I 
could  : and  my  labour  was  not  in  vain.  The 
congregation  increafed  very  confiderably,  and 
appeared  to  be  of  another  fpirit.  They  behaved 
better  the  fecond  night  than  the  firft,  and  far 
better  the  third  night  than  the  fecond.  Many  of 
them,  I believe,  had  a frefh  call  from  God:  and 
at  the  meeting  of  the  fociety  he  was  eminently 
prefent.  So  that  notwithftanding  their  decay,  I 
could  not  but  hope  there  would  be  a blejfing  in 
the  remnant , 

A 3 


I ex- 


[ 6 ] 

I expected  one  to  meet  me  at  Sligo  : but  none 
appearing,  I let  out  alone  at  five  in  the  morning, 
June  x,  purpofing  to  ride  the  new  road  to  Caf- 
tle-barr.  But  on  fecond  thoughts  I rode  firait  on 
to  Foxford.  At  the  entrance  of  the  town  I met 
three  gentlewomen,  one  of  them  turned  and 
cried  out,  “ Is  not  that  Mr.  Wefley  ?”  I thought 
it  odd,  but  rode  on.  At  the  other  end  of  the  town 
a gentleman  met  me,  and  taking  hoid  of  my  bri- 
dle, faid,  “ Sir,  I mult  beg  you  to  turn  back,  and 
dine  with  me  at  the  barracks.  There  is  a lady 
whom  you  know,  and  who  will  be  very  glad  to 
fee  you.”  I went  back,  and  found  one  whom  I 
had  wilhed  to  fee,  more  than  moff  perfons  in  the 
nation,  hut  fcarce  ever  expended'  to  fee  her  more? 

It  was  Mifs  B n of  Sligo.  And  I found 

Mrs.  S n (now  a widow)  juft  the  fame  ami- 
able woman  that-  Mifs  B n was.  I fpent  an 

hour  or  two  in  clofe,  ferious  converfation,  admir- 
ing the  good  providence  of  God  1 So  I could  not 
go  the  new  road,  which  miftes  Foxford,  becaufe 
God  had  work  for  me  to  do  there. 

About  feven  I preached  at  Caflle  barr,  on  The 
excellency  oj  the  knowledge  of  Jcfus  Chrijl.  I found 
another  kind  of  people  here  than  at  Sligo,  and 
was  much  retrefhed  3mong  them.  Sunday  2. 
Moft  of  the  gentry  in  the  town  being  at  the  court- 
houfe  in  the  evening,  my  text  was,  We.  preach 
Chrifl  crucified,  to  the  Jews  a fiumbling-block,  and  to 
the  Greeks foolijhnefs . I know  not  that  ever  I fpake 

more 


more  plain,  though  I fuppofed  many  would  be 
offended.  But  I was  miffaken : high  and  low 
feemed  to  approve.  Some,  I hope,  profited. 

Monday  3.  I rode  to  Newport,  and  preached 
at  one,  to  the  largeft  congregation  1 remember  to 
have  feen  there.  And  on  Tuefday  evening  I took 
a folemn  leave  of  the  congregation  at  Caftle- 
barr. 

Wednefday  5.  At  five  I took  horfe  with  a 
friend  who  undertook  to  bear  me  company  to 
Galway.  We  faced  the  fun  all  the  day ; but 
light  clouds  and  a fmall  breeze  made  the  heat 
tolerable.  After  refting  an  hour  at  Hollymount, 
(where  the  gardens,  water-works,  and  once  lovely 
walks,  fwiftly  running  to  ruin,  give  a ftriking 
proof  that  the  fajhion  of  this  world  pajfeth  away) 
we  rode  on  to  Mr.  Lambert’s  near  Headford,  (a 
plain,  open,  hofpitable  man)  and  thence  to  Gal- 
tvay,  one  of  the  largeft  towns  I have  feen  fince  I 
left  Glafgow.  Our  room  being  fmall,  fome  of 
our  well-meaning  friends  were  earneft  for  my 
preaching  in  the  Exchange.  Becaufe  I would 
not  difoblige  them,  I began  at  feven ; and  was 
buffered  to  go  on  for  a full  quarter  of  an  hour  ! 
The  beafls  of  the  people  (juft  as  I expefted)  then 
roaring  louder  and  louder,  I walked  through 
them  without  any  hindrance  or  affront,  and  re- 
turned quietly  to  my  lodgings.  A large  retinue 
attended  me  to  the  door ; but  it  was  only  to 
gape  and  ftare  : none  taking  the  pains  either 
A 4 to 


[ 8 ] 

to  lift  up  an  hand,  or  to  fay  any  thing  bad  or 
good. 

1 hurfday  6.  I was  brought  on  my  way  by 
Lieutenant  Cook,  who  was  in  all  the  aftions  at 
Fort- William- Henry,  at  Louifbourg,  Quebec, 
Martinico,  and  the  Havannah,  and  gave  a more 
diflinfit  account  of  thofe  eminent  fcenes  of  Pro- 
vidence than  ever  I heard  before.  Although  he 
was  fo  often  in  the  front  of  the  battle,  both  againft 
Indians,  French  and  Spaniards,  and  in  the  hotted: 
fire,  both  advancing  and  retreating,  he  never  re- 
ceived one  wound.  So  true  is  the  odd  faying  of 
King  William,  that  “ every  bullet  has  its  billet.” 
Between  five  and  fix  we  reached  Ennis,  after  a 
warm  day,  which  much  exhaufled  my  flrength. 
But  it  uras  foon  repaired  : and  the  ferious,  well- 
behaved  congregation  (though  many  of  them 
were  people  of  fortune)  mide  amends  for  the 
turbulent  one  at  Galway.  Such  is  the  chequer- 
work  of  life ! 

Friday  7.  I relied  at  Ennis;  and  it  was  well  I 
did  : for  even  in  the  houfe  the  heat  was  fcarce 
fupportable.  Saturday  8.  I rode  to  Limerick,  and 
found  the  preaching-houfe  juft  fimfhed.  I liked 
it  the  befl  of  any  in  the  kingdom,  being  neat, 
yea  elegant,  yet  not  gaudy.  Sunday  9.  In  the 
evening  I preached  at  Mardyke.  The  heat  w'as 
violent,  even  at  fix ; neverthelefs  there  was  a 
numerous  congregation,  both  of  protelfants  and 
pap i its.  Some  of  the  latter  behaved  with  re- 
markable indecency,  talking  and  laughing,  as  at 

a play. 


[ 9 ] 

a play.  I turned  and  reproved  them.  They 
took  it  well,  and  neither  laughed  nor  talked  any 
more. 

In  the  following  week  I fpoke  to  each  mem- 
ber of  the  fociety,  and  had  much  fatisfaftion 
among  them.  Concerning  feveral  of  them,  there 
is  all  reafonable  proof,  that  they  have  given  God 
all  their  heart.  Many  others  are  groaning  after 
full  falvation,  and  all  the  reft  are  free  from  out- 
ward blame.  Why  may  not  every  Chriftian  com- 
munity come  as  far  as  this  ? 

Wednefday  12.  In  the  evening  I preached 
near  Mardyke,  on  a fmooth,  grafly  place,  to,  I 
think,  the  largeft  congregation  which  I ever  faw 
in  Limerick.  A folemn  awe  feemed  to  fit  on 
every  face,  while  1 declared  in  ftrong  words,  He 
died  for  all , that  they  who  live  jhould  not  henceforth 
live  unto  themflves , but  unto  him.  The  next 
day  the  rain  began,  fo  that  all  the  follow- 
ing days  I was  conflrained  to  preach  in  the 
houfe. 

Friday  14.  About  noon  I preached  at  Ballyga- 
rane,  to  the  fmall  remains  of  the  poor  Palatines. 
As  they  could  not  get  food  and  raiment  here, 
with  all  their  diligence  and  frugality,  part  are 
fcattered  up  and  down  the  kingdom,  and  part 
gone  to  America.  I ftand  amazed  ! Have  land- 
lords no  common  fenfe,  (whether  they  have  com- 
mon humanity  or  no)  that  they  will  fuffer  fitch 
tenants  as  thefe  to  be  farved  away  from  them  ? 
In  the  evening  I preached  at  Newmarket,  to  a 
A 5 larger, 


[ *0  ] 


larger  congregation  of  Papifls,  as  well  as  Protef- 
tants,  both  in  the  evening  and  morning,  than  I 
remember  to  have  feen  there  before.  For  the 
prefent,  many  were  full  of  good  refolutions:  and 
Why Jhould  ye  revolt  any  more  ? 

Sunday  16,  was  a fabbath  indeed.  Both  in  the 
morning  and  afternoon,  many  were  filled  with 
confolation.  Few  were  abfent  at  five,  Monday 
17,  when  I chearfully  recommended  them  to  the 
grace  of  God. 

Two  or  three  of  them  were  defirous  to  bear  me 
company,  for  a day’s  journey.  Before  noon  we 
were  met  by  a violent  fhower,  which  drove  us 
into  a little  cabin,  where  were  a company  of 
children,  with  their  mother,  grandmother,  and 
great-grandmother.  They  feemed  much  frighted; 
blit  one  of  our  company,  who  fpoke  Irifh,  foon 
took  away  their  fears.  We  then  fang  an  hymn, 
and  went  to  prayer.  They  gaped  and  flared  abun- 
dantly: and  when  we  went  away,  after  giving 
them  a fmall  piece  of  money,  followed  us  with  a 
thoufand  bleffing?. 

At  feven  I preached  in  the  roarket-houfe  at 
Killfinnan.  Well  nigh  all  the  town,  Irifh,  Eng- 
Lifh,  and  Germans,  Proteflants  and  Papifls,  pre- 
fently  gathered  together.  At  firfl,  mofl  of  the 
papifls  flood  aloof ; and  fo  did  feveral  of  the 
genteeler  people;  but  by  degrees  they  drew  in, 
and  mixed  with  the  congregation.  And  I believe 
all  of  them  felt,  that  God  was  there. 


When 


i 11  i 


When  I went  to  my  lodging,  they  crouded  af- 
ter me,  fo  that  the  houfe  was  quickly  filled. 
I exhorted  and  prayed  again,  till  I found  it 
was  full  time  both  for  them  and  me  to  go  to 
reft. 

* To-day  I received  from  Prudence  Nixon 
herfelf  the  ftrange  account  of  her  late  hufband. 
In  November  laft,  on  a Sunday  evening,  he  was 
uncommonly  fervent  in  prayer,  and  found  fuch 
a delire  as  he  never  had  before,  to  depart , and  to 
be  with  Chrifl.  In  the  night  fhe  awaked,  and 
found  him  quite  ftiff,  and  without  either  fenfe  or 
motion.  Suppofing  him  to  be  either  dying  or 
dead,  fhe  broke  out  into  a vehement  agony  of 
prayer,  and  cried  for  half  an  hour  together, 
“ Lord  Jefus!  Give  me  George!  Take  him  not 
away.”  Soon  after  he  opened  his  eyes,  and  faid 
earneftly,  “ You  had  better  have  let  me  go.” 
Prefently  he  was  raving  mad,  and  began  to  curfe 
and  blafpheme  in  the  mofl  horrid  manner.  Tins' 
he  continued  to  do  for  feveral  days,  appearing  to 
be  under  the  full  power  of  an  unclean  fpirit.  At 
the  latter  end  of  the  week,  fhe  cried  out,  “ Lord, 
I am  willing!  I am  willing  he  fhould  go  to  thee.” 
Quickly  his  underftanding  returned,  and  he  again 
rejoiced  with  joy  unfpeakable.  He  tenderly 
thanked  her  for  giving  him  up  to  God,  kiffed 
her,  lay  down  and  died. 

Tuefday  18.  The  town  feemed  to  be  all  alive 
a little  after  four  o’clock.  So  finding  the  congre~ 
A 6 gation 


[ 12  j 

gation  ready,  I began  a little  before  five.  A cry 
foon  arofe  of  young  and  old,  on  the  right  hand 
and  on  the  left.  But  in  many,  it  was  not  fo  much 
the  voice  of  forrow,  as  of  joy  and  triumph.  A 
fair  beginning  this  ! But  who  can  tell  what  the 
end  will  be  ? 

About  nine  we  rode  through  Doneraile,  one  of 
the  pleafanteft  towns  in  the  kingdom.  But  a 
man  came  galloping  after  us,  and  faid,  “ All  the 
town  begs  you  will  Hop,  and  give  them  a fermon.” 

I turned  back,  and  took  my  fland  in  the  main 
flreet.  Men,  women  and  children  flocked  from 
all  fides.  There  was  no  dilturbance  of  any  kind, 
while  I declared  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jefus 
Chrif.  Fair  bioffoms  again!  And  who  knows 
but  fome  of  thefe  may  bring  forth  fruit  unto  per- 
feflion  ? 

In  the  evening  I came  to  Cork,  and  at  feven 
was  furprized  at  the  unufual  largenefs  of  the 
congregation.  I had  often  been  grieved  at  the 
fmalinefs  of  the  congregation  here;  and  it  could 
be  no  other,  while  we  cooped  ourfelves  up  in  the 
houfe.  But  now  the  alarm  is  founded  abroad, 
people  flock  from  all  quarters.  So  plain  it  is, 
that  field-preaching  is  the  mofl  effeflual  way  of 
overturning  Satan's  kingdom. 

Thuifday  20.  At  feven  in  the  evening  I flood 
in  a vacant  place  near  Blackpool,  famous  from 
time  immemorial  for  all  manner  of  wdckednefs, 
for  riot  in  particular,  and  cried  aloud,  Why  will 
ye  die,  0 houfe  of  lfraell  Abundance  of  papifls 

gathered 


[ i3  ] 

gathered  at  a diftance  ; but  they  drew  nearer 
and  nearer,  till  nine  parts  in  ten  mingled  with 
the  congregation,  and  were  all  attention.  Sure- 
ly this  is  the  way  to  fpread  religion  : to  publifh 
it  in  the  face  of  the  fun. 

Frid.  21.  I rode  over  to  Bandon,  and  preach- 
ed at  feven  in  the  main  ftreet.  The  congrega- 
tion was  exceeding  large:  fo  it  was,  in  propor- 
tion, at  five  in  the  morning.  Sunday  23.  I 
preached  at  eight  near  the-  upper  market-houfe. 
Till  now  I did  not  obferve  that  all  I could  fay, 
made  any  imprefTion  upon  the  hearers.  But  the 
power  of  God  was  now  eminently  prefent : and 
all  feemed  to  be  fenfible  of  it.  About  five  I be- 
gan in  George’s- ftreet  at  Cork,  the  oppofite  cor- 
ner of  the  town  from  the  new  room.  Many  of 
the  chief  of  the  city  were  of  the  audience,  cler- 
gy as  well  as  laity.  And  all  but  two  or  three, 
were  not  only  quiet,  but  ferious  and  deeply  at- 
tentive. What  a change  ! Formerly  we  could 
not  walk  through  this  ftreet,  but  at  the  peril  of 
our  lives. 

Monday  and  Tuefday,  I fpoke,  one  by  one, 
to  the  members  of  the  fociety.  They  are  now 
two  hundred  and  ninety-five,  fifty  or  fixty  more 
than  they  have  been  for  fome  years.  This  is 
owing,  partly  to  the  preaching  abroad,  partly  to 
the  meetings  for  prayer  in  feveral  parts  of  the 
city.  Thefe  have  been  the  means  of  awaken- 
ing many  grofs  finners,  of  recovering  many  back- 

fliders. 


[ *4  ] 

Aiders,  of  confirming  many  that  were  weak  and 
wavering,  and  bringing  many  of  all  forts  to  ^the 
public  preaching.  Ac  ieven  I went  once  more 
to  Blackpool,  where  the  congregation  was  far 
larger  than  before.  Abundance  of  papifts  ftole 
in  among  them,  a very  few  {landing  aloof.  O 
what  a day  of  God’s  power  is  this ! May  he  fulfil 
in  us  all  his  good  pleafure  ! 

Friday  28.  After  giving  our  brethren  a folemn 
caution,  not  to  love  the  world , nor  the  things  of 
the  world , I left  them  with  more  fatisfadlion  than 
ever,  as  there  is  reafon  to  hope,  that  they  will 
be  toft  to  and  fro  no  more,  but  fleadily  adorn 
the  doftrine  of  God  our  Saviour. 

About  feven  in  the  evening,  I began  in  the 
Exchange  atYoughal.  Four  or  five  noify  men  dif- 
turbed  thofe  that  were  near  them,  till  I reprov- 
ed them  fharply.  The  whole  congregation  then 
behaved  with  the  utmoft  decency. 

Saturday  29.  I preached  at  five  in  a room, 
that  would  contain  four  or  five  hundred  people. 
But  the  word  does  not  yet  fink  into  their  hearts: 
many  are  pleafed  : but  few  convinced.  In  the 
evening  I went  to  the  exchange  again.  The  con- 
gregation was  almoft  doubled,  whom  I exhorted 
to  ajk  for  the  old  path,  the  good  way,  and  to  walk 
therein.  Aftewards  I met  the  infant  fociety  con- 
fiding of  nineteen  members  : all  of  whom  are 
full  of  good  defires  and  fome  know  in  whom 
they  have  believed. 

Sunday  30.  At  eight  the  congregation  was 

both 


C >5  ] 

both  larger  and  more  affefted  than  ever.  I was 
glad  to  fee  a large  and  tolerably  ferious  congrega- 
tion in  the  church.  It  was  once  a fpacious  build- 
ing : but  more  than  half  of  it  now  (a  common 
thing  in  Ireland  !)  lies  in  ruins.  In  the  evening 
I preached  to  a multitude  of  people  in  the  main 
ftreet.  A few  gentry  foon  walked  away  : but  the 
bulk  of  the  congregation  were  deeply  attentive. 
What  an  harveft  is  ready  for  zealous  labourers ! 
When  wilt  thou  thruft  them  out  into  thy  har- 
veft ? 

Monday  July  1.  I rode  to  Waterford,  and 
preached  in  a little  court,  on  our  Great  high 
Priejl  who  is  pajfed  into  heaven  for  us.  But  I foon 
found,  I was  got  above  mod  of  my  hearers  : I 
fhould  have  fpoke  of  death  or  judgment.  On 
Tuefday  evening  I fuited  my  difcourfe  to  my 
audience,  which  was  confiderably  increafed  : but 
much  more  the  next  evening.  And  deep  atten- 
tion fat  on  almoft  every  face.  The  room  was  well 
filled  on  Thurfday  morning,  and  the  poor  peo- 
ple were  fo  affeftionate,  that  it  was  with  difficulty 
we  were  able  to  break  from  them,  amidft  abund- 
ance of  prayers  and  bleflings. 

At  feven  in  the  evening  I preached  in  the  af- 
fembly  room  at  Killkenny,  to  many  well-dreft, 
reputable  people,  fome  ofwhom  attended  again  at 
five  in  the  morning.  In  the  evening  the  congre- 
gation was  increafed  in  ferioufnefs  as  much.as 
in  number,  while  I enforced  thofe  awful  words, 
Gcd  now  commandeth  all  men , every  where  to  repent. 

I never 


[ i6  ] 

1 never  fpoke  plainer.  Yet  I did  not  hear  of  any 
that  were  offended.  What  an  alteration  is  there 
in  this  city  within  fix  or  eight  years  ! 

Saturday  6 We  rode  to  Portarlington.  At 
feven  I preached  in  the  Market-houfe  to  a nu- 
merous congregation.  Near  as  many  were  prefent 
at  eight  in  the  morning.  I had  great  liberty  of 
fpeech.  And  the  manner  wherein  they  Jujfered 
the  word  of  exhortation , perfuaded  me  it  would 
not  be  in  vain. 

We  came  to  Mountmelick  before  the  church 
began,  and  were  glad  to  find  it  was  facrament 
Sunday.  In  the  evening  I preached  on  one  fide 
of  the  market-place,  on  our  Lord’s  lamentation 
over  Jerufalem,  to  almoft  all  the  Proteftants  in 
the  town,  and  not  a few  of  the  Papiits.  Tothofe 
I made  a particular  application  in  the  conclu- 
fton  of  my  difcourfe.  Indeed  I never  found  fo 
great  a concern  for  them,  as  fince  I came  laft 
into  the  kingdom. 

Monday  8.  I preached  in  the  market-place 
once  more,  and  it  was  a folemn  hour.  I left 
many  of  the  people  much  alive  to  God,  and  a- 
thirft  for  his  whole  image.  I preached  at  Tulla- 
morein  the  evening.  At  five  in  the  morning  the 
houfe  was  near  full.  While  I was  preaching  on 
Tuef.  evening  in  the  market-place,  we  had  feveral 
fhowers : but  few  went  away.  Here  likewife  I 
was  conllrained  to  addrefs  myfelfto  the  Papilfs 
in  particular,  and  to  exhort  them,  never  to  reft, 
till  they  were  partakers  of  the  common  falvation. 

About 


[ *7  ] 

About  eleven  we  were  waked  with  a cry  of 
fire,  which  was  at  the  next  door  but  one.  The 
flame  fhone  fo  that  one  might  fee  to  pick  up  a 
pin,  and  the  fparks  flew  on  every  fide.  So  that 
it  was  much  feared,  the  neighbouring  houfes 
would  take  fire,  as  feveral  of  them  were  thatch- 
ed. But  the  violent  rain,  which  fell  an  hour 
before  had  made  the  thatch  fo  wet  that  it 
could  not  catch  quickly.  And  in  lefs  than  two 
hours  all  the  fire  was  quenched.  So  we  flept  the 
reft  of  the  night  in  peace. 

Wednefday  10.  1 preached  at  Clara  about 
noon,  and  in  the  evening  at  Athlone.  The  two 
next  evenings  I preached  in  the  market- houfe, 
for  the  fake  of  the  Papifts,  who  durft  not  come 
to  the  room.  Saturday  13.  I read  Sir  Richard 
Cox’s  biftory  of  Ireland.  I fuppofe  it  is  ac- 
counted as  authentic  as  any  that  is  extant.  But 
furely  never  was  there  the  like  in  the  habitable 
world  ! Such  a feries  of  robberies,  murders,  and 
burning  of  houfes,  towns  and  countries,  did  I 
never  hear  or  read  of  before.  I do  not  now 
wonder,  Ireland  is  thinly  inhabited,  but  that  it 
has  any  inhabitants  at  all  ! Probably  it  had  been 
wholly  defolate  before  now,  had  not  the  Eng- 
lifh  come,  and  prevented  the  implacable 
wretches  from  going  on,  till  they  had  fwept 
each  other  from  the  earth. 

In  the  afternoon  I rode  to  Aghrim,  and 
preached  about  feven  to  a deeply  ferious  con- 
gregation, mofl  of  whom  were  prefent  again  at 

eight 


[ i8  ] 

eight  in  the  morning.  On  Sunday  14.  About 
five  I began  in  my  ufuai  place  at  Athlone,  on 
the  Conaught  fide  of  the  river.  I believe  the 
congregation  (both  of  Proteftants  and  Papifts,) 
was  never  fo  large  before.  Some  were  difpleaf- 
ed  at  this:  and  feveral  pieces  of  turf  were 
thrown  over  the  houfes,  with  fome  {tones.  But 
neither  one  nor  the  other  could  in  the  leafl  in- 
terrupt the  attention  of  the  people.  Then  a po- 
pifh  miller  (prompted  by  his  betters,  fo  called) 
got  up  to  preach  over  again!)  me.  But  fome  of 
his  comrades  throwing  a little  dirt  in  his  face, 
he  leaped  down  in  hafte,  to  fight  them.  This 
bred  a tray,  in  which  he  was  fo  roughly  hand- 
led. that  he  was  glad  to  get  off  with  only  a 
bloody  nofe. 

Monday  15.  I had  the  pleafure  of  meeting 
many  of  my  friends  from  various  parts  at  Coolv- 
lough.  I preached  at  twelve  under  the  {hade  of 
fome  fpreading  trees,  and  again  at  fix  in  the 
evening.  Tuefday  16.  I preached  at  Tyrrels- 
pafs,  with  a peculiar  bleffing  from  God,  though 
many  perfons  of  fortune  were  in  the  congrega- 
tion. Bu  the  poor  and  the  rich  are  his. 

Wednefday  1 y.  I preached  in  the  Grove  at 
Edinderry.  Manv  of  the  Quakers  were  there, 
(it being  the  ti  re  of  their  general  meeting)  and 
many  of  all  forts.  I met  here,  with  the  journal 
of  William  Edmundfon,  one  of  their  preachers 
in  the  laft  century.  If  the  original  equa'led  the 
pifture  (which  1 fee  no  reafon  to  doubt)  vhaf  an 

amiable 


[ »9  3 

amiable  man  was  this  ? His  opinions  I leave  ; but 
what  a fpirit  was  here  ? What  faith,  love,  gen- 
tlenefs,  long-fuffering  ? Could  mijiakes  fend 
fuch  a man  as  this  to  hell  ? Not  fo.  I am  fo  far 
from  believing  this,  that  I fcruple  not  to  fay, 
“ Let  my  foul  be  with  the  foul  of  William  Ed- 
mundfon  !” 

* Thurfday  18.  The  wind  in  our  face  temper- 
ing the  heat  of  the  fun,  we  had  a pleafant  ride  to 
Dublin.  In  the  evening  I began  expounding  the 
deepefi  part  of  the  holy  fcripture,  namely  the 
firft  epiflie  of  St.  John  ; by  which,  above  all 
other  even  infp-iied  writings,  1 advife  every 
yoLtng  preacher  to  form  his  fide.  Here  are  fub- 
limity  and  fimplicity  together,  the  ftrongeft 
fenfe  and  the  plained  language  ! flow  can  any 
one  that  would  /peak  as  the  oracles  oj  God , ufe 
harder  words  than  are  found  here? 

Sunday  21.  Between  eight  and  nine  I began 
preaching  in  the  Barrack-fquare  to  fuch  a con- 
gregation as  I never  faw  in  Dublin  before.  And 
every  one  was  as  quiet,  as  if  we  had  been  in  the 
new  fquare  at  Brifiol.  What  a change  fince  Mr. 
Whitefield  a few  years  ago  attempted  to  preach 
near  this  place  ! 

Monday  22.  I rode  to  Donard,  a little  town 
in  the  county  of  Wicklow.  Here  I met  with 
more  noife  and  fiupid,  fenfelefs  impudence,  than 
I have  found  fince  I left  England.  But  the  chief 
man  of  the  town  having  handled  one  of  the  dis- 
turbers roughly,  and  another  of  them  being 

knocked 


r 20  ] 

knocked  down  (not  by  a Methodift  $ I conclud- 
ed my  difcourfe  without  any  farther  hindrance. 

June  23. 1 began,  as  ufual,  at  five.  About  the 
middle  of  the  fermon,  the  rain  (which  was  ex- 
ceedingly wanted)  began,  and  drove  us  into  our 
friend’s  houfe  ; where  I found  his  daughters, 
five  fillers,  all  rejoicing  in  God  their  Saviour. 
Hence  I rode  to  Baltinglafs.  But  I had  fcarce 
fpoken  five  minutes  when  the  rain  drove  us  into 
the  houfe  here  alfo.  I had  defigned  to  preach 
at  Carlow  in  the  evening.  But  the  difficulty  was 
where  to  find  a place  ? Our  houfe  was  too 
fmall : and  there  was  1-ttle  profpe£l  of  preaching 
quietly  in  the  llreet.  While  we  were  confider- 
ing,  one  of  the  chief  perfons  in  the  town,  fent  to 
defire  I would  preach  in  her  court-yard.  This 
I did  to  a multitude  of  people  rich  and  poor.  And 
there  was  no  dillurbance  at  all.  Nor  did  I ob- 
ferve,  that  any  went  away,  though  we  had  a fharp 
fhower,  almoll  as  foon  as  I begin. 

Wednefday  24.  I rode,  in  theFotteft  day  I 
have  felt  this  year,  to  Dublin.  Thurfda\  and  Fri- 
day morning  I fpent  in  a conference  with  our 
preachers  : in  the  afternoons  I fpoke  to  the  mem- 
bers of  the  fociety  I left  four  hundred  and  forty, 
and  find  above  five  hundred  ; more  than  ever 
they  were  fince  my  firft  landing  in  the  kingdom. 
And  they  are  not  increafed  in  number  only;  but 
many  of  rhem  are  rejoicing  in  the  pure  love  of 
God.  And  many  more  refufe  to  be  comforted, 
till  they  can  witnefs  the  fame  confeffion. 


i 21  ] 

Sunday  28.  1 preached  in  the  Barrack-fquare, 
both  morning  and  afternoon.  The  morning  con- 
gregation was  far  larger  than  Laft  week  : but  this 
was  doubled  in  the  afternoon.  At  both  times 
my  heart  was  much  inlarged  towards  them,  and 
my  voice  fo  {Lengthened,  that  I fuppofe,  fever- 
al  thoufands  more  might  have  diftin&ly  heard 
every  fentence. 

Monday  29.  I was  deftred  by  fome  friends  to 
take  a ride  to  the  Dargle,  ten  or  twelve  miles 
from  Dublin";  one  of  the  greateft  natural  curio- 
fities,  they  faid,  which  the  kingdom  afforded. 
It  far  exceeded  my  expectation.  You  have  a 
high  and  deep  mountain,  covered  with  {lately 
wood,  up  the  fide  of  which  a path  is  cut,  and 
feats  placed  at  fmall  diftances.  A deep  vale, 
through  which  a clear  river  runs,  lies  between 
this  and  another  high  mountain,  whole  Tides  are 
clothed  with  tall  trees,  row  above  row,  from  the 
river  to  the  very  top.  Near  the  fummit  of  the 
firft  mountain,  you  have  an  opening  on  the  one 
hand  which  commands  the  fruitful  counties  of 
Kildare-,  Dublin  and  Loth,  as  far  in  a clear  fun- 
fhiny  day,  as  the  huge  mountains  of  Newry  : on 
the  other  hand  is  a fine  landfcape  of  meadows 
and  fields,  that  terminates  in  a fea-profpe£L  Ad- 
ding this  to  the  reft,  it  exceeds  any  thing  which 
I have  feen  in  Great-Britain.  And  yet  the  eye 
is  not  fati fed  with  feeing  ! It  never  can,  till  we 
fee  God. 

Wednefday  31.  At  the  earned  defire  of  a 

friend, 


[ 22  ] 

friend,  I fuffered  Mr.  Hunter  to  take  my  pic- 
ture. I fat  only  once,  from  about  ten  o’clock, 
to  half  an  hour  after  one.  And  in  that  time  he 
began  and  ended  the  face  ; and  with  a moft 
ftriking  likenefs. 

Friday,  Auguft  2.  One  informed  me,  that  the 
captain  with  whom  I had  agreed  for  my  palfage, 
was  gone  without  me,  but  had  taken  mv  horfe. 
I was  content,  believing  all  was  for  the  belt. 
But  we  foon  heard,  he  was  only  fallen  down  a 
few  miles.  So  we  took  a boat  and  followed 
him  ; and  about  ten,  we  went  on  board  the  Fe- 
licity, bound  for  Whitehaven.  In  about  an  hour 
we  fet  fail.  Soon  after  the  wind  turned,  and 
was  againft  us  moll  part  of  Saturday  and  Sunday. 
On  Sunday  I preached  to  our  little  congregation, 
thirteen  in  all,  on  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at 
hand:  Repent  ye,  and  believe  the  go  [pel.  In  a 
fliort  time,  the  wind  fprung  up  fair,  but  with 
intervals  of  calm.  So  that  we  did  not  reach 
Whitehaven  key,  till  Tuefday  6,  between  twelve 
and  one  in  the  morning.  After  fleeping  two  or 
three  hours,  I haflened  away,  and  in  the  after- 
noon came  to  Carlifle.  Some  friends  waited 
for  me  here.  We  purpofed  fetting  out  early  in 
the  morning : but  one  of  our  company  being 
taken  ill,  we  waited  feme  hours,  fo  that  we  did 
not  reach  Newcaftle  till  about  one  on  Thurfday 
Morning. 

I fcarce  ever  faw  the  people  here  fo  much 
alive  to  God  ; particularly  thofe  who  believe 

they 


C ^3  ] 


they  are  faved  from  fin.  I was  ready  to  fay.  It 
is  good for  me  to  be  here  : but  I mull  not  build 
tabernacles.  I am  to  be  a wanderer  on  earth 
and  defire  no  reft,  till  my  fpirit  returns  to 
God. 

Sunday  11.  I preached  about  feven  at  the  Fell, 
to  our  honeft,  lively  colliers : and  about  two 
in  the  afternoon  in  the  fquare  at  Hartly  eleven 
miles  From  Newcaftle.  Thence  I haften’d  back  to 
the  Gartheads,  where  was  the  largeft  congrega- 
tion which  has  been  there  for  many  years.  After- 
wards feveral  hundreds  of  us  met  at  the  room, 
and  folemnly  renewed  our  covenant  with  God. 
About  eight  I was  fo  tired,  I could  hardly  ftand. 
But  after  fpeaking  another  hour  all  my  wearinefs 
was  gone,  and  I was  as  lively  and  ftrong  as  at 
eight  in  the  morning. 

Monday  12.  I went  to  Sunderland : here 
likewife  is  a people  ready  prepared  for  the  Lord. 
Tuef.  13.  Ipurpofedto  preach  abroad  at  Durham; 
but  the  rain  hindered.  As  many  as  could  hear 
behaved  well  : and  many  felt  that  God  was  there. 
At  Yarm,  in  the  evening,  one  would  have 
thought,  the  whole  congregation  loved  or  feared 
God:  fo  much  thought  appeared  in  all  their  faces : 
fo  muchdeceny  in  their  behaviour. 

Wednefday  15.  I preached  in  the  evening 
at  Leeds,  and  next  morning  rode  to  Hudders- 
field. Mr.  Venn  having  given  notice  on  Sunday 
of  my  preaching,  we  had  a numerous  congrega- 
tion. 


[ ^4  ] 

tion.  We  had  a warm  ride  from  hence  to  Man* 
chefter.  But  as  my  day,  fo  was  my  ftrength. 

Friday  16.  I rode  over  to  Chefter,  and  preach- 
ed to  as  many  as  the  new  houfe  would  well  con- 
tain. We  had  likewife  a numerous  congregation 
on  Saturday,  morning  as  well  as  evening.  How 
the  grace  of  God  concurs  with  his  providence? 
A new  houfe  not  only  brings  a new  congrega- 
tion, but  likewife  (what  we  have  obferved  again 
and  again)  a new  blefting  from  God.  And  no 
wonder  if  every  labour  of  love , finds  even  a pre- 
fent  reward. 

Sunday  18.  The  houfe  contained  the  morn- 
ing congregation.  But  in  the  evening  multitudes 
were  conftrained  to  go  away.  So  does  truth  win 
its  way  againft  all  oppofition  if  it  be  fteadily  de- 
clared with  meeknefs  of  wifdom. 

Monday  19.  I preached  in  Northwich  at  ten, 
and  at  Manchefter  in  the  evening.  Our  confer- 
ence began  on  Tuefday  20.  and  ended  on  Fri- 
day 23.  Sunday  25,  having  been  all  the  week 
greatly  ftraitened  for  room,  I preached  at  feven 
irnthe  New-fquare  : the  congregration  was  ex- 
ceeding large  : yet  generally  and  deeply  atten- 
tive. About  one  I preached  at  Stockport  on  a 
green  at  the  fouth  end  of  the  town.  It  was  ful- 
try  hot,  but  few  regarded  it ; for  God f.nt  a gra - 
ciou  s rain  upon  his  inheritance. 

At  fix  in  the  evening  I preached  at  Maxfield, 
and  fetting  out  early  in  the  morning,  by  long 
ftages  came  to  Binriingham,  where  a large  con- 
gregation 


L 25  ] 


gregation  waited  for  me.  I began  immediately  to 
apply  thofe  comfortable  words,  Open  thy  mouth 
wide,  and  I will  fill'll.  I foon  forgot  my  wearinefs 
and  the  heat  of  the  place.  God  was  there  and  it 
was  enough.  OnTuefd.  27.  I rode  on  to  Stroud, 
and  the  next  morning  to  Briflol.  After  refting 
three  or  four  days,  on  Monday,  September  2. 
I fet  out  for  Cornwall,  and  preached  that  even- 
ing at  Middlefey.  Tuefday  g,  I rode  to  Tiver- 
ton, and  in  the  evening  preached  near  the  Eaft- 
end  of  the  town  to  a large  and  quiet  audience. 
Wednefday  4.  I rode  on  to  North-Tauton  ; a 
village  where  feveral  of  our  preachers  had  preach- 
ed occafionally.  About  fix  I went  to  the  door 
of  our  inn  : but  I had  hardly  ended  the  pfalm, 
when  a clergyman  came,  with  two  or  three,  (by 
the  courtfey  of  England  called)  gentlemen.  Af- 
ter I had  named  my  text,  I faid,  “ There  may 
be  fome  truths  which  concern  fome  men  only. 
But  this  concerns  all  mankind.”  The  minifter 
cried  out,  “ That  is  falfe  dodlrine,  that  is  pre- 
deftination.”  Then  the  roar  began,  to  fecond 
which  they  had  brought  an  huntfman  with  his 
hounds.  But  the  dogs  were  wifer  than  the  men: 
for  they  could  not  bring  them  to  make  any  noife 
at  all.  One  of  the  gentlemen  fupplied  their 
place.  He  allured  us  he  was  fuch,  or  none 
would  have  fufpe&ed  it.  For  his  language  was 
as  bafe,  foul,  and  porterly,  as  ever  was  heard  at 
Billmgfgate.  Dog,  Rafcal,  Puppy,  and  the 
like  terms  adorned  almofl  every  fentence.  Find- 


Vol.  XXXII.  B 


ing 


[ ^ ] 

ing  there  was  no  probability  of  a quiet  hearing, 
I left  him  the  field,  and  withdrew  to  my  lodg- 
ing. 

Thurfday  5.  We  had  a pleafant  ride  to  Mill, 
houfe,  where  I preached  at  five  to  a deeply  feri- 
ous  congregation.  The  next  day  at  noon  I 
preached  in  a field  near  Camelford,  it  being  the 
fair-day,  on,  Come.  and.  buy  wine  and  milk,  with- 
out money  and  without  price.  I preached  within 
at  Port  Ifaac,  becaufe  of  the  rain:  but  many 
were  conilrained  to  Hand  without.  It  was  a 
glorious  opportunity  ; God  fhoweiing  down  his 
bleffing  on  many  fouls. 

Saturday  7.  I rode  to  St.  Cuthbert  (that  is  the 
true  fpelling)  and  found  Mr.  Hofkius  weak  in 
body,  but  happy  in  God.  He  was  juft  able  to 
ride  to  the  church-town  in  the  evening,  where 
a ferious  congregation  foon  adembled.  Sunday 
8.  About  eight  I preached  at  St.  Agnes  : at 
one,  in  the  main  dreet  at  Redruth.  But  a Hill 
larger  congregation  was  at  Gw'enap  in  the  even- 
ing, equal  to  any  I have  feen  in  Moorfields. 
Yet,  I think,  they  all  heard,  while  I inforced, 
Why  will  ye  die , 0 houfe  of  Ifrael? 

* After  preaching  I returned  to  Redruth: 
where  hearing  an  exceeding  firange  dory,  I fent 
for  the  perfon  herfelf,  Grace  Paddy,  a well-bred, 
fenfible  young  woman.  I can  fpeak  of  her  now 
without  redraint,  as  (he  is  fafe  in  Abraham’s  bo- 
fom.  She  faid,  “ I was  harmlefs,  as  I thought, 
4*  but  quite  carelefs  about  religion,  till  about 

“ Chriitmas 


[ 27  ] 


“ Chriftmas,  when  my  brother  was  faying' 
“ “ God  has  given  to  me  all  I want : I am  as  bap- 
“ py  as  I can  live.”  This  was  about  ten  in  the 
“ morning.  The  words  went  like  an  arrow  to 
“ my  heart.  I went  into  my  chamber  and 
“ thought,  “ Why  am  not  I fo  ? O,  I cannot 
“ be,  becaufe  I am  not  convinced  of  fin.”  “ I 
**  I cried  out  vehemently,  “ Lord,  lay  as  much 
“ convidlion  upon  me  as  my  body  can  bear.” 
“ Immediately  I faw  myfelf  in  fuch  a light,  that 
“ I roared  for  the  difquietnefs  of  my  heart.  The 
“ maid  running  up,  I faid,  “ Call  mv  brother.” 
“Hecame;  rejoiced  over  me  ; faid,  “ Chrift 
“ is  juft  ready  to  receive  you  ! Only  believe  I” 
“And  went  to  prayer.  In  a fhort  time  ali  my 
“ trouble  was  gone,  and  I did  believe  al!  my  fins 
“ were  blotted  out.  But  in  the  evening  I was 

O 

“ throughly  convinced  of  the  want  of  a deeper 
“ change.  I felt  the  remains  of  fin  in  my  heart, 
“ which  I longed  to  have  taken  away.  I longed  to 
“ be  faved  from  all  fin,  to  b ecle.anfd from  all  un - 
“ rigthe.oufncfs.  And  at  the  time  Mr.  Rankin  was 
preaching,  this  defire  increafed  exceedingly. 
“ Afterwards  he  met  the  fociety.  During  his 
“ laft  prayer  I was  quite  overwhelmed  with  the 
“ power  of  God.  I felt  an  inexpreftible  change, 
“ in  the  very  depth  of  my  hea't  And  from  that 
“ hour  I have  fell  no  anger,  no  pride,  no  wrong 
“ temper  of  any  kind  : nothing  contrary  to  the 
“ pure  love  of  God,  which  I leel  continually. 

B 2 “I  defire 


[ 28  ] 

“ I defire  nothing  but  Chrifl : and  I have  Chrifl: 
“ always  reigning  in  my  heart.  I want  nothing: 
“ he  is  my  fufficient  portion  in  time  and  in 
“ eternity.” 

* Such  an  inftance  I never  knew  before  : 
fuch  an  inftance  I never  read  : a perfon  convinc- 
ed of  fin,  converted  to  God,  and  renewed  in 
love,  within  twelve  hours  ! Yet  it  is  by  no 
means  incredible  ; feeing  one  day  is  with  God 
as  a thoufand  years. 

Monday  9.  The  room  would  by  no  means 
contain  the  congregation  at  five  in  the  morning. 
How  is  this  town  changed  ! Some  years  fince  a 
Methodift  preacher  could  not  fafely  ride  through 
it.  Now  high  and  low,  few  excepted,  fay, 
BleJJcd  is  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  ! 

About  one  I preached  at  Portkellis  : at  fix 
in  Crowan.  I admire  the  depth  of  grace  in  the 
generality  of  this  people  : fo  limple,  fo  humble, 
fo  teachable,  fo  ferious,  fo  utterly  dead  to  the 
world  ! 

Tuefday  10.  They  filled  the  houfe  at  five,  I 
preached  in  Breag  at  twelve,  under  a lovely 
Jhade  of  trees.  About  fix  I began  at  St.John's  near 
Helfton,  once  as  furious  a town  as  Redruth.  Now 
almofi  all  the  gentry  of  the  town  were  prefent, 
and  heard  with  the  deepeft  attention. 

Wednefday  11.  Perceiving  my  voice  began  to 
fail  I refolved  to  preach,  for  a while,  but  twice  a 
day.  In  the  evening  I preached  in  a little 
ground  at  Newlin,  to  a numerous  congregation. 

Non® 


[ 29  ] 

None  behaved  amifs  but  a young  gentleman,  who 
feemed  to  underhand  nothing  of  the  matter. 

Thurfday  12.  Coming  to  St.  Juft,  I learned 
that  John  Bennets  had  died  fome  hours  before. 
He  was  a wife  and  a good  man,  who  had  been 
above  twenty  years  as  father  to  that  fociety.  A 
little  before  his  death  he  examined  each  of  his 
children  concerning  their  abiding  in  the  faith. 
Being  fatisfied  of  this  he  told  them,  “ Now  I 
have  no  doubt  but  we  fhall  meet  again  at  the 
right  hand  of  our  Lord.”  He  then  chearfully 
committed  his  foul  to  him,  and  fell  afleep. 

On  the  numerous  congregation  in  the  even- 
ing I inforced  thofe  folemn  words,  There  is  no 
work , nor  device , nor  knowledge,  nor  wifdom  in 
the  grave,  whether  thou  goejl. 

Friday  13. 1 rode  to  St.  Ives,  and  in  the  even- 
ing preached  on  the  fea-fhore.  But  though  there 
was  little  wind,  yet  the  noife  of  the  waves  pre- 
vented many  from  hearing.  Saturday  14.  About 
noon  I preached  at  the  Hale,  a fmall  arm  of  the 
fea,  which  runs  up  into  the  land,  two  or  three 
miles  from  St.  Ives,  and  makes  a tolerable  har- 
bour. In  the  evening  we  procured  a more  con- 
venient place  at  St.  Ives,  a meadow  on  the  fide  of 
the  hill,  where  the  people  flood  before  me, 
row  above  row,  to  a confiderable  diftance.  On 
Sunday  15,  we  had  nearly  the  fame  congregation 
at  feven  in  the  morning ; to  whom  I explained. 
Truly  our  felloujhip  is  with  the  Father  and  with 
Jus  Son  Jefas  Chrijl.  At  One  I preached  in 
B 3 Lelant 


[ 3o  ] 

Lelant  three  miles  from  St.  Ives  : and  at  five  in 
the  fame  meadow,  to  a larger  congregation  than 
before.  Indeed  the  whole  town  feems  moved  ; 
the  truths  we  preach  being  fo  confirmed  by  the 
lives  of  i he  people. 

Monday  16.  We  had  our  quarterly  meeting 
at  Redruth  : and  it  appeared,  by  the  accounts 
from  all  parts  that  the  flame,  which  was  kindled 
the  laft  year,  though  abated,  is  not  extinguifhed. 
At  fix  I began  on  the  marls et-houfe  fteps,  as 
uftial,  to  a very  numerous  congregation.  But  I 
had  not  finifhed  the  hymn,  when  Mr.  C.  came, 
and  read  the  aft  again!!  riots.  I faid,  “ Mr  C. 
“ I did  not  expeft  this  from  you  : I really  thought 
“ you  had  more  underftanding.”  He  anfwered 
not,  but  flood  like  one  aftonilhed,  neither  mov- 
ing hand  nor  foot.  However  I removed  two  or 
three  hundred  yards,  and  quietly  finifhed  my 
difcourfe. 

Tuefday  17.  I rode  to  Medros,  near  St.  Awftle, 
where  we  had  the  quarterly  meeting  for  the  eaft- 
ern  circuit.  Here  likewife  we  had  an  agreeable 
account  of  a ft  ill  increafing  work  of  God.  This 
fociety  has  eighty-fix  members,  and  all  rejoicing 
in  the  love  of  God.  Fifty-five  or  fifty-fix  of 
thefe  believe  he  has  faved  them  from  all  fin. 
And  their  life  no  way  contradifts  their  profef- 
fion.  But  how  many  will  endure  to  the  end  ? 

Wednefday  18.  I fet  out  for  Plymouth-Dock. 
In  the  way  we  called  on  one  of  our  friends  near 
Lifkard,  and  found  his  wife,  once  ftrong  in 

faith, 


[ 3»  ] 

faith,  in  the  very  depth  of  defpair.  I could  not 
but  admire  the  providence  of  God,  which  fent 
us  fo  feafonably  thither.  We  cried  ftrongly  to 
God  in  her  behalf,  and  left  her  not  a little  com- 
forted. 

The  focietv  at  the  Dock  had  been  for  fome 
time  in  a miferable  condition.  Difputes  had  run 
fo  high,  concerning  a worthlefs  man,  that  every 
one’s  fword  was  fet  as  it  were  againfthis  brother. 
I Ihewed  them  how  Satan  had  defired  to  have 
them,  that  he  might fift  them  as  wheat : and  after- 
wards told  them,  there  was  but  one  way  to  take, 
to  pafs  an  abfolute  a£l  of  oblivion  : not  to  men- 
tion, on  any  pretence  whatever,  any  thing  that 
had  been  faid  or  done  on  either  fide.  They  fully 
determined  fo  to  do  : if  they  keep  that  refolu* 
tion,  God  will  return  to  them. 

Thurfdav  19.  1 rode  to  Tiverton,  and  preach- 
ed to  a deeply  ferious  congregation.  Friday  20. 
I preached  at  noon  in  Hillfarrance,  near  Taun- 
ton, where  I had  not  been  for  fifteen  years. 
Saturday  21.  I preached  about  noon  at  Sbepton- 
Mallet,  and  then  went  on  to  Briffol. 

Wednefday  25.  About  one  I preached  at  Paul- 
ton,  under  a large,  fhady  tree.  My  own  foul, 
and  I trull  many  others  were  refrefhed,  while  I 
was  defcribing  our  fellowjhip  with  the  Father  and 
the  Son. 

After  vifiting  the  other  neighbouring  places, 
on  Saturday  28,  at  noon  I preached  at  Bath. 
But  I had  only  the  poor  to  hear,  there  being  fer- 
B 4 vice 


L 32  ] 

vice  at  tl:  fame  time  in  Lady  H.’s  chapel.  Sol 
was  jm.  . my  element.  I have  fcarce  ever  found 
fuch  liberty  at  Bath  before. 

Monday  30.  and  the  two  following  days,  I 
examined  the  fociety  at  Briftol,  and  was  fur- 
prized  to  find  fifty  members  fewer,  than  I left  in 
it  lall  OClober.  One  reafon  is,  Chrifiian  Perfec- 
feflion  has  been  little  infilled  on.  And  where- 
ever  this  is  not  done,  be  the  preachers  ever  fo 
eloquent,  there  is  little  increafe,  either  in  the 
number  or  the  grace  of  the  hearers. 

Saturday,  October  ,5.  I fpent  feme  time  with 
the  children  at  Kingfwood.  They  are  all  in  health. 
They  behave  well.  They  learn  well.  But  alas ! 
(Two  or  three  excepted)  there  is  no  life  in 
them ! 

About  this  time  the  oldeft  preacher  in  our 
connection,  Alexander  Coats,  relied  from  his 
labours.  A little  account  of  his  death,  one 
who  was  in  the  houfe  fent  me  in  thefe  words: 

Newcaftle,  OCtober  7.  1765. 

“ I had  an  opportunity  the  lall  evening  of  fee- 
ing our  dear  aged  brother  Coats.  A few  days  be- 
fore, he  was  fore  tempted  by  the  enemy  ; but 
near  the  clofe,  he  had  perfefit  peace.  His  faith 
was  clear,  and  he  found  Chrift  precious,  his  por- 
tion and  his  eternal  all.  I alked  him  a little  be- 
fore he  died,  if  he  had  followed  cunningly  de- 
vfed fables  ? He  anfwered,  “No,  no,  no.!  I 

then 


[ 33  ] 

then  afked  him,  whether  he  faw  b\  1 ? He 
faid,  “ Yes,  I do.”  And  after  waking  a few 
moments  at  anchor,  he  put  into  the  quiet  har- 
bour.” 

\Vednefday9.  I read  Mr.  Jones’s  ingenious 
elfay  on  the  principles  of  natural  philofophy. 
He  feems  to  have  totally  overthrown  the  New- 
tonian principles.  But  whether  he  can  eflablifh 
the  Hutchinfonian,  is  another  queltion. 

Friday  11.  We  obferved  as  a day  of  fading 
and  prayer.  Sunday  13.  We  met  in  the  even- 
ing, jointly  to  renew  our  covenant  with  God. 
It  was,  as  ufual,  a time  of  remarkable  blef- 
fing. 

Monday  14.  In  the  evening  I preached  at 
Shaftefoury,  and  on  Tuefday  at  Wincaunton. 
Riding  homeward  we  faw  the  pond,  in  which  a 
great  man,  a few  weeks  fince,  put  an  end  to  a 
wretched  life.  And  is  death  more  welcome  than 
'life,  even  to  a man  that  w allows  in  gold  and  fil- 
ver  ? 

Sunday  20.  I preached  a funeral  fermon  at 
Kingfwood,  over  the  remains  of  Sufanna  Flook  : 
who  a few  days  before  rofe  up  and  faid,  “ I am 
dying  and  dropped  down  dead.  So  little  fecu- 
rity  is  there  in  youth  or  health!  Re  ye  therefor  e 
likewije  ready ! 

Monday  21.  I went  in  the  coach  to  Salifbury, 
and  on  Thurfday  24,  came  to  London.  Monday 
28.  I breakfafted  with  Mr.  Whitefield,  who 
B 5 feem.ec! 


[ 34  ] 

feemed  to  be  an  old,  old  man,  being  fairly  worn 
out  in  his  Matter's  fervice,  though  he  has  hardly 
feen  fifty  years.  And  yet  it  pleafes  God,  that  I, 
who  am  now  in  my  fixty-third  year,  find  no  dif- 
order,  no  weaknefs,  no  decay,  no  difference  from 
what  I was  at  five  and  twenty  : only  that  I have 
fewer  teeth,  and  more  grey  hairs! 

Thurfday,  November  7.  A fire  broke  out  near 
the  corner  of  Leadenhall-fti  eet,  which  (the  wind 
being  exceeding  high)  foorx  fcized  on  both  the 
corners  of  the  ftreet,  and  both  the  corners  of 
Cornhill,  and  in  a few  hours  defrayed  above 
threefcore  houfes.  Yet  no  lives  were  loft.  Even 
Mr.  Rutland  (at  whofe  houfe  it  began)  and  his 
whole  family  were  preferved,  part  efcaping 
through  the  chamber  window,  part  over  the  top 
of  the  houfe. 

* Sunday  24.  I preached  on  thofe  words  in 
the  lefTon  for  the  day,  The  Lord  our  ri6  hteoufnefs. 
I faid  not  one  thing,  which  I have  not  faid,  at 
leaft,  fifty  times  within  this  twelvemonth.  Yet 
it  appeared  to  many  entire  y new,  who  much 
importuned  me  to  print  my  fennon,  fur pofing 
“ it  would  ftop  the  mouths  of  all  gainfavers.” 
Alas  for  their  fimplicity  I In  foite  of  all  I can 
print,  fa) ..  or  do,  will  not  thofe  who  / > occafion 
of  offence  find  ocafion? 

Monday,  December  2.  I went  to  Canterbury. 
I had  received  molt  tragical  accounts,  as  it  the 
fociety  were  all  /alien  from  grace , it  e er  ’hey 
had  any.  I determined  10  i'earch  this  to  the  bot- 
tom. 


[ 35  ] 

tom.  To  this  end  I examined  them  one  by  one : 
and  was  agreeably  furprized,  to  find  them  all 
(none  excepted]  upright  and  blamelefs  in  their 
behaviour. 

Tuefday  3. 1 rode  to  Dover,  and  found  a little 
company  more  united  together  than  they  have 
been  for  many  years.  Whilft  feveral  of  them 
continued  to  rob  the  king,  we  feemed  to  be 
plowing  upon  the  fand.  But  fince  they  have  cut 
off  the  right  hand,  the  word  of  God  finks  deep 
into  their  hearts. 

Wednefday  4.  I preached  about  noon  at  Sand- 
wich, and  in  the  evening  at  Margate.  A few 
people  here  alfo  join  in  helping  each  other,  to 
work  out  their  falvation.  But  the  minifler  of  the 
parifh  earnefily  oppofes  them,  and  thinks  he  is 
doing  God  fervice  ! 

Thurfday  3.  I rode  back  to  Feverfham.  Here 
I was  quickly  infoi  med,  that  the  mob  and  the 
magiftrates  had  agreed  together  to  drive  metho- 
difm,  fo  called,  out  of  the  town.  After  preaching, 
I told  them  what  we  had  been  contained  to 
do,  by  the  magiftrate  at  Rolvenden  ; who  per- 
haps would  have  been  richer  by  fome  hundred 
pounds,  had  he  never  meddled  with  the  Metho- 
difts : concluding,  “ Since  we  have  both  God 
and  the  law  on  our  fide,  if  we  can  have  peace 
by  fair  means,  we  had  much  rather,  we  fhould 
be  exceeding  glad : but  if  not,  we  will  have 
tieace.” 

B 6 


Saturday 


[ 36  ] 

Saturday  7. 1 returned  to  London.  Wednefday 

11.  I had  much  converfaliun  with  Mr.  D e, 

lately  a Romifh  pried.  What  wonder  is  it,  that 
we  have  fo  many  converts  to  popery,  and  fo  few 
to  proteftantifm  ; when  the  former  are  fure  to 
want  nothing,  and  the  latter  almoft  fure  to 
flarve  ? 

* Thurfday  12. 1 rode  over  to  Latonftone,  and. 
found  one  truly  Chrijha  n family.  This  is,  what 
that  at  Kingfwood  fiould  be  ; and  would , if  it  had 
fuch governors.  Friday  13.  I examined  the  chil* 
dren  one  by  one.  Several  of  them  did  find  the 
love  of  God.  One  enjoys  it  Hill,  and  continues  to 
walk  humbly  and  clofely  with  God, 

Sunday  15.  I buried  the  remains  of  Henry 
Perronet,  who  had  been  a child  of  forrow  from 
his  infancy.  But  from  the  time  he  was  taken  ill, 
his  mind  was  more  and  more  compofed.  The 
day  and  night  before  his  death,  he  was  praying 
continually,  till  all  fear  being  taken  away,  he 
chearlully  gave  up  his  fpirit  to  God. 

* Wednefday  18.  Riding  through  the  Bo- 
rough, all  my  mare  s feet  flew  up,  and  fhe  1 ell 
with  my  leg  under  her.  A gentleman  flepping 
out,  lifted  me  up,  and  helped  me  into  his  {hop. 
1 was  exceeding  fick,  but  was  prefently  relieved, 
by  a little  hartfhorn  and  water.  After  reding  a 
few  minutes,  I took  a coach;  but  when  I was 
cold  found  myfeif  much  worfe,  being  bruifed  on 
my  right  arm,  my  bread,  my  knee,  leg  and  ankle, 
which  fwelled  exceedingly.  However  I went  on 

to 


[ 37  3 

to  Shoreham,  where,  by  applying  treacle  twice  a 
day,  all  the  forenefs  was  removed,  and  I reco- 
vered fome  ftrength,  fo  as  to  be  able  to  walk  a 
little  on  plain  ground.  The  word  of  God  does  at 
length  bear  fruit  here  alfo,  and  Mr.  P.  is  com- 
forted over  all  his  trouble.  Saturday  21.  Being 
not  yet  able  to  ride,  I returned  in  a chariot  to 
London. 

Sunday  22.  I was  ill  able  to  go  through  the 
fervice  at  Weft-ftreet.  But  God  provided  for 
this  alfo.  Mr.  Greaves,  being  juft  ordained,  came 
ftrait  to  the  chapel,  and  gave  me  the  afliitance  I 
wanted. 

Thurfday  26.  I fhould  have  been  glad  of  a few 
days  reft  : but  it  could  not  be  at  this  bufy  fea- 
fon.  However,  being  eleftrified  morning  and 
evening,  my  lamenefs  mended,  though  but 
flowly. 

Wed nefday,  January  1,  1766.  A large  congre- 
gation met  in  the  Foundery,  at  four  o’clock, 
and  ufhered  in  the  new  year  with  the  voice  of 
praife  and  thankfgiving.  In  the  evening  we  met, 
as  ufual,  at  the  church  in  Spitalfields,  to  renew 
our  covenant  with  God.  This  is  always  a re- 
frefhing  feafon,  at  which  fome  ptifoners  are  fet 
at  liberty. 

Friday  3.  Mr.  B called  upon  me, 

now  calm  and  in  his  right  mind.  God  has  re- 
prefTed  his  furious,  bitter  zeal,  by  means  of 
Mr.  Whitefield.  He  made  the  breach  among  the 

Methodifis ; 


[ 38  ] 

Metkodifis:  O that  God  may  empower  him  to 
heal  it ! 

Sunday  5.  In  the  evening  I went  to  Lew- 
ifham.  Thurfday  9.  I read  Bilhop  Lowth’s  an- 
fwer  to  Bifhop  W.  If  any  thing  human  could  be 
a cure  for  pride,  furely  fuch  a medicine  as  this 
would  ! 

Monday  13.  I went  in  the  machine  to  Bury, 
and  preached  to  a final),  ferious  congregation. 
Tuefday  14.  The  frozen  road  being  exceeding 
rough,  our  machine  broke  down  before  dav. 
However  it  was  patched  up  fo  as  to  carry  us  to 
Budfdale  ; and  in  the  evening  I preached  at  Yar- 
mouth. The  work  ol  God  was  increafing  here, 
when  poor  B.  W.  was  converted  to  Calvinifm. 
Immediately  he  declared  open  war,  tore  the  fo- 
ciety  in  pieces,  took  all  he  could  to  himfelf, 
wholly  quitted  the  church,  and  raifed  fuch  afcan- 
da!  as  will  not  foon  be  removed.  Yet  doubtlefs, 
he  who  turned  the  young  man’s  head,  thinks,  he 
has  done  God fervice! 

Thurfday  16,  I rode  to  Norwich,  and  preached 
at  feven  in  a large  place  called  The  Priory.  The 
room,  I fuppofe,  was  formerly  the  chapel  ; Hike 
it  the  better  on  that  account.  After  fpending 
three  days  here  more  agreeably  than  I had  done 
for  many  years,  on  Monday  20,  I left  a fociety 
of  an  hundred  and  feventv  members,  regular  and 
well  united  together.  In  the  evening  the  machine 
put  up  at  the  White  Elm.  On  Tuefday  morning 
I reached  Colchefter. 


I found 


C 39  ] 

I found  the  fociety  here  flowly  recovering 
from  the  mifchiefdone  by  offence  and  difputing 
together.  I had  great  liberty  of  fpeecb  both 
morning  and  evening,  and  God  feemed  flrongly 
to  apply  his  word.  Surely  they  will  at  length 
learn  to  bear  one  another s burdens : then  will  the 
zvildernejs  blojjom  and  bud  as  a roje. 

Friday  24.  I returned  to  London.  Tuefday 
28.  Our  brethren  met  together  to  confider 
our  temporal  affairs.  One  propofed,  that  we 
fhould  in  the  firfl  place  pay  off  the  debt  of  the  fo- 
ciety, which  was  five  hundred  pounds.  To- 
wards this  an  hundred  and  feventy  were  fub- 
fcribed  immediately.  At  a feqond  meeting,  this 
was  enlarged  to  three  hundred  and  twenty. 
Surely  God  will  fupply  the  ref}. 

Friday  31.  Mr.  Whitefield  called  upon  me. 
He  breathes  nothing  but  peace  and  love.  Bigotry 
cannot  Hand  before  him,  but  hides  its  head 
wherever  he  comes. 

Sunday,  February  2.  I dined  with  W.  Welfb, 
the  father  of  the  late  fociety  for  reformation  of 
manners.  But  that  excellent  defign  is  at  a full 
flop.  They  have  indeed  convi&ed  the  wretch, 
who  by  wilful  perjury  carried  the  caufe  atrajflft 
them  in  Weflminfter  hall.  But  they  couH  ne- 
ver recover  the  expence  of  that  fuit.  Lord,  how 
long  fhall  the  ungodly  triumph  ! 

Wednefday  5.  One  called  upon  me  who  had 
been  cheated  out  of  a large  fortune,  and  was  now 
perifhing  for  want  of  bread.  I had  a defire  to 

cloath 


[ 40  ] 

cloath  him  and  fend  him  back  to  his  own  coun- 
try; but  was  fhort  of  money.  However,  I ap- 
pointed him  to  call  again  in  an  hour.  He  did 
fo;  but  before  he  came,  one  from  whom  I ex- 
pected nothing  lefs,  put  twenty  guineas  into  my 
hand.  So  I ordered  him  to  be  cloathed  from 
head  to  foot,  and  I fent  him  ftrait  away  to  Dub- 
lin. 

Monday  10.  and  the  four  following  days  I 
wrote  a catalogue  of  the  fociety,  now  reduced 
from  eight  and  twenty  hundred  to  about  two 
and  twenty.  Such  is  the  fruit  of  George 
Bell’s  enthufiafm,  and  Thomas  Maxfield’s  grati- 
tude J 

Monday  17. 1 preached  at  Sundon.  And  many 
looked,  as  if  they  underfiood  fomething  of  what 
was  faid.  Tuefday  18.  I went  on  to  Bedford, 
and  found  James  Glafbrook  had  juft  buried  his 
wife,  a woman  of  fine  underfianding  and  an  ex- 
cellent fpirit,  fnatched  away  in  the  dawn  of  her 
ufefulnefs.  What  thou  doji,  we  know  not  now! 
We  wonder  and  adore  ! The  next  day  I rode 
over  to  Copley,  where  lhe  died,  and  preached 
her  funeral  fermon.  In  the  evening  I preached 
at  Bedford,  and  found  God  was  there  alfo. 

And  “where  thy  prefence  isdifplav’d,  is  heaven.” 

Thurfday  20.  I preached  at  Hertford,  and  in 
llie  evening  at  Latonftor.e.  Friday  20. 1 preached 

at 


[ 41  ] 


at  Oldford,  near  Bow.  Part  of  the  congrega* 
tion  were  deeply  ferious ; the  other  part  wild 
and  ftupid  enough.  But  the  bridle  was  in  their 
mouth,  fo  that  they  made  no  noife ; nay,  and 
were,  in  a manner,  attentive. 

Sunday  23.  In  the  evening  I went  to  Lewi- 
fham,  and  finilhed  the  notes  on  the  book  of 
Job.  About  this  time,  one  of  Henry  Jackfon  s 
daughters  gave  me  the  following  letter  from  her 
filler . 

Newcaftle,  February  23,  1766. 
“ On  Thurfday,  the  13th  of  this  month,  my 
“ honoured  father  looked  fo  beautiful  and  come- 
“ 1 y,  that  we  all  wondered.  At  night,  in  his 
“ firlt  deep,  he  was  taken  very  ill.  On  Friday 
morning  I alked  him,  “ what  he  could  take  ?” 
“ He  anfwered,  “ 1 am  to  eat  no  more.”  His  ill- 
*■  nefs  increafed  : but  he  was  Hill  calm  and 
“ compofed,  and  refigned  to  the  will  of  God. 
“ Indeed  I always  beheld  in  him  fuch  faith, 
“ love  and  divine  refignation,  as  I never  faw  in 
“ any  other.  On  Sunday  he  faid,  “ Now  my  foul 
“ is  prepared,  and  made  ready  to  meet  the  Lord.” 
*•  From  this  time  he  was  filled  with  longing  de- 
“ fires,  to  depart  and  to  be  with  Chrilt  ; crying 
“ out,  I cannot  flay:  I mull  go  to  my  beloved,  to 
“ be  with  him  for  ever.”  Monday  17.  He  faid, 
1 have  fought  a good  fight : 1 have  finijhed  my 
“ courfe , I have  kept  the  faith.  Henceforth  there  is 
“ laid  up  for  me  a crown  of  glory,  which  the  righ - 
“ teous  Judge  Jhallgive  me  at  that  day . Tuefday 

“ 18. 


[ 42  ] 

“ 18.  after  receiving  the  bleffed  facrament,  he 
“ declared  to  the  minifler,  “ My  anchor  is  caft 
*■  within  the  veil,  both  fure  and  immoveable.” 
“ And  as  long  as  he  had  his  fpeech.  he  preach- 
“ ed  Chrill  to  every  one  that  came  to  fee  him. 
“ Indeed  his  whole  life  for  many  years  was  but 
“ one  dedication  of  his  body  and  foul  to  God, 
“ praying  continually,  and  being  loll  in  praife 
•*  and  thankfgiving  to  his  adorable  faviour.  In 
“ all  the  various  difpenfations  of  God’s  provi- 
“ dence  towards  him  and  his  family,  he  was 
“ flill  magnifying  and  praifing  his  holy  name, 
“ always  thankful,  humble,  loving,  and  obedient. 
“ Nothing  was  able  to  move  him  one  moment, 
“ or  put  him  out  of  temper:  but  he  received 
“ every  thing  from  the  hand  of  God,  with  faith, 
“ patience,  and  refignation.  Before  his  fpeech 
“ failed,  he  blefied  all  his  children,  grand  chil- 
“ dren  and  great-grand-children  ; and  on  Thurf- 
“ day  morning,  February  20,  yielded  up  his  foul 
“ to  God  being  ninety-nine  years  and  five  months 
“ old.” 

Saturday,  March  1.  I read  bifhop  Lowth’s  in- 
genious lectures  de  poefi  hebrcea,  far  more  fatis- 
fa£lory  than  any  thing  on  that  fubjeft  which  I 
ever  faw  before.  He  (hews  clearly,  that  the  no- 
blefl  poetry  may  fubfifl,  without  being  beholden 
either  to  ryme  or  fixed  meafures. 

Thurfday  6.  Our  brethren  met  once  more,  on 
account  of  the  public  debt.  And  they  did  not  part 

till 


C 43  ] 

till  more  than  the  whole,  (which  was  fix  hundred 
and  ten  pounds)  was  fuhfcribed. 

Sunday  9.  In  the  evening  I went  to  Knights- 
bridge,  and  in  the  morning,  took  the  machine 
for  Briftol,  where  I preached  (as  I had  appointed) 
on  Tuefday  evening,  and  met  the  fociety.  Wed- 
nefday  12,  I rode  over  to  Kingfwood,  and  hav- 
ing told  my  whole  mind  to  the  matters  and  fer- 
vants,  fpoke  to  the  children  in  a far  ftrongerman- 
ner,  than  ever  I did  before.  I will  kill  or  cure  ; I 
will  have  one  or  the  other,  a Chriftian  fchool,  or 
none  at  all. 

Sund.  16. 1 preached  in  Princefs-ftreet  at  eight, 
on  Awake  thou  that Jleepefl  : and  at  the  fquare  in 
the  evening,  to  a liftening  multitude,  on  Come , 
Lordjefus ! At  Kingfwood  we  had  fuch  a congre- 
gation at  ten  as  has  not  been  there  for  feveral 
years.  And  I had  the  fatisfaftion  to  find  four  of 
our  children  again  rejoicing  in  the  love  of  God. 

Mon.  17.  1 rode  to  Stroud,  the  fun  Ihining  as 
in  May.  Seventeen  fuch  days  in  the  beginning 
of  March,  I fuppofe  few  men  have  known.  But 
on  Tuefday  the  weather  intirely  changed  : and 
the  piercing  north-eaft  wind,  this  and  the  two 
following  days,  was  fcarce  fupportable.  At  feven 
I preached  in  the  room  at  Painfwick,  and  about 
ten  came  to  Cheltenham.  Here  I was  in  a ftrait  : 
the  houfe  would  not  hold  half  the  people  : and 
the  wind  was  keen  enough.  However  I thought 
this  the  lefs  evil  of  the  two,  and  fo  preached  a- 
broad,  where  we  were  tolerably  fheltered.  And 

I did 


t 44  1 

I did  not  obferve  that  any,  rich  or  poor,  went 
away  till  I concluded. 

I reached  Evefham  about  five  in  the  evening, 
and  preached  about  fix  with  tolerable  quiet.  But 
as  we  returned  the  mob,  encouraged  by  the 
wretched  magiftrate  were  tude  and  noify  enough. 
Yet  as  they  neither  faluted  us  with  hones,  nor 
dirt,  we  were  well  contented. 

* Wednefday  19.  We  called  at  a little  inn, 
about  fixteen  miles  from  Evefham.  But  as  Dun- 
can Wright  and  I had  our  hoods  on.  the  good 
woman  was  frighted,  and  did  not  care  to  take  us 
in.  So  we  rode  a mile  or  two  farther  to  another 
houfe,  where  we  came  in  feafon.  After  a little 
talk,  the  woman  of  the  houfe  faid,  “ I fear,  it  is 
“ not  fo  well  with  me  as  it  was  once.  Before  I 
“ married,  I ufed  to  kneel  down  in  the  cow* 
“ houfe,  to  pray  to  God  for  all  I wanted.  B.ct 
“ now  I am  incumbered  with  worldly  cares  : and 
“ yet  God  has  not  forgotten  me.  Laft  winter, 

“ when  my  hufband  had  loft  the  ufeofallhis 
“ limbs,  I prayed  to  God  for  him,  and  he  was 
“ well.”  This  woman  knew  nothing  about  the 
Methodifts  : but  God  is  nigh  to  all  that  call 
upon  him. 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  Birmingham. 
Towards  the  clofe,  the  mob  gathered  : but  they 
were  reftrained  till  I had  concluded. 

Thur.  20.  It  was  as  much  as  we  could  do,  to 
bear  the  cold  before  fun-rife.  However  we  came 
well  to  Burton  before  eleven,  where  I preached 

to 


[ 45  ] 

to  an  exceeding  ferious  congregation.  In  the 
evening  I preached  at  Nottingham  in  the  new 
houfe,  thoroughly  filled  with  ferious  hearers. 
Indeed  there  is  never  any  difiurbance  here.  And 
there  could  be  none  any  where,  if  the  magif- 
trates  were  lovers  of  peace,  and  exerted  them- 
felves  in  the  defence  of  it. 

Sunday  23.  I had  thoughts  of  preaching  in  the 
market-place.  But  the  fnow  which  fell  in  the 
night  made  it  imprafticable.  In  the  morning  the 
houfe  contained  the  congregation  : but  in  the 
evening  many  were  conftrained  to  go  away.  There 
feems  to  be  now,  (what  never  was  before)  a ge- 
neral call  to  the  town. 

Monday  24.  We  rode  to  Derby.  I never  faw 
this  houfe  full  before,  the  people  in  general  being 
profoundly  rarelefs.  I endeavoured  to  fhew  them 
their  pifture,  by  inlarging  on  thofe  words  Gallio 
cared for  none  oj theje  things. 

Tuefday  2,5.  At  ten,  1 preached  in  their  new 
houfe  at  Creitch,  about  twelve  miles  from  Der- 
by to  a loving,  firnple  hearted  people,  many  of 
whom  felt  what  I fpoke  of followjhip  with  the 
father  and  with  the  Jon.  Thence  we  rode  on  thro’ 
feveral  heavy  fhowers  of  fnow  to  Sheffield, 
where  at  fix  we  had  a numerous  congregation. 
There  has  been  much  dillurbance  here  this  win- 
ter. But  to  night  all  was  peace. 

Thurfday  27.  I preached  in  the  morning  at  a 
little  village  near  Eyam,  in  the  High-Peak.  The 
eagernefs  with  which  the  poor  people  devoured 

the 


[ 46  ] 

the  word,  made  me  amends  for  the  cold  ride 
over  the  fnowy  mountains.  The  fame  earneftnefs 
I obferved  in  the  congregation  at  Maxfield  : and 
yet  hardly  a third  part  of  thofe  I formerly  exa- 
mined, now  retain  the  glorious  liberty  which  the}’ 
then  enjoyed. 

March  28.  being  Good-Friday,  as  foon  as  we 
came  from  church,  I began  at  Stockport,  on  We 
preach  Chrijl  crucified , to  the  Jews  a fumbling - 
block,  and  to  the  Greeks foohjhnefs.  At  fix  in  the 
evening  I preached  at  Manchefler,  and  on  Satur- 
day and  Eatter-Day.  In  the  evening  1 explained 
to  the  fociety  the  nature  of  the  yearly  fubfcrip- 
tion.  On  this  one  fent  me  the  following  letter. 

Good  Sir,  March  31,  1766. 

“ I thought  proper  to  fend  you  a few  lines, 
« concerning  what  you  fpoke  ol  laft  night.  How 
“ good  it  was,  that  you  put  us  all  together  as 
“ one  family  ! That  each  might  do  hisutmoft  to 
“ help  all  his  brethren  ! Had  you  fpoke  of  this 
“ fooner,  and  opened  your  mind  freely  as  you 
“ did  yeflerdav,  where  I have  given  one  fhil- 
“ ling,  1 would  have  given  one  pound.  My  heart 
“ was  rejoiced  at  the  good  news,  fo  as  my  ton- 
“ gue  cannot  exprefs.  1 was  ready  to  cry  out 
“ with  Zaccheus,  Lo,  the  ha/J  of?ny  goods  1 give 
“ to  the  poor.  I have  fent  you  two  guineas,  10- 
“ wards  carrying  on  the  work  of  the  Lord.  And 
“ may  the  bleffing  of  the  Lord  go  with  it ; for 

“ I give 


[ 47  ] 

“ I give  it  freely  : I would  rather  it  had  been 
“ two  fcore.”  W.  N. 

Tuefday,  April  l.On  a clofe  examination,  out 
of  more  than  fifty  perfons,  who  two  or  three 
years  ago  were  filled  with  the  love  of  God,  I did 
not  find  above  a third  part  who  had  not  buffered 
lofs.  But  almoft  all  were  deeply  fenfible  of  their 
lofs,  and  earneftly  groaning  for  what  they  once 
enjoyed. 

Wednefday  2.  We  rode  through  heavy  rain 
to  Chefter.  Friday  4.  I vifited  a poor  woman, 
who  has  been  ill  eight  years  and  is  not  yet  weary 
or  faint  in  .her  mind.  An  heavy  laden  finner 
defired  to  receive  the  facrament  with  her,  and 
found  reft  to  her  foul:  and  from  that  hour  in- 
creafed  every  day  in  the  knowledge  and  love  of 
God. 

Mon.  7. 1 preached  atWarrington  about  noon 
to  a large  congregation,  rich  and  poor,  learn- 
ed and  unlearned.  I never  fpoke  more  -«plain  : 
nor  have  I ever  feen  a congregation  liften 
-with  more  attention.  Thence  I rode  to  Liver- 
pool, and  thoroughly  regulated  the  fociety, 
which  had  great  need  of  it.  Wednefday  9. 1 took, 
much  pains  with  a fenfible  woman,  who  had 
taken  feveral  imprudent  fteps.  But  it  was  labour 
loft  : neither  argument  nor  perfuafion  made  the 
leaf!  impreflion.  O what  power  lefs  than  Al- 
mighty can  convince  a thorough-paced  enthu- 
fiaft! 

Thurfday  10.  I looked  over  the  wonderful 

deed, 


[ 4§  ] 

deed,  which  was  lately  made  here:  on  which  I 
obferved  1.  It  takes  up  three  large  fkins  of  parch- 
ment, and  fo  could  not  coft  lefs  than  fix  gui- 
neas : whereas  our  own  deed,  tranfcribed  by 
a friend,  would  not  have  coft  fix  (hillings. 
2.  It  is  verbofc  beyond  all  fenfe  and  reafon,  and 
withal  fo  ambiguoudy  worded,  that  one  paftage 
only  might  find  matter  for  a fuit  of  ten  or  twelve 
years  in  chancery.  3.  It  every  where  calls  the 
houfe  a Meeting-houfe,  a name  which  I parti- 
cularly objeft  to.  4.  It  leaves  no  power  either  to 
the  aftiftant  or  me,  fo  much  as  to  place  or  dif- 
place  a fteward.  5.  Neither  I,  nor  all  the  confer- 
ence have  power  to  fend  the  fame  preacher  two 
years  together.  To  crown  all  6.  If  a preacher  is 
not  appointed  at  the  conference,  the  truftees  and 
the  congregation  are  to  chufe  one  by  mo  ft  votes  ! 
And  can  any  one  wonder  I diflike  this  deed, 
which  tears  the  methodift  difcipline  up  by  the 
roots'? 

Is  it  not  ftrange,  that  any  who  have  the  lead 
regard  either  for  me  or  our  difcipline,  (liould 
fcruple  to  alter  this  uncouth  deed  ! 

Fridav  11.  I preached  near  Wigan  to  a large 
number  of  ferious,  well-behaved  people,  mixt 
with  a few  as  ftupidly  infolent  creatures,  as  I 
ever  faw.  Finding  them  proof  both  againft  rea- 
fon and  perfuafion,  at  length  I rebuked  them 
fharply.  This  they  underftood,  and  quickly  re- 
tired. So  I concluded  in  peace. 

Saturday  12.  I was  defired  to  preach  at  Brinf- 

]y, 


[ 49  J 

ly,  three  or  four  miles  from  Wigan.  The  fun 
fhone  hot,  but  I had  fome  fhelter  : and  the  art- 
lefs  people  drank  in  every  word.  About  fix  I 
began  in  the  flreet  at  Bolton.  The  wind  was 
then  high  and  cold  enough.  But  I foon  forgot 
it,  and  fo  did  mod  of  the  people,  being  almoft 
as  thirfty  as  thofe  at  Brinfly.  When  I began  on 
Sunday  in  the  afternoon,  the  wind  was  exceed- 
ing fharp ; but  it  fell  in  a few  moments,  and  we 
had  a mild,  agreeable  fummer-evening. 

Monday  14.  I preached  at  Middleton,  fix 
miles  from  Manchelfer.  A fharp  fhower  of  hail 
began  in  the  middle  of  the  fermon  ; but  fcarce 
any  went  awav.  Tuefday  15.  We  rode  to  Chap- 
p el  in  the  Frith.  We  had  a rough  falutation  in 
riding  through  the  town.  At  the  end  of  which  a 
multitude  of  people  gathered  together,  in  a con- 
venient meadow.  I preached  on,  By  grace  ye  are 
faved  through  faith.  God  fpoke  in  his  word.  It 
was  an  acceptable  time,  and  few  went  emptvaway. 

In  riding  over  the  dreary  mountains  of  the 
High-Peak,  we  met  with  feveral  {forms.  But 
we  were  no  worfe  when  we  came  to  Rother- 
ham, where  I preached  in  the  evening.  The 
fpirit  ol  the  congregation  was  able  to  enliven 
the  dullelt  preacher.  Indeed  it  was  good  to  be 
here.  Wednefday  16.  About  two  in  the  after- 
noon, I had  another  kind  of  congregation  at 
Doncafter,  wild  and  flupid  enough.  Yet  all 
•were  tolerably  civil,  many  attentive,  and  fome 
affeffed.  Thence  we  haded  to  Epworth.  Here  I 
took  knowledge  of  the  fame  fpirit  as  at  Rotherham. 
Vol.  XXXII.  C What 


£ 5°  ] 

What  a bleffing  is  it,  to  be  with  thofe  who  are  a- 
live  to  God  ! But  how  few  duly  value  this  bleffing-1 
Friday  18.  I fet  out  for  the  eadern  pait  of 
Lincolnlhire,  and  after  preaching  at  Awkbo- 
rough  and  Barrow  in  the  way,  came  the  next 
day  to  our  old  friends  at  Grimfby.  It  put  me  in 
mind  of  Purryfburg  in  Georgia.  It  tear  one  of 
the  larged  towns  in  the  county.  It  is  no  bigger 
than  a middling  village,  containing  a fmall  num- 
ber of  half-ftarved  inhabitants,  without  any  trade, 
either  foreign  or  domefiic.  But  this  they  have  ; 
they  love  the  gofpel,  hardly  fix  families  except- 
ed. And  a large  proportion  of  them  have 
found,  it  is  the  power  of  God  unto  falvation. 

Monday  21.  Between  nine  and  ten  I began 
preaching  in  an  open  place  at  Lowth.  The  mob 
here  ufed  to  be  exceeding  boiderous  ; but  none 
now  opened  his  mouth.  How  eafily,  when  it  feems 
him  good,  does  God  Jlill  the  madnefs  of  the  people'. 

Hence  we  rode  to  Trudthorpe  in  the  Marfli, 
where  a multitude  of  plain,  fimple-hearted  peo- 
ple afiembled.  When  I met  the  fociety  after 
preaching,  abundance  of  them  crowded  in : 
many  of  whom,  while  we  were  wredling  with 
God  in  prayer,  cried  out  with  a loud  and  bitter 
cry.  But  it  was  not  long  before  fome  of  them 
rejoiced,  with  joy  unfpeakable. 

Tuefday  22.  I preached  to  a congregation  of 
a very  different  kind  at  Horncadle.  John  Hill 
has  done  more  mifchief  here  than  a man  of  lar 
greater  talents  can  do  good.  By  that  unhappy 
divifion  of  the  fociety,  he  has  opened  the  mouths 

of 


[ 5*  3 


of  all  the  gainfayers  : and  to  complete  the 
fcandal,  he  and  fix  and  twenty  more  have  been 
dipped  ! unftable  as  water , thou  Jlialt  not  excell ! 

Wednef.  23.  I preached  at  five  ; in  Torring- 
tonatnine,  and  about  two  at  Scotter,  where  the 
poor  people  now  enjoy  great  quietnefs,  by  means 
of  Sir  N.  H.  about  fix  I preached  at  Ferry.  1 do 
not  chufe  to  preach  above  twice  or  thrice  in  a 
day.  But  when  I a;n  called  to  do  more,  it  is 
all  one.  I find  ftrength  according  to  my  need. 

Thurf.  24.  I rode  to  Epworth,  and  the  next 
day,  through  heavy  rain,  to  Swainfleet.  I fup. 
pofed,  as  the  rain  kept  many  from  coming,  the 
preaching-houfe  would  contain  the  congregation  ; 
but  it  would  not.  However  as  the  door  and  win- 
dows were  open,  1 believe  mod  of  them  could 
hear.  And  the  eagernefs  with  which  they  heard 
made  me  hope,  they  were  not  forgetful  hearers. 

Sunday  27.  I rode  over  to  Miderton,  and  vi- 
fited  a young  woman  who  a year  or  two  fince, 
was  firuck  fird  with  deep  melancholy,  and  foon 
after  with  utter  didraffion.  We  were  quickly 
convinced  whence  herdifordcr  came.  Let  phyfi- 
cians  do  all  they  will  or  can  ; yet  it  will  be 
found  in  the  end,  that  this  kind  goethnot  out  but 
by  prayer  and  fajling. 

After  preaching  I haded  away  to  Haxey,  and 
came  thither  before  the  church  began.  The 
curate  preached  a very  harmlefs  fermon  againft 
the  Methodids.  Between  one  and  two  I preach- 
ed atWedwood-fide,  o n Behold,  now  is  the  day  of 
C 2 falvation  J 


t 52  ] 

Jalvation  ! And  it  feeraed  as  if  all  had  ears  to 
hear.  About  four  I began  in  the  market-place 
at  Epworth,  on  He  beheld  the  city,  and  wept  over  it. 
And  fuch  a call  I think  the  inhabitants  of  this 
town  have  fcarce  ever  had  before. 

Monday  28.  I preached  at  Thorne.  Although 
a great  part  of  the  congregation,  had  never  heard 
one  preach  under  a tree  before,  yet  they  behaved 
extremely  well.  Before  we  came  to  York,  I was 
thoroughly  tired.  But  my  ftrength  quickly  return- 
ed : fo  that  after  preaching  to  a large  congre- 
gation and  meeting  the  fociety,  I was  frelher 
than  when  I began. 

Tuefday  29.  I preached  at  noon  in  the  new 
houfe  at  Thirfk,  almoft  equal  to  that  at  Yann. 
And  why  not  quite,  feeing  they  had  the  model 
before  their  eyes,  and  had  nothing  to  do  but  to 
copy  after  it  ? Is  it  not  an  amazing  weaknefs, 
that  when  they  have  the  mod  beautiful  pattern 
before  them,  all  builders  will  affeft  to  mend 
fometbing?  So  the  je  ne  fcai  quoi  is  loft  and  the 
fecond  building  fcarce  ever  equals  the  firft. 

I preached  at  Yarm  in  the  evening,  and  the 
next  at  Newcaftle.  I know  not  to  what  it  is  ow- 
ing, that  I have  felt  more  wearinefs  this  fpring, 
than  I had  done  before  ior  many  years ; unlefs 
to  my  fall  at  Chriftmas  which  perhaps  weakened 
the  fprings  of  my  whole  machine  more  than  1 
was  fenftble  of. 

Thurfday,  May  x.  I enjoyed  a little  reft.  I 
do  not  find  the  leaft  change  in  this  refpeff.  I 

love 


C 53  ] 


love  quietnefs  and  filence  as  well  as  ever : but 
if  I am  called  into  noife  and  tumult,  all  is  well. 

Sunday  4.  The  rain  condrained  me  to  preach 
in  the  room,  both  in  the  morning  and  even- 
ing. But  it  was  fair  at  two  while  1 preached 
abroad  at  the  Fell,  where  the  room  could  not 
contain  one  half  of  the  congregation. 

Tuefday  6.  1 rode  to  Sunderland.  On  Wed- 
nefday  and  Thurfday  evening,  I preached  in 
Monk- Weremouth  church.  Saturday  10.  I 
fpent  an  agreeable  hour  at  a Quaker’s,  a man  of 
large  fubdance.  His  fpirit  put  me  in  mind  of 
Thomas  Keene.  May  thy  lad  end  be  like  his! 

Sunday  11.  The  weather  not  permitting  me 
to  preach  abroad,  I preached  in  the  room,  morn- 
ing and  evening,  and  about  eleven  in  Monk- 
Weremouih  church.  In  the  evening  fome 
hundreds  of  us,  folemnly  renewed  our  covenant 
with  God,  and  he  anfwered  many,  in  thejoy  of 
their  hearts.  Mon.  12.  After  preaching  at  South- 
fhields  about  noon,  and  at  Noith-fhields  in  the 
evening,  I returned  to  Newcadle.  In  the  fol- 
lowing days  I preached  at  as  many  of  the  neigh- 
bouring places  as  I could:  and  on  Monday  1 9, 
fet  out  northward.  About  two  I preached  to 
the  honed;  colliers  at  Placey,  and  in  the  even- 
ing at  Morpeth.  Tuefday  20.  About  noon  I 
preached  at  Felton.  There  were  many  hearers, 
though  the  wind  was  extremely  fbarp.  And 
mod  of  them  were  attentive  ; but  very  few 
C 3 feemed 


[ <54  ] 

Teemed  to  under/tand  any  thing  of  the  matter. 
I preacbea  at  Alnwick  in  the  evening.  Wed- 
nefday  21.  We  fpent  an  hour  in  the  caflle  and 
the  gardens  which  the  duke  is  inlarging  and 
improving  daily,  and  turning  into  a little  para- 
dife.  What  pity,  that  he  muff  leave  all  thefe,  and 
die  like  a common  man  ! 

Thurfday  22.  At  eleven  I preached  in  the 
ftreet  at  Belford,  fifteen  miles  beyond  Alnwick. 
The  hearers  were  ferioufly  attentive,  and  a few 
Teemed  to  underhand  what  was  fpoken.  Be« 
tween  fix  and  feven  I preached  in  the  Town- 
hall  at  Berwick.  I had  an  uncommon  liberty 
in  fpeaking,  and  a folemn  awe  fat  on  the  faces 
of  all  the  hearers.  Is  God  again  vifiting  this 
poor,  barren  place ! 

Friday  23.  When  I came  to  Old-Camus,  I 
found  notice  had  been  given  of  my  preaching 
about  a mile  off.  So  I took  horfe  without  de- 
lay, and  rode  to  Copperfmith,  where  the  con- 
gregation was  waiting.  I fpoke  as  plain  as  I 
pofiibly  could.  But  very  few  appeared  to  be  at 
all  affe&ed  It  feems  to  be  with  them,  as  with 
mofl  in  the  north;  they  knoxv  every  thing,  and 
fed  nothing. 

I had  defigned  to  preach  abroad  at  Dunbar 
in  the  evening.  But  the  rain  drove  us  into 
the  houfe.  It  was  for  good.  I now  had  a full 
ftroke  at  their  hearts ; and  I think  fome  felt 
themfelves  Tinners. 

Saturday  24.  In  the  afternoon,  notice  having 

been 


L 55  ] 


been  given  a week  before,  I went  to  the  room 
at  Preifon-pans.  And  I had  it  all  to  myfelf, 
neither  man,  woman  nor  child  offered  to  look 
me  in  the  face.  So  I ordered  a chair  to  be 
placed  in  the  flreet.  Then  forty  or  fifty  crept 
together.  But  they  were  mere  flocks  and  floncs  ; 
no  more  concerned,  than  if  I had  talked  Greek. 
In  the  evening  I preached  in  the  new- room  at 
Edinburgh,  a large  and  commodious  building. 

Monday  26.  I fpent  fome  hours  at  the  meet- 
ing of  the  national  aJJ'embly.  I am  very  far  from 
being  of  Mr.  Whitefield’s  mind,  who  greatly 
commends  the  folemnity  of  this  meeting.  I 
have  feen  few  lefs  folemn ; I was  extremely 
fhocked  at  the  behaviour  of  many  of  the  mem- 
bers. Had  any  preacher  behaved  fo  at  our  con- 
ference, he  would  have  had  no  more  place 
among  us. 

Wednefday  28.  I preached  at  Leith,  and 
fpoke  exceeding  plain.  A few  received  the 
truth  in  the  love  thereof. 

Sunday,  June  1.  Many  of  the  miniflers  were 
prefent  at  feven,  with  a large  and  ferious  con- 
gregation. In  the  afternoon  I heard  a thun- 
dering fermon  in  the  new  kirk,  occafioned  by 
Mr.  Jardin,  a minifler’s  dropping  down  dead 
in  the  affembly  a day  or  two  before.  I preach- 
ed in  the  evening  on  The Jpirit  and  the  bride fay , 
Come!  A few,  I truft,  clofed  with  the  invita- 
tion. 

Monday  2.  I came  to  Dundee  wet  enough. 

1 C $ But 


[ 5 6 ] 

But  it  cleared  up  in  the  evening;  lo  that  I 
preached  abroad,  to  a large  congregation  ; many 
of  whom  attended  in  the  morning.  Tuefdav  3. 
The  congregation  was  dill  larger  in  the  evening  ; 
but  on  Wednelday  the  rain  kept  us  in  the  houfe. 
l'hurfday  5.  It  being  fair,  we  had  a more  numer- 
ous congregation  than  ever ; to  whom,  after 
preaching,  I took  occafion  to  repeat  mod  of  the 
plaufible  objeftions  which  had  been  made  to  us 
in  Scotland.  I then  fhewed  our  reafons  for  the 
things  which  had  been  objected  to  us  : and  all 
feemed  to  be  throughly  fatisfie d. 

*The  fum  of  what  I fpokewas  this; 

I love  plain-dealing.  Do  not  you  ? I will  ufe  it 
now.  Bear  with  me. 

I hang  out  no  falfe  colours,  but  fliew  you  all  I 
am,  all  I intend,  all  I do. 

I am  a member  of  the  church  of  England:  but 
I love  good  men  of  every  church. 

My  ground  is,  the  bible.  Yea,  I am  a bible- 
bigot.  I follow  it  in  all  things,  both  great  and 
fmall. 

Therefore,  1.  I always  ufe  a Jhort,  private 
prayer , when  I attend  the  public  fervice  of  God. 
'Do  not  you  ? Why  do  you  not  ? Is  not  this  ac- 
cording to  the  bible  ? 

2.  I Jland  whenever  I ling  the  praife  of  God  in 
public.  Does  not  the  bible  give  you  plain  prece- 
dents for  this  ? 

3.  I always  kneel  before  the  Lord  my  Maker, 
when  I pray  in  public. 

4.I 


[ 57  3 

4.  I generally  in  public  ufe  the  Lord's  prayer ; 
becaufe  Chrift  has  taught  me,  when  I pray  to 
fay — 

I advife  every  preacher  connedled  with  me, 
whether  in  England  or  Scotland,  herein  to  tread 
in  my  heps. 

Friday  6.  We  went  on  to  Aberdeen,  about  fe- 
venty  meafured  miles.  The  congregation  in  the 
evening  was  larger  than  the  ufual  one  at  Edin- 
burgh. And  the  number  of  thofe  who  attended 
in  the  morning,  (hewed  they  were  not  all  curious 
hearers. 

Sunday  8.  Knowing  no  reafon  why  we  (hould 
make  God’s  day  the  fhorteft  of  the  feven,  I de- 
filed Jofeph  Thompfon  to  preach  at  five.  At 
eight  I preached  myfelf.  In  the  afternoon  I heard 
a (Irong,  clofe  feimon,  at  Old  Aberdeen : and 
afterward  preached  in  the  College-kirk,  to  a very 
genteel,  and  yet  ferious  congregation.  I then 
opened  and  enforced  the  way  of  hohnefs,  at  New 
Aberdeen,  on  a numerous  congregation.  Mon- 
day 9.  I kept  a watch-night,  and  explained  to 
abundance  of  genteel  people,  One  thing  is  need- 
ful: a great  number  of  whom  would  not  go  away, 
till  after  the  noon  of  night. 

Tuefday  to.  I rode  over  to  Sir  Archibald 
Grant’s.  The  church  was  pretty  well  filled.  And 
I fpoke  exceeding  plain.  Yet  the  hearers  did  not 
appear  to  be  any  more  affefled  than  the  (lone- 
walls. 

Wednefday  11. 1 returned  to  Aberdeen,  where 

C 5 many 


[ 5*  ] 

many  of  the  people  were  much  alive  to  God. 
With  thefe  our  labour  has  not  been  in  vain.  And 
they  are  worth  all  the  pains  we  have  taken  in 
Scotland. 

Friday  13.  We  reached  Brechin,  a little  be- 
fore twelve.  Quickly  after  I began  preaching  in 
the  llelh-market,  on  the  one  thing  needful  It  be- 
ing the  fair-day,  the  town  was  full  of  ftrangers : 
and  perhaps  fome  of  them  were  found  of  him 
they  fought  not.  I preached  in  the  evening  at 
Dundee,  with  greater  liberty  than  ever  before. 
Saturday  14.  It  rained  from  the  moment  we  fet 
cut,  till  (about  one)  we  came  to  King-horn.  Find- 
ing the  boat  was  not  to  move  till  four  o’clock,  I 
purpofedto  hire  a pinnace.  But  the  wind  fpring- 
ing  up  fair,  I went  into  the  large  boat.  Quickly 
it  fell  calm  again  : fo  that  we  did  not  get  over 
till  pall  feven. 

Sunday  15.  Our  room  was  very  warm  in  the 
afternoon,  through  the  multitude  of  people:  a 
great  number  of  whom  were  people  of  fafhion, 
with  many  minifters.  I fpoke  to  them  with  the 
utmoft  plainnefs:  and  I believe  not  in  vain.  For 
we  had  fuch  a congregation  at  five  in  the  morn- 
ing, as  I never  faw  at  Edinburgh  before.  * It  is 
fcarce  pofiible  to  fpeak  too  plain  in  England: 
but  it  is  fcarce  pofiible  to  fpeak  plain  enough  in 
Scotland  And  if  you  do  not,  you  lofe  all  your 
labour  : you  plow  upon  the  fand. 

Monday  16. 1 took  a view  of  one  of  the  great- 

eft 


[ 59  ] 

eft  natural  curiofitles  in  the  kingdom ; what  is 
called  Arthur’s  Seat,  a frnall,  rocky  eminence, 
fix  or  feven  yards  acrofs,  on  the  top  of  an  ex- 
ceeding high  mountain,  not  far  from  Edinburgh. 
The  profpeff  from  the  top  of  the  caftle  is  large  : 
but  it  is  nothing  in  comparifon  of  this.  In  the 
evening  we  had  another  Sunday’s  congregation  ; 
who  feemed  more  affefted  than  the  day  before. 
Tuefday  17.  It  rained  much;  yet  abundance  of 
people  came  : and  again  God  made  bare  his 
arm.  I can  now  leave  Edinburgh  with  com- 
fort : for  I have  fully  delivered  my  own  foul. 

Wednefday  18.  I fet  out  for  Glafgow.  In  the 
afternoon  the  rain  poured  down,  fo  that  we 
were  glad  to  take  Ihelter  in  a little  houfe,  where 
I foon  began  to  talk  with  our  hoft’s  daughter,, 
eighteen  or  nineteen  years  old.  But  to  my  fur- 
prize  I found  her  as  ignorant  of  the  nature  of  re- 
ligion as  an  Hottentot.  And  many  fuch  I have 
found  in  Scotland  ; able  to  read,  nay  and  repeat 
the  catechifm  : but  wholly  unacquainted  with 
true  religion,  yea  and  all  genuine  morality. 
This,  evening  we  were  in^the  houfe:  but  the- 
next  I preached  abroad,  to  many  more  than  the 
houfe  could  contain.  On  Friday  the  number  was 
greatly  increafed  ; but  much  more  on  Saturday. 
I then  enlarged  upon  communion  with  God , as  the 
only  real,  fcriptural  religion.  And  I believe 
many  felt,  that  with  all  their  orthodoxy , they  had 
no  religion  Hill. 

C 6 


* Whau 


• [ 6o  ] 

* What  a difference  there  is  between  the  fo* 
ciety  here,  and  that  at  Dundee  ? There  are  about 
fixty  members  there,  and  fcarce  more  than  fix 
fcriptural  believers.  Here  are  feventy-four  mem- 
bers, and  near  thirty  among  them  lively,  zealous’ 
believers  ; one  of  whom  was  juftified  thirty  years 
ago,  and  another  of  them  two  and  forty.  And  fe- 
veral  of  them  have  been  for  many  years  rejoic- 
ing in  God  their  Saviour. 

Sunday  22.  At  feven  I was  obliged  to  preach 
abroad,  and  the  word  funk  deep  into  the  hearers. 
I almoff  wondered  at  myfelf  for  fpeaking  fo  plain, 
and  wondered  how  they  could  bear  it.  It  is  the 
Lord’s  doing  ! In  the  afternoon  Mr.  Gillies  was 
unufually  clofe  and  convincing.  At  five  I 
preached  on,  0 that  thou,  haji  known , at  leajl  in 
this  thy  clay,  the  things  that  make  for  thy  peace ! I 
almofl  defpaired  of  making  the  whole  congrega- 
tion hear  ; but  by  their  behaviour  it  feemed  they 
did.  In  the  clofe  I enlarged  upon  their  prejudi- 
ces, and  explained  myfelf  with  regard  to  moll  of 
them.  Shame,  concern,  and  a mixture  of  vari- 
ous pafiions,  were  painted  on  mod  faces.  And 
I perceived  the  Scots,  if  you  touch  but  the 
right  key,  receive  as  lively  imprelTions  as  the 
Englifh. 

Monday  23.  We  rode  in  a mild,  cool  day  to 
Thorny-hill,  about  fixty  (meafured)  miles  from 
Glafgow.  * Here  I met  with  Mr.  Knox’s  hif- 
tory  of  the  church  of  Scotland.  And  could  any 

man 


[ 6i  ] 

man  wonder,  if  the  members  of  it  were  more 
fierce,  four,  and  bitter  of  fpirit  than  fomeof  them 
are?  For  what  a pattern  have  they  before  them  ! 
I know  it  is  commonly  faid,  “ The  work  to  be 
done  needed  fiich  a fpirit.”  Not  fo  : the  work  of 
God  does  not,  cannot  need  the  work  of  the  devil 
to  forward  it.  And  a calm  even  fpirit  goes  through 
rough  work  far  better  than  a furious  one.  Al- 
though therefore  God  did  ufe  at  the  time  of  the 
reformation,  four,  over-bearing,  paffionate  men, 
yet  he  did  not  ufe  them  becaufe  they  were  fuch, 
but  notwithflanding  they  were  fo.  And  there 
is  no  doubt,  he  would  have  ufed  them  much 
more,  had  they  been  of  an  humbler  and  milder 
fpirit. 

Tuefday  24.  Before  eight  we  reached  Dum- 
fries, and  after  a fhort  bait  we  pufhed  on,  in 
hopes  of  reaching  Solway-frith,  before  the  fea 
was  come  in.  Defigning  to  call  at  an  inn  by  the 
Frith  fide,  we  inquired  the  wav,  and  were  di- 
refled  to  leave  the  main  road,  and  go  firait  to  the 
houfe,  which  we  faw  before  us.  In  ten  minutes 
Duncan  Wright  was  embogged.  However  the 
horfe  plunged  on,  and  got  through.  I was  in- 
clined to  turn  back.  But  Duncan  telling  me,  I 
needed  only  go  a little  to  the  left,  I did  fo,  and 
funk  at  once  to  my  horfe ’s  fhoulders.  He  fprung 
up  twice,  and  twice  fung  again,  each  time  deeper 
than  before.  At  the  third  plunge  he  threw  me  on 
one  fide,  and  we  both  made  fhift  to  fcramble  out. 

I was 


f[  62  ] 

1 was  covered  with  fine,  foft  mud,  from  my  feet 
to  the  crown  of  my  head  : yet,  bleffed  be  God, 
not  hurt  at  all.  But  we  could  not  crofs  till  be- 
tween feven  and  eight  o’clock.  An  honefl  man 
croffed  with  us,  who  went  two  miles  out  of  his 
way,  to  guide  us  over  the  fands  to  Sktlborneze  : 
where  we  found  a little,  clean  houfe  and  paffeda 
comfortable  night. 

Wednefday  25.  We  rode  on  to  Whitehaven. 
Here  I fpent  the  reft  of  the  week.  Sunday  29. 

I appointed  the  children  to  meet  me  ; and  defired 
Mr.  Atlay  to  meet  them  for  the  time  to  come. 
At  one,  Robert  Williams  preached  in  the  mar- 
ket-place, to  fome  thoufands  of  people,  all  quiet 
and  attentive.  About  five  I preached  near  the 
town  to  a willing  multitude,  many  of  whom 
Teemed  to  be  cut  to  the  heart. 

Monday  30.  About  two  we  reached  Penrith. 
Two  of  our  friends  guided  us  thence  to  Appleby, 
a county-town  worthy  of  Ireland,  containing  at 
leaft,  five  and  twenty  houfes.  I was  defired  to 
preach  here;  but  being  very  wet,  I chofe  to  ride 
on  to  Arthur  Johnfon’s,  near  Brough. 

I would  willingly  have  preached,  (though  we 
had  lode  upwards  of  feventy  miles)  but  it  was  a 
lone  houfe,  and  there  was  not  time  to  gather  a 
congregation.  Tuefday,  July  1.  The  neighbours 
foon  came  together,  to  whom  I preached  at  fe- 
ven, and  then  rode  on  to  Barnard-caftle,  and  met 
the  ftewards  of  the  focieties, greatly  increafed  fince 
I was  here  before.  At  fix  I preached  in  an  open 

fpace, 


[ 63  ] 

fpace,  adjoining  to  the  preaching-houfe.  As  the 
militia  were  in  the  town,  the  far  greater  part  of 
them  attended,  with  a large  congregation  from 
town  and  country.  It  rained  moft  of  the  time  I 
was  fpeaking  : but  I believe  hardly  fix  perfons 
went  away.  At  the  love-feaft  which  followed,  fe- 
veral  fpoke  their  experience,  with  all  fimpli- 
city.  One  poor  mourner  was  fet  at  liberty,  and 
many  greatly  comforted. 

Wednefday  2.  About  noon  I preached  in 
Teefdale,  and  in  Wardale  at  fix  in  the  evening. 
Here  a poor  woman  was  brought  to  us,  who  had 
been  difordered  feveral  years,  and  was  now  rav- 
ing-mad. She  curfed  and  blafphemed  in  a terri- 
ble manner,  and  could  not  Hand  or  fit  fiill  for  a 
moment.  However  her  hufband  conftrained 
her  to  come  to  the  place  where  I was  going  to 
preach.  And  he  held  her  there  by  main  ftrength, 
although  fhe  fhrieked  in  the  moft  dreadful  man- 
ner. But  in  a quarter  of  an  hour,  fhe  left  off 
fhrieking,  and  fat  motionlefs  and  filent,  till  fhe 
began  crying  to  God,  which  fhe  continued  to 
do,  almoft  without  intermiffion,  till  we  left 
her. 

Thurfday  3.  We  rode  through  a pleafant  vale 
to  Woolfingham,  where  I began  finging  near  the 
middle  of  the  town.  A few  foon  gathered  toge- 
ther, and  their  number  increafed  all  the  time  I 
was  preaching.  Only  one  young  man  behaved 
amifs,  ftriving  to  divert  them  that  was  near  him. 

But 


C 64  ] 

But  they  would  not  be  diverted:  fo  that  after  a 
while  he  grew  ferious  too. 

In  the  evening  we  came  once  more  to  New- 
cattle.  On  Saturday  I rode  to  Sunderland  : and 
at  eight  the  next  morning  preached  at  the  eatt: 
end  of  the  town,  to  a huge  multitude,  the  greater 
part  of  whom  had  little  thought  of  God  or  devil. 
Thence  we  returned  to  Gatefhead-fell,  where 
was  a multitude  of  another  kind,  ripe  for  the 
whole  gofpel.  Here  therefore,  as  well  as  at  the 
Garth- heads  about  five,  I enlarged  on  thofe  fo- 
lemn  words,  To  day,  if  you  will  hear  his  voice , 
harden  not  your  hearts . 

Monday  7.  I rode  to  Durham,  and  preached 
about  noon  on  our  Lord's  lamentation  over  Je- 
rufalem.  In  the  evening,  the  rain  hindering  me 
from  preaching  in  the  ttreet,  at  Hartlepool,  I had 
a large  congregation  in  the  Aflembly-room. 
Many  of  them  were  prefen  t again  in  the  morning, 
and  feemed  almojl  per fuaded  to  be  Chriftians. 

Tuefday  8.  While  I was  preaching  at  Stockton, 
a drunken  man  made  fome  ditturbance.  I turned 
and  fpoke  ttrongly  to  him.  He  ttood  reproved, 
and  lifiened  with  much  attention.  Wednefday  9. 
We  had  our  quarterly  meeting  at  Yartn.  The  fo- 
cieties  in  this  circuit  increafe  : that  is,  among 
the  poor;  for  the  rich,  generally  fpeaking,  care 
for  none  of  thefe  things. 

Thurfdav  10.  About  two  in  the  afternoon  I 
preached  at  Potto,  and  in  the  evening  at  Hutton- 

rudbey, 


[ 65  ] 

rudbey.  Here  is  the  largeft  focieiy  in  thefe  parts, 
and  the  nioft  alive  to  God.  After  fpending  fome 
time  with  them  all,  I met  thofe  apart,  who  be- 
lieve they  are  faved  from  fin.  * I was  agreeably 
furprized.  I think  not  above  two,  out  of  fixteen 
or  feventeen  whom  I examined,  have  loft  the 
diredl  witnejs  of  that  falvation,  ever  fince  they 
experienced  it. 

Friday  11,  I preached  at  five  on  The  Spies, 
who  brought  up  an  evil  report  on  the  good  land. 
I breakfafted  at  — — ’s  and  met  with  a very  re- 
markable family.  He  himfelf,  his  wife,  and 
three  of  his  daughters,  are  a pattern  to  all  round 
about  them.  About  nine  I preached  in  the  new 
houfe  at  Stokefly  : but  it  would  by  no  means 
contain  the  congregation.  I came  to  Gifhorough, 
a little  before  twelve,  and  found  notice  had  been 
given  of  my  preaching  there.  So  having  no 
time  to  lofe,  I began  without  delay,  in  the  ftreet, 
where  I alighted.  I had  a ferious  congregation 
in  a few  minutes,  and  did  not  at  all  repent  of  my 
labour.  After  riding  on  to  Whitby,  and  preach- 
ing at  feven,  I was  no  more  tired  than  when  I 
rofe  in  the  morning. 

Sunday  13.  I preached  at  feven  in  the  room  ; 
at  one  in  the  main-ftreet  on  the  other  fide 
the  water.  A vaft  multitude  quickly  ran  toge- 
ther, and  were  deeply  attentive.  At  five  I 
preached  in  the  new  market  place,  to  a ff ill 
larger  congregation.  A great  number  of  them 

attended 


C 66  ] 

attended  at  five  in  the  morning,  and  we  had  a 
folemn  parting. 

About  one  I preached  in  the  little  fquare  at 
Robinhood’s-bay,  and  rode  on  to  Scarborough. 
We  were  met  near  the  town  by  a furious  thun- 
der fhower,  but  it  was  quickly  over.  And  a fair 
evening  following,  I preached  in  the  garden,  to 
a tolerably  ferious  congregation. 

Tuefday  1^.  I had  much  converfation  with 
Mr.  C.  whom  fome  had  again  taken  true  pains  to 
prejudice.  I think  he  is  once  more  fet  right,  but 
fear,  it  will  not  continue  long.  It  rained  hard  at 
fix  ; but  was  fair  at  feven.  Jufl  as  1 ended  my 
fermon  the  rain  began  again. 

Wednefday  16.  About  ten  I reached  Middle- 
ton,  near  Pickering.  The  church  was  pretty  well 
filled.  I preached  on  part  of  the  fecond  lelfon, 
John  iv.  particularly  the  24th  verfe.  And 
all  the  congregation  feemed  earneft  to  know, 
how  they  might  zvorjhip  God,  in  Jpinl  and  in 
truth. 

In  the  evening  moft  of  the  congregation  at 
Mahon  were  of  another  kind.  But  a whole  roop 
of  the  Oxford-Blues,  who  flood  together,  and 
were  deeply  ferious,  kept  them  in  awe.  So  that 
all  behaved  decently,  and  many  of  the  foldiers 
were  prefent  again  in  the  morning. 

Thurfday  17.  In  the  way  to  Beverly,  I called 
upon  Sir  Charles  Hotham,  and  fpent  a comforta- 
ble hour.  I preached  before  the  time  appointed 
at  Hull,  by  which  means  the  room  was  but  mo- 
derately 


[ 67  ] 

derately  filled.  It  was  near  full  at  five  in  the 
morning:  at  noon  I believe  few  were  unaffe&ed. 
When  we  took  horfe  in  the  afternoon,  it  was 
quite  calm,  and  the  fun  was  extremely  fcorch- 
ing.  But  the  wind  foon  role  and  brought  on  the 
clouds  : fo  we  had  aplealant  ride  to  Beverley.  I 
preached  at  fix  in  an  houfe  as  warm  as  an  oven; 
and  the  people  were  tolerably  attentive.  Who 
knows  but  we  may  find  again  after  many  days , 
the  bread  we  are  now  cafing  upon  the  waters  ? 

Saturday  19.  I took  a view  of  Beverly-minller, 
fuch  a parifh-church  as  has  fcarce  its  fellow  in 
England.  It  is  a moll  beautiful  as  well  as  llately 
building,  both  within  and  without,  and -is  kept 
more  nicely  clean  than  any  cathedral,  which  I 
have  feen  in  the  kingdom.  But  where  will  it  be, 
when  the  earth  is  burnt  up,  and  the  elements  melt 
with  fervent  heat?  About  one  I preached  at  Pock- 
lington,  (though  my  llrenglh  was  much  ex- 
haulledj  and  in  the  evening  at  York. 

Sunday  20.  After  preaching  at  eight,  I went 
to  St.  Saviourgate  church.  Towards  the  clofe  of 
the  prayer,  the  redlor  fent  the  fexton  to  tell  me, 
“ The  pulpit  was  at  my  fervice.’-  I preached  on 
the  conclufion  of  the  gofpel  for  the  day,  A Jot 
every  one  that  faith  unto  me,  Lord , Lord,fhall  en- 
ter into  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  but  he  that  doth  the 
will  of  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven.  I did  not  fee 
one  perfon  laugh  or  fmile,  though  we  had  a molt 
elegant  congregation. 


Wednefday 


[ 68  ] 

vVednefday  23.  I went  on  toTadcafter.  Here 

Mr.  J m had  once  a far  larger  fociety  than 

ours : but  it  is  now  fhrunk  into  nothing  : ours 
mean  time  is  continually  increafing.  In  the 
eveningrich  and  poor  flocked  together,  to  whom 
I explained,  IVe  know  that  wt  art  oj God : namely, 
by  the  Jpint  which  he  hath  given  us  : by  the  wit- 
nefs  of  the  fpirit,  and  by  the  Iruit  confirming 
that  witnefs. 

Thurfday  24,  I preached  at  Pately-bridge. 
Such  a congregation,  both  for  number  and  feri- 
oufnefs,  I have  not  feen  fince  we  left  Newcaftle. 
As  it  rained,  I defired  the  men  to  put  on  their 
hats ; but  in  two  or  three  minutes  they  pulled 
them  off  again,  and  feemed  to  mind  nothing  but 
how  they  might  know  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jefus 
Chrifl. 

Friday  25.  We  rode  toSkipton  in  Craven.  I 
defigned  to  preach  in  the  market  place:  but  the 
rain  prevented.  So  I flood  near  Mr.  Garforth’s 
houfe,  where  many  were  under  fhelter.  But 
many  remained  without,  feeming  not  to  think 
whether  it  rained  or  not.  Will  all  thefe  be  bar- 
ren and  unfruitful? 

Saturday  26.  I preached  at  Adlingham  about 
nine,  and  at  Guifelev  in  the  evening.  Sunday 
27.  As  Baleden  church  would  not  near  contain 
the  congregation,  after  the  prayers  were  ended  I 
came  out  into  the  church-vard,  both  morning 
and  afternoon.  The'  wind  was  extremely  high, 
and  blew  in  my  face  all  the  time : yet  I believe 

all 


[ 69  J 


all  the  people  could  hear.  But  at  Bradford 
there  was  fo  huge  a-  multitude,  and  the  rain  fo 
damped  my  voice  that  many  in  the  fkirts  of  the 
congregation  could  not  hear  diftin&ly.  They 
have  juft  built  a preaching-houfe.  Fifty-four  feet 
fquare,  the  largeft  o&ogon  we  have  in  England. 
And  it  is  the  firft  ol  the  kind  where  the  roof  is 
built  with  common  fenfe,  rifmgonly  a third  of  its 
breadth : yet  it  is  as  firm  as  any  in  England  ; 
nor  does  it  at  all  hurt  the  walls.  Why  then  does 
any  roof  rife  higher  ? Only  through  want  of  fkill, 
or  want  ofhonefty,  in  the  builder. 

* Tuefday  29.  I preached  at  Coin.  And  here 
I found  one  whom  I had  fent  for,  feveral  years 
ago.  She  lives  two  miles  from  Coin,  and 
is  of  an  unblamable  behaviour.  Her  name  is 
Ann  A — n.  She  is  now  in  the  twenty-fixth 

I year  of  her  age.  The  account  {he  gives  is  as 
follows.  “ 1 cannot  now  remember  the  parti- 
culars, which  I told  Mr.  Grimfhaw  from  time 
to  time.  But  I well  remember,  that  from  the 
time  I was  about  four  years  old,  after  I was  in 
bed,  I ufed  to  fee  feveral  perfons  walking  up 
and  down  the  room.  They  all  ufed  to  come 
■ very  near  the  bed,  and  look  upon  me,  but  fay 
nothing.  Some  of  them  looked  very  fad,  and 
fome  looked  very  chearful.  Some  feemed  pleaf- 
ed,  others  very  angry:  and  thefe  fra)  ed  me  fore. 
Efpecially  a man  and  a woman  of  our  own  pa- 
i rifh,  who  feemed  fighting,  and  died  foot)  after. 
None  of  them  fpake  to  me  but  a lad  about  fix- 

teen, 

1 


[ 70  ] 

teen,  who  a week  before  died  of  the  fmall-pox. 
I faid  to  him,  “ You  are  dead  How  did  you 
get  out  of  the  other  place?”  He  faid,  “ Eafily 
enough.”  I faid,  “ Nay,  I think,  if  I w as  there, 
I (hould  not  get  out  fo  eafily.”  He  looked  ex- 
ceeding angry.  I was  frighted,  and  began  to 
pray,  and  he  vanifhed  away.  If  it  was  ever  fo 
dark,  when  any  of  them  appeared,  there  was 
light  all  round  them.  This  continued  till  I was 
fixteen  or  feventeen.  But  it  frighted  me  more 
and  more.  And  I was  troubled,  becaufe  people 
talked  about  me  : and  many  told  me,  I was 
a witch.  This  made  me  cry  earnefily  to  God 
to  take  it  away  from  me.  In  a week  or  two  it 
was  all  at  an  end.  And  1 have  feen  nothing 
fince.” 

In  the  evening  I preached  near  the  preaching- 
houfeat  Paddiham,  and  ftrongly  infilled  on  com- 
munion with  God,  as  the  only  religion  that 
would  avail  us.  At  the  clofe  of  the  fermon  came 
Mr.  M.  his  long,  white  beard,  (hewed  that  his 
prefent  diforder  was  of  fome  continuance.  In  all 
other  refpecls  he  was  quite  fenfible  : but  he 
told  me,  with  much  concern,  “You  can  have  no 
“ place  in  heaven  without  — a beard  ! Therefore 
“ I beg  let  yours  grow  immediately.5 

Wednefday  30.  I rode  to  Rofendale,  which 
notwithllanding  its  name  is  little  elfe  than  a chain 
of  mountains.  The  rain  in  the  evening  obliged 
me  to  preach  in  the  new  houfe,  near  a village 
called  New  Church.  As  many  as  could  crowded 

in. 


C 7*  ] 


in,  and  many  more  flood  at  the  door.  But  many 
were  couftained  to  go  away.  Thurfday  31.  I 
preached  at  Bacup,  and  then  rode  on  to  Hepton- 
ftall.  The  tall  mountain,  on  which  it  ftands,  is 
quite  fteep  and  abrupt,  only  where  the  roads  are 
made  : and  the  deep  valleys  that  furround  it, 
as  well  as  the  Tides  of  the  mountains  beyond, 
are  well  cloathed  with  grafs,  corn  and  trees.  I 
preached  with  great  enlargement  of  heart,  on 
Nozu  is  the  day  of  falvation.  The  renegade 
Methodifls,  firfl  turning  Calvinifts,  then  Anabap- 
tifts,  made  much  confufion  here  for  a feafon. 
But  as  they  now  have  taken  themfelves  away, 
the  poor  people  are  in  peace  again, 

Friday  Augufl  2.  I rode  to  Ewood.  The  lafl 
time  I was  here,  young  Mr.  Grimfhaw  received 
us  in  the  fame  hearty  manner  as  his  father  ufed 
to  do.  But  he  too  is  now  gone  into  eternity! 
So  in  a few  years  the  family  is  extinft  ! I preach- 
ed at  one  in  a meadow  near  the  houfe  to  a nu- 
merous congregaiioni  And  we  fang  with  one 
heart, 

“ Let  ftcknefs  bl aft  and  death  devour, 

“ If  heaven  will  recompenfe  our  pains  : 

“ Perifh  the  grafs  and  fade  the  flower, 

“ Since  firm  the  word  of  God  remains.” 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  Halifax.  When  I 
began  the  fun  wasintenfely  hot.  But  quickly  the 
clouds  covered  him. 


Sunday 


[ 72  ] 

Sund.  3.  When  the  prayers  at  Haworth  were 
ended,  I preached  from  a little  fcatfold  on  the 
fouth  fide  of  the  church,  on  thofe  words  in  th§> 
gofpel.  0 that  thou  hadjl known  the  things  that  be- 
long unto  thy  peace  ! The  communicants  alone  (a 
fight  which  has  not  been  feen  fince  Mr.  Grim- 
fhaw’s  death;  filled  the  church.  In  the  afternoon 
the  congregation  was  fuppofed  to  be  the  largeft 
which  had  ever  been  there.  But  lirength  was 
given  me  in  proportion  ; fo  that  I believe  all 
could  hear. 

Monday  4.  At  One  I preached  at  Bingley, 
but  with  an  heavy  heart,  finding  fo  many  of  the 
Method ifts  here,  as  well  as  at  Haworth  perverted 
by  the  Anabaptifis.  I fee  clearer  and  clearer,  none 
will  keep  to  11s,  unlefsthey  keep  to  the  church. 
Whoever  feparate  from  the  church,  will  feparate 
from  the  Methodifls.  In  the  afternoon  I went  to 
Otley.  But  the  town  feemed  to  be  run  mad.  Such 
noife,  hurry,  drunkennefs,  rioting,  confufion.I 
know  not  when  I have  met  with  before.  It  was 
their  feaft-day  ! A feafl:  of  Bacchus,  or  Venus, 
or  Belial  ? O fhame  to  aChriftian  country  ! How- 
ever, both  the  fmall  and  great  rabble  were  fo  en- 
gaged, that  they  had  no  leifure  to  rnoleft  us : fo 
that  I preached  to  a large,  congregation  under 
the  hill  with  perfecl  quietnefs. 

Tuefday  5.  I rode  to  Bradford.  V edneiday  6. 
I preached  at  one  in  Great  Gummerfal  ; in  the 
evening  at  Dewfbury.  d he  congregation  was  as 
large  as  at  Bradford,  and  as  attentive.  Although 

a few 


[ 73  3 

a few  years  fince  the  people  of  Daw-Green  were 
as  eminently  favage  and  irreligious,  as  even  the 
colliers  of  Kingfwood. 

Thurfday  7.  We  had  as  hot  a day  as  moftl 
have  known  in  Georgia.  However,  about  noon  I 
rode  to  Harbury  : but  it  was  impraHicable  to 
preach  abroad.  So  we  retired  into  the  new  houfe  : 
but  this  too  was  as  hot  as  an  oven.  Some  of  the 
people  behaved  exceeding  ill  at  fir fl : but  it  was 
foonover.  In  a few  minutes  the  whole  congrega- 
tion was  as  ferious  and  attentive  as  that  at  Daw- 
Green. 

Friday  8.  I rode  over  to  Huddersfield.  The 
church,  though  large  was  exceeding  hot,  through 
the  multitude  of  people  : on  whom  I inforced 
St  Paul’s  words,  God  forbid  that  I Jhould glory , 
Javein  the  ciofscj  out  Lord  JefusChriJl.  Flow 
we  fhould  have  rode  back,  I knew  not  : but 
that  the  wind  which  was  in  our  face  as  we  came, 
was  again  in  our  face  as  we  returned.  At  Birfial 
we  found  many  of  our  brethren  from  various 
parts.  One  of  them  was  mentioning  a remarkable 
cafe.  David  Prince,  of  Thorner,  near  Leeds,  had 
been  {tone-blind  for  many  years,  and  was  without 
God  in  the  world,  till  pad  fourfcore.  At  about 
eighty-one  he  received  remiflion  of  fins,  and 
from  that  hour  he  never  loft  the  fenfe  of  it. 
When  he  was  aflced,  how  he  did?  Flis  anfwer 
was,  “ happier  and  happier.”  In  the  eighty-fifth 
year  of  his  age,  his  fpirit  returned  to  God. 

Sunday  10.  After  Mr.  Eaftwood  had  read 

Vol.  XXXII.  D prayers 


C 74  ] 

prayers  I came  out  into  the  church-yard,  and 
preached  to  four-times  as  many  as  the  church 
could  contain,  on  Are  not  Abana  and  Pharphar 
better  than  all  the  waters  of  Ifrael  ? About  one  I 
preached  at  Daw-Green.  I judged  the  congre- 
gation clofely  wedged  together  to  extend  forty 
yards  one  way,  and  about  an  hundred  the  other. 
Now  fuppofe  five  to  hand  in  a yard  fqu3re,  they 
would  amount  to  twenty  thoufand  people.  I began 
preaching  at  Leeds  between  five  and  fix,  to  juft 
fuch  another  congregation.  This  was  the  hardeft 
day’s  work  I have  had  fince  I left  London  ; 
being  obliged  to  fpeak  at  each  place  from  the  be- 
ginning to  the  end,  to  the  utmoft  extent  of  my 
voice.  But  my  ftrength  was  as  my  day. 

Tuefday  12.  Our  conference  began,  and  ended 
on  Friday  evening.  An  happier  conference  we 
never  had,  nor  a more  profitable  one.  It  was 
both  begun  and  ended  in  love,  and  with  a fo- 
Jemn  fenfe  of  the  prefence  of  God. 

Sunday  17.  After  preaching  in  Leeds  at  feven, 

1 rode  to  Birftal,  and  heard  a found,  ufeful  fer- 
rnon,  on  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are 
heavy  laden.  At  One  I preached  to  an  immenfe 
multitude,  on  Come,  Lord  Jfus  ! I then  let  out 
for  Rotherham.  But  the  next  day  I turned  off 
from  the  road  I had  defigned  to  take,  and  going 
on  to  Leicester  that  night,  on  Wednefday  reach- 
ed London. 

It  was  at  the  earnefr  requeP  of  — , whofe  heart 
God  has  turned  again,  without  any  expectation  of 

mine, 


C 75  ] 

mine,  that  I came  hither  fo  fuddenly.  And  if  no 
other  good  refult  from  it,  but  our  firm  union 
with  Mr.  Whitefield,  it  is  an  abundant  recom- 
pence  for  my  labour.  My  brother  and  I conferred 
with  him  every  day  : and  let  the  honourable 
men  do  what  they  pleafe,  we  refolved  by  the 
grace  of  God,  to  go  on  hand  in  hand,  through 
honour  and  difhonour. 

Sunday  24.  The  chapel  was  fufficiently  crowd- 
ed, both  morning  and  afternoon.  And  God 
was  eminently  prefent.  In  the  evening  I went  to 
Brentford,  and  faw  a remarkable  monument  of 
mercy  : a man,  who  in  the  full  career  of  fin, 
was  fo  hurt  by  a fall,  that  there  was  no  hope  of 
his  life.  But  after  deep  repentance,  God  broke 
in  upon  his  foul,  and  gave  him  a better  hope.  So 
that  he  is  now  little  concerned  about  life  or  death, 
but  praifes  God  all  the  day  long.  Monday  2^. 
We  fet  out  early  from  Brentford,  and  reached 
Bath  on  Tuefday  in  the  afternoon. 

Many  werefuot  a little  furprized  in  the  evening 
at  feeing  me  in  the  countefs  of  H's.  chapel.  The 
congregation  was  not  only  large  butferious; 
and  I fully  delivered  my  own  foul.  So  I am  in 
no  concern,  whether  I preach  there  again,  or  no. 
I have  no  choice  concerning  it. 

Wednefday  2y.  I rode  to  Bnftol,  and  the  next 
day  delivered  the  management  of  Kingfwood- 
houfe,  to  ftewards  on  whom  I could  depend.  So 
I have  call  an  heavy  load  off  my  fhoulders. 
Bleffed  be  God  for  able  and  faithful  men,  who 
D 2 vvill 


[ 76  ] 

will  do  his  work,  without  any  temporal  reward. 

Friday  29.  In  my  way  to  Cornwall,  1 preach- 
ed at  Shepton-mallet  at  nine  : in  Wincaunton 
at  one.  I was  throughly  tired  before  we  came  to 
Shafrfbury  : however  at  fix  I preached  in  the 
new-houfe,  filled  within  and  without,  to  the  no 
fmall  aflonifhment,  it  feemed,  of  mofl  of  the  hear- 
ers. But  it  was  a time  of  confolation,  as  well  as 
convi&ion.  I truft,  many  will  experience  both  in 
this  houfe. 

Saturday  30.  We  rode  to  Stallbridge,  long  the 
feat  of  war,  by  a fenfelefs  infolent  mob,  encou- 
raged by  their  betters  fo  called,  to  outrage  their 
quiet  neighbours.  For  what  ? “ Why  they  were 
mad  : They  were  Methodifls.”  So  to  bring 
them  to  their  fenfes,  they  would  beat  their  brains 
out.  They  broke  their  windows,  leaving  not  one 
whole  pane  of  glafs,  fpoiled  their  goods,  and  af- 
faulted  their  perfons,  with  dirt,  and  rotten  eggs, 
and  Hones,  when  ever  they  appeared  in  the 
flreet.  But  no  magiltrate,  though  they  applied  to 
feveral,  would  fhew  them  either  metcy  or  juflice. 
At  length  they  wrote  to  me.  I ordered  a lawyer 
to  write  to  the  rioters:  he  didfo;  but  they  fet 
him  at  nought.  We  then  moved  the  court  of 
King’s-Bench.  By  various,  artifices,  they  got  the 
trial  put  off,  from  one  afiizes  to  another,  for 
eighteen  months.  But  it  fell  fo  much  the  hea- 
vier on  themfelves,  when  they  were  found  guilty. 
And  from  that  time,  finding  “ there  is  law  for 

Methodifls,” 


[ 77  j 

Methodifts,”  they  have  fuffeied  them  to  be  at 
peace. 

I preached  near  the  main-ftreet,  without  the 
leail  difturbance  to  a large  and  attentive  congte- 
gation.  Thence  we  rode  on  to  Axminfter,  but 
were  throughly  wet,  before  we  came  thither.  The 
rai  n obliged  me  to  preach  within  at  fix.  But  at 
feven  on  Sunday  morning,  I cried  in  the  market 
place.  The  Kingdom  oj  God  it  at  hand  : repent  ye 
and  believe  thegofpel. 

In  the  evening  I preached  in  the  fireet  at 
Alhburton.  Many  behaved  with  decency;  but 
the  reft,  with  fuch  ftupid  rudenefs  as  I have  not 
feen  fora  long  time  in  any  part  of  England. 

Monday  September  1.  I came  to  Plymouth- 
Dock,  where  after  heavy  ftorms,  there  is  now  a 
calm.  The  houle,  notwithftanding  the  new  gal- 
leries, was  extreamly  crowded  in  the  evening.  I 
ftrongly  exhorted  the  back- Aiders  to  return  to 
God.  And  I believe  many  received  the  word  of 
exhortation. 

Tuefday  2.  Being  invited  to  preach  in  the 
tabernacle  at  Plymouth,  I began,  about  two  in 
the  afternoon.  In  the  evening  I was  offered  the 
ufe  of  Mr.  Wbitefield’s  room  at  the  Dock  : but 
large  as  it  is,  it  would  not  contain  the  congrega- 
tion. At  the  clofe  of  the  fermon,  a large  ftone 
was  thrown  in  at  one  of  the  windows  which 
came  juft  behind  me  and  fell  at  my  feet,  the  beft 
place  that  could  have  been  found.  So  no  one 
D g was 


[ 7§  ] 

was  either  hurt  or  frighted,  not  many  knowing 
any  thing  of  the  matter. 

Wednefday  3.  I rode  to  Medros,  where  there 
was  laft  year  the  mod  lively  fociety  in  Cornwall. 
But  they  are  decreafed  both  in  number  and 
ftrength  ; many  who  were  then  flrong  in  the 
Lord  being  now  weak  and  faint.  However  we 
had  a deeply  ferious  congregation  in  the  evening 
and  3 remarkable  bleffing  at  the  meeting  of  the 
fociety. 

Thurfday  4.  At  noon  I preached  in  Truro.  I 
was'in  hopes,  when  Mr.  Walker  died,  the  enmity 
in  thole  who  were  called  his  people  would  have 
died  alfo.  But  it  is  not  fo.  1 hey  hill  look  upon 
us  as  rank  heretics,  and  will  have  no  fellowfhip 
with  11s.  In  the  evening  I preached  at  Penryn  in 
the  main-ftreet,  at  the  door  of  one  of  die  chief 
gentlemen  in  the  town.  I never  faw  fuch  a con- 
gregation here  before.  And  all  feemed  to  hear 
as  for  life. 

Friday  5.  I preached  near  Hellion,  to  an  ex- 
ceeding large  and  ferious  congregation.  What  a 
furpriftng  change  is  wrought  here  alfo,  within  a 
few  years  ! Where  a Methodill  preacher  could 
hardly  go  through  the  ftreet,  without  a fhower  of 
Hones. 

Saturday  6.  At  one,  I began  preaching  in  a 
meadow  adjoining  to  Penzance.  The  whole  con- 
gregation behaved  well.  The  old  bitternefs  is 
gone.  And  perhaps,  had  it  not  been  maiket-day, 
I might  have  had  a quiet  hearing  in  the  market- 
place. 


[ 79  ] 

place.  In  the  evening  I preached  at  Newlin. 
Small  rain  fell  all  the  time.  But  none  went  away. 

Sunday  7.  At  eight  I preached  in  Moufehole, 
a large  village  fonth-weft  from  Newlin.  Thence 
I went  to  Beryan  church  : and  as  foon  as  the  fer- 
vice  was  ended,  preached  near  the  church- 
yard, to  a numerous  congregation.  Juft  after  I 
began,  I faw  a gentleman  before  me,  fhaking 
his  whip,  and  vehemently  ftriving  to  fay  fome- 
thing.  But  he  was  abundantly  too  warm,  to  fay 
any  thing  intelligibly.  So,  after  walking  a 
while  to  and  fro,  he  wifely  took  horfe  and  rode 
away. 

The  multitude  of  people  atSt.Juft  conftrained 
me  to  preach  abroad,  though  it  rained  the  whole 
time.  But  this  did  not  difcourage  the  congrega- 
tion, who  not  only  ftayed  till  I had  concluded, 
but  were  not  in  hafte  to  go  away  then  ; many 
ft  ill  hovering  about  the  place. 

Tuefday  9.  In  riding  to  St.  Ives,  I called  on 
one  with  whom  I ufed  to  lodge,  two  or  three 
and  twenty  years  ago,  Alice  Daniel  at  Rofemar- 
gay.  Her  fons  are  all  gone  from  her  : and  fhe 
has  but  one  daughter  left,  who  is  always  ill.  Her 
hufband  is  dead.  And  fhe  can  no  longer  read 
her  bible  : for  Die  is  ftone-blind.  Yet  (lie  mur- 
murs at  nothing,  but  chearfully  waits  till  her  ap- 
pointed time  Dial  1 come.  How  many  of  thefa 
jewels  may  lie  hid  up  and  down  ? Forgotten  of 
men,  but  precious  in  the  fight  of  God  ! 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  St.  Ives,  a little 

D 4 


aoove 


[ J 

above  the  town,  to  the  largefl  congregation  I 
ever  faw  there.  Indeed  nearly  the  whole  town 
feems  convinced  of  the  truth,  yea  and  ajmoft 
perfuaded  to  be  Chriflians. 

Wednefday  10.  1 preached  at  Lelant  about 
one  ; but  the  rain  drove  us  into  the  houfe.  And 
at  St.  Ives,  all  I could  do  was  to  preach  to  as 
many  as  the  houfe  would  hold,  and  a few  at  the 
door.  But  the  next  evenirg  I flood  in  the  mea- 
dow’ again,  and  inforced  thofe  folemn  words. 
Come,  Lord  JeJ'u.% ! 

Friday  12.  I rode  to  St.  Hilary’s,  and  in  the 
evening  preached  near  the  new  houfe,  on 
Awake  thou  that  Jleepejl ! In  returning  to  my 
lodging,  it  being  dark,  my  horfe  was  juft  flep- 
ping  into  a tin-pit,  when  an  honeft  man  caught 
him  by  the  bridle,  and  turned  his  head  the  other 
way. 

Saturday  13.  I preached  at  noon  in  the  new 
houfe  in  Crowan,  it  being  a very  flormy  day. 
But  I knew’  not  what  to  do  at  Redruth  in  the 
evening  : the  houfe  was  far  too  fmall : and  the 
wind  was  exceeding  high,  and  brought  on  fre- 
quent and  heavy  fhowers.  However  I chofe 
the  molt  convenient  part  of  the  flreet.  And  tve 
had  but  one  fhort  fhow'er  till  I concluded. 

Sunday  14.  I preached  in  St.  Agnes  at  eight. 
The  congregation  in  Redruth  at  one  was  the 
largeft  I ever  had  feen  there  ; but  fmall,  com- 
pared to  that  which  affembled  at  five,  in  the  na- 
tural amphitheatre  at  Gwenap,  far  the  finefl  I 

know 


[ ] 

know  in  the  kingdom.  It  is  a round,  green 
hollow,  gently  Ihelving  down,  about  fifty  feet 
deep  ; but  I fuppofe  it  is  two  hundred  acrofs 
one  way,  and  near  three  hundred  the  other.  I 
believe  there  were  full  twenty  thoufand  people, 
and  in  the  evening  being  calm,  all  could  hear. 

Monday  15. 1 preached  at  St.  Cuthbert’s,  and 
next  morning  rode  on  to  St.  Columbs.  Being 
defired  to  break  the  ice  here,  I began  preaching 
without  delay,  in  a gentleman’s  yard,  adjoining 
to  the  main-fireet.  I chofe  this,  as  neither  too 
public,  nor  too  private.  I fear  the  greater  part 
of  the  audience,  underftood  full  little  of  what 
they  heard.  However  they  behaved  with  feri- 
oufnefs  and  good-manners. 

Hence  I rode  to  Port-Ifaac,  now  one  of  the 
liveliefl:  places  in  Cornwall.  The  weather  being1 
uncertain,  I preached  near  the  houfe.  But  there 
was  no  rain  while  I preached  ; except  the  graci- 
ous rain  which  God  fent  upon  his  inheritance. 

Here  Mr.  B.  met  me,  who,  for  fear  of  offend- 
ing the  bilhop,  broke  off  all  commerce  with  the 
Methodiffs.  He  had  no  fooner  done  thisr  than 
the  bifhop  rewarded  him,  by  turning  him  out 
of  his  curacy  : which,  had  he  continued  to  walk 
in  C hr i Ilian  fimplicity,  he  would  probably  have 
had  to  this  day. 

Wednefday  17.  I twice  ftopt  a violent  bleed- 
ing from  a cut,  by  applying  a brier-leaf.  The 
room  at  Launcelton  would  not  near  contain  the 
congregation  in  the  evening,  to  whom  I flrongly 
D 5 applied. 


[ 82  ] 

applied  the  cafe  of  the  impotent  man  at  the  pool 
of  Bethefda.  Many  were  much  affefted.  But 
O!  how  few,  are  willing  to  be  made  whole? 

Thurfday  18. 1 rode  to  Collumpton,  preached 
at  fix,  and  then  went  on  to  Tiverton,  i'riday  19, 
came  a meffenger  from  Jo.  Magor,  dangeroufly  ill 
at  Sidmouth,  four  or  five  and  twenty  miles  off, 
to  tell  me  he  could  not  die  in  peace  till  he  had 
feen  me.  So  the  next  morning  after  preaching' 
I fet  out  : fpent  an  hour  with  him  by  which  he 
was  exceedingly  refrefhed  ; and  returned  to 
Tiverton  time  enough  to  reft  a little,  before  the 
evening  preaching. 

Sunday  21.  I preached  morning  and  evening, 
in  the  market-houfe,  and  at  one  in  an  open 
place  atBampton.  Monday  22.  I preached  in  the 
ftreet  at  Culumbftock,  to  almoft  all  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  town.  A little  before  fix  in  the  even- 
ing I preached  at  Mr.  Jones's  door  in  Middle- 
fey..  Many  of  the  hearers  did  once  run  well  : 
fome  of  whom  refolve  to  fet  out  anew.  Tuefday 
23.  at  eleven  I preached  to  a large  and  ferious 
congregation  at  Lymfham-green.  When  I con- 
cluded, a clergyman  began  to  entertain  the  peo- 
ple, with  a difpute  concerning  lay-preachers. 
In  the  inftant  began  a violent  Ihower  : fo  they 
left  him  to  himfelf.  But  it  was  fair  again  in  the 
afternoon,  and  we  had  a pleafant  ride  to  Brifiol. 

Sunday  28.  I preached  in  Princefs-ftreet  at 
eight,  in  Kingfwood  at  two,,  and  at  five  near  the 
New  fquaie.  The  laft  efpecially  was  an  accept- 
able 


[ §3  ] 

able  time  : particularly  while  I was  explaining, 
Neither' can  they  die  any  more , but  are  the  children 
oj  God,  being  children  of  the  refurredion. 

In  the  following  days,  I preached  at  Pensford, 
Paulton,  Coleford,  Buckland,  Frome,  Becking- 
ton,  Frefhford  and  Bradford.  Sunday,  Odtber^ 
at  eight  I adminiftered  the  facrament  at  Lady 
H’s.  chappel  in  Bath.  At  eleven  I preached  there 
on  thofe  words  in  the  gofpel  for  the  day,  Thou 
Jhalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thy  [elf.  The  word 
was  quick  and  powerful,  and  1 truft  many,  even 
of  the  rich  and  great,  felt  themfelves  finners  be- 
fore God. 

Several  evenings  this  week  I preached  atBrif- 
tol,  on  the  education  of  children.  Some  an- 
fwered  all,  by  that  poor,  lame,  miferable  fhift, 
“ O he  has  no  children  of  his  own.”  But  many 
of  a nobler  fpirit,  owned  the  truth  and  pleaded 
guilty  before  God. 

Thurfday  9.  1 waited  on  the  good,  oldbifhop 
of  Londonderry,  and  fpent  two  or  three  hours, 
in  ufeful  converfation.  In  the  evening  I preach- 
ed again  at  my  Lady’s  chapel,  to  another  nume- 
rous congregation.  Who  knows  but  a few  a- 
mong  this  gay  multitude,  may  work  out  their  fal - 
vation  with  fear  and  trembling ? 

Friday  io.  I took  a ride  to  Cheltenham.  It 
being  too  cold  to  preach,  abroad,  at  fix  I preach- 
ed in  the  chappel,  and  fully  declared  the  whole 
eounfel  of  God.  Afterwards  I examined  the  lit- 
tle fociety,  and  found  the  greater  part  of  them 
I>  6 lively 


[ ] 

lively  believers,  and  quite  free  from  bigotry 
' 'in -h  is  common  among  churchmen,  and 
fh.l  more  among  dilfenters.  The  next  day, 
after  preaching  at  five,  and  at  eight  in  Glocefter, 
1 had  a pleafant  ride  to  Briftol. 

Sunday  12.  I took  my  leave  of  Princefs-flreet 
for  this  feafon.  We  had  fuch  a congregation  at 
Kinvfvvood  at  ten,  as  I have  fcarce  feen  there  for 
thefe  twenty  years.  And  at  two  I was  obliged  to 
preach  abroad.  Sunday  19.  I preached  once 
more  in  the  fquare  : and  in  the  morning,  Mon- 
day 20,  left  Briftol,  with  a firm  hope,  that  both 
here  and  at  Kingfwood,  things  will  now  be  con- 
ducted to  the  glory  of  God  and  the  honour  of 
true  religion.  In  the  evening  I preached  an 
healing  fermon  at  Bath,  on  Col.  iii.  9.  The  next 
day  I went  on  to  Salilhury  and  preached  in  as 
routing  a manner  as  I could,  on  One  thing  is  need- 
ful. Thurfday  23.  I preached  at  Rumfey : the 
next  day  at  "\Vincheller,  Whitchurch  and  Ba- 
lingftoke  : where  many  attended  at  five  on  Sa- 
turday morning.  In  the  afternoon  I came  to 
London. 

Sunday  26.  I preached  at  Weft-flreet  in  the 
morning  to  a crowded  audience,  and  in  the 
evening  at  the  Foundery.  Flow  pleafing  would  it 
be,  to  play  between  Btiflol  and  London,  and 
preach  alwavs  to  fuch  congregations  as  thefe  ■ 
But  what  account  then  fnould  I gilt  cj  my 
jlewardjliip,  when  I can  be.  no  longer  fleward ? 

Monday -27.  I rode  to  Wycombe.  The  room 


was 


[ 8,5  ] 

was  much  crowded  ; and  yet  could  not  contain 
the  congregation.  In  the  morning  too  they 
flocked  together  in  fuch  a manner,  as  had  not 
been  feen  here  before.  In  the  evening  I preached 
at  Witney,  (where  a little  company  Hand  fall  to- 
gether) and  thrice  the  next  day,  endeavouring  to 
lay  line  upon  line,  and  precept  upon  precept. 

Thurfday  go.  At  one  I preached  in  Wattleton, 
and  thence  rode  with  fome  difficulty,  the  wind 
being  exceeding  high,  over  the  mountain  to 
Wycombe.  The  congregation  was  as  before,  both 
for  number  and  earneflnefs.  So  at  length  we  fee 
the  fruit  of  our  labour. 

* Friday  31.  At  my  return  to  London,  I found 
it  needful  to  haften  to  Laton-ftone.  But  I came 
too  late.  Mifs  Lewen  died  the  day  before,  after 
an  illefs  of  five  days.  Some  hours  before,  Ihe 
witnefled  that  good  confeffion, 

“ Nature’s  laft  agony  is  o’er, 

“ And  cruel  fin  fubfifis  no  more.” 

A while  after  fhe  cried  out,  earneftly,  “ Do 
not  you  fee  him  ? There  he  is  ! Glory,  glory, 
glory  ! I ffiall  be  with  him  for  ever,  for  ever,  for 
ever.” 

So  died  Margaret  Lewen ! A pattern  to  all 
young  women  of  fortune  in  England  : a real  bi- 
ble  Chriftian.  So  (he  rejls  from  her  labours,  and 
her  works  do  follow  her. 

Saturday,  November  1.  “ God  who  hath  knit 
together  his  eleft  in  one  communion  and  fellow- 
ship,” 


[ 86  ] 

fhip  ” gave  us  a folemn  feafon  at  Wefl-flreet  (as 
ufualj  in  praifing  him  for  all  his  faints.  On  this 
day  in  particular,  I commonly  find  the  truth  of 
thefe  words  ; 

The  church  triumphant  in  his  love, 

Their  mighty  joys  we  know  : 

They  praife  the  Lamb  in  hymns  above, 

And  we  in  hymns  below. 

Monday  3.  I rode  to  Brentford,  where  all  was 
quiet,  both  in  the  congregation  and  the  fociety. 
Tuefday  4.  I preached  at  Brentford,  Batterfea, 
Deptford  and  Welling,  and  examined  the  feveral 
focieties.  Wednefday  3.  I rode  by  Shoreham  to 
Sevenoaks.  * In  the  little  journies  which  I have 
lately  taken,  I have  thought  much  on  the  huge 
encomiums,  wTich  have  been  for  many  ages  be- 
llowed on  a country-life.  How  have  all  the  learned 
world  cried  out, 

0 Fortuna/i  nimium , hona.fi  fua  norint. 
Agricola  I 

But  after  all,  what  a flat  contradiction  is  this., 
to  univerfal  experience  ? See  that  little  houfe, 
under  the  wood,  by  the  river- fide ! There  is  rural 
fife  in  perfection.  How  happy  then  is  the  farmer 
that  lives  there  ? Let  us  take  a detail  of  his  hap- 
pinefs.  He  rifes  with,  or  before  the  fun,  calls  his 

fervants. 


[ 8?  1 

fervants,  looks  to  his  fwine  and  cows  ; then  to  hk 
ftables  and  barns.  He  fees  to  the  ploughing  and 
fowing  his  ground,  in  winter  or  in  fpring.  In 
fummer  and  autumn  he  hurries  and  fweats, 
among  his  mowers  and  reapers.  And  where  is 
his  happinefs  in  the  mean  time?  Which  of  thefe 
employments  do  we  envy  ? Or  do  we  envy  the 
delicate  repaft  that  fucceeds,  which  the  poet  Co 
languilhes  for  ? 

0 quando faba , Pythagora.  cognata,Jimulque. 

UnEla fatis  pingui  ponentur  olufcula  lardo! 

O the  happinefs  of  eating  beans  well greafed 
with  fat  bacon  l Nay,  and  ravage  too!  Was  Horace 
in  his  fenfes  when  he  talked  thus?  Orthefervile 
herd  of  his  imitators?  Our  eyes  and  ears  mayT 
convince  us,  there  is  not  a lefs,  happy  body  of 
men  in  all  England  than  the  country  farmers.  In 
general,  their  life  is  fupremely  dull ; and  it  is 
ufually  unhappy  too.  For  of  all  people  in  the 
kingdom  they  are  moft  difcontented  j feldom  fa- 
tisfied  either  with  God  or  man. 

Monday  io.  I fet  out  early  for  Northampton. 
But  before  we  came  to  Luton,  James  Glafbrook 
met  me,  and  informed  me,  that  he  had  given  no- 
tice of  my  preaching  every  day,  at  one  place  or 
another  in  Bedfordfhire.  Upon  refleftion,  we 
thought  it  bell  for  Mr.  Blackwell  to  go  to  North- 
ampton, and  for  me  to  keep  the  appointments 
which  had  been  made.  So  I preached  in  Lutorr 

at 


[ 88  ] 

at  two,  and  in  the  evening  at  Sundon.  Tuefday 
11. 1 preached  between  one  and  two,  at  a village 
called  Milbrook,  to  a company  of  plain,  ferious 
people,  and  in  the  evening  at  Wotton-Pillidge  : 
where  feveral  have  already  found  this  word  to 
be  the  power  oj  God  unto  falvation.  Wednefday 
12.  I preached  at  two  in  Lidlington,  to  another 
company  of  plain,  country  people.  Thence  we 
crolTed  over  to  Copel,  where  is  at  prefent  the 
moll  lively  of  all  the  little  focieties  in  Bedford- 
fhire.  Thurfday  13.  I rode  to  Bedford,  and  in 
the  evening  fpoke  with  more  plainnefs,  I may  in- 
deed fay  rdughnefs,  than  ever  I did  before,  if 
haply  God  might  roufe  fome  of  thefe  drowfy  peo- 
ple. Friday  14.  I preached  at  Luton,  and  on  Sa- 
turday returned  to  London. 

Sunday  16.  I flrongly  inculcated  family  reli- 
gion, the  grand  defideratum  among  the  Metho- 
difts.  Many  were  afhamed  before  God,  and  at 
length  adopted  Jofhua’s  refolution,  As  for  me 
and  my  houje,  we  will  ferve  the  Lord. 

Thurfday  27. 1 converfed  with  a young  clergy- 
man full  of  good  refolutions.  But  I judge  it  im- 
poflible  they  can  hold  : for  he  has  not  the  leaft 
conception  of  his  own  weaknefs. 

Sunday  30.  I preached  on  the  education  of 
children,  wherein  we  are  fo  fhamefullv  wanting. 
Many  were  now  deeply  convinced  of  this.  I 
hope  they  will  not  all  llifle  that  conviftion. 

Monday,  December  8.  I went  to  Canterbury, 
and  on  Wednefday  10,  to  Dover.  At  all  the  fea- 

ports 


[ 8*9  3 

ports  we  have  a multitude  of  hearers.  Is  not  this 
a token  for  good  to  the  nation  ? Surely  mercy 
embraces  us  on  every  fide.  Will  it  not  likewife  go 
through  the  land ? 

Thurfday  11.  I preached  at  Dover,  Sandwich, 
Ramfgate  and  Margate:  on  Friday  at  Canter- 
bury. I have  not  feen  this  fociety  fo  at  unity 
among  themfelves  for  many  years.  Saturday  13, 
I left  them  with  much  fatisfa&ion,  and  chear- 
fully  returned  to  London. 

Monday  29.  At  five  in  the  morning,  I again 
began  a courfe  of  fermons  on  Chriflian  Perfec- 
tion : if  haply  that  thirft  after  it  might  return, 
which  was  fo  general  a few  years  ago.  Since  that 
time,  how  deeply  have  we  grieved  the  holy  Spi- 
rit of  God  ? Yet  two  or  three  have  lately  re- 
ceived his  pure  love  : and  a few  more  are  brought 
to  the  birth. 

Thurfday,  January  1,  1 767.  The  whole  fo- 
ciety met  in  the  evening,  in  Spitalfields  church, 
and  folemnly  renewed  their  covenant  with  God. 
Sunday  4.  I buried  the  remains  of  Mary  Clarke 
(formerly,  Gardiner)  who  having  been  much  hurt 
in  the  late  Cornells,  was  during  a lingering  ill- 
nefs,  firfl  throughly  convinced  of  her  fall  from 
God,  and  afterward  throughly  reflored.  She 
then  vehemently  exhorted  all,  not  to  flray  from 
the  fold;  and  died,  rejoicing  in  the  full  falvation 
of  God. 

Sunday  11.  I made  a pufh  for  the  lending- 
flock,  fpeaking  more  flrongly  than  ever  I had 

done 


[ 90  ] 

done  before.  The  effeft  was,  that  it  was  railed 
from  about  fifty  to  one  hundred  and  twenty 
pounds. 

* Tuefday  20,  I buried  the  remains  of  Ann 
Wheeler,  who,  while  fhe  was  hearing  the  preach- 
ing in  Moorfields  four  or  five  and  twenty  years 
ago,  was  firuck  in  the  forehead  with  a ftone,  be- 
ing then  big  with  child.  The  daughter  with  whom 
fhe  then  went,  retains  the  mark  of  the  ftone  in 
her  forehead  to  this  day. 

Wednefday  21.  I had  a converfalion  with  an 
ingenious  man,  who  proved  to  a deinonftration, 
that  it  was  the  duty  of  every  many  that  could,  to 
be  cloathed  in  purple  and  fine  linen , and  to  jare 
fumptuoujly  every  day : and  that  he  would  do 
abundantly  more  good  hereby,  than  he  could  do 
by  feeding  ike  hungry  and  cloalhing  the  naked.  O 
the  depth  of  human  underftanding  ! What  may 
not  a man  believe,  ij  he  will? 

" Saturday  31.  From  the  words  of  our  bleffed 
Lord,  He  that  followeth  me Jhall  not  walk  in  dark- 
«e/},  I largely  Ihewed,  that  God  never  deferts  any 
man,  unlefs  he  firft  deferts  God  : and  that,  ab- 
ftrablingfrom  the  bodily  diforders  on  the  one  hand, 
and  violent  temptation  on  the  other,  ever)'  be- 
liever may  be  happy  as  well  as  holy,  and  walk  in 
the  light  all  the  days  of  his  life. 

Thurfday,  February  5.  I heard  a melancholy 
relation.  One  who  had  run  well  for  many  years, 
a year  or  two  ago,  took  violent  offence  at  a per- 
fon  fire  thought  had  ufed  her  ill.  A week  or  two 

fince 


[ 9i  ] 

fince  fhe  was  taken  ill.  But  as  her  illnefs  in- 
creafed,  fo  did  her  anger.  She  often  cried  out, 
“ I cannot  forgive,  I will  not  forgive,”  and  in- 
termixed horrid  lhrieks,  till  lhe  died. 

Tuefday  to.  I baptized  a young  woman,  who 
had  been  educated  among  the  Anabaptifts.  God 
bore  witnefs  to  his  ordinance,  and  gave  her 
fuch  a bleffing,  as  fhe  could  not  find  words  to 
exprefs. 

Thurfday  12.  I preached  at  Laton-ftone.  O 
what  an  houfe  of  God  is  here  ! Not  only  for  de- 
cency and  order,  but  for  the  life  and  power  of 
religion  ! I am  afraid,  there  are  very  few  fuch  to 
be  found,  in  all  the  king’s  dominions. 

* Sunday  15.  I buried  the  remains  of  Richard 
Morris,  who  had  been  in  the  fociety  twenty 
years;  and  was  a right  honefl  man,  but  never 
convinced  of  fin,  till  death  began  to  look  him  in 
the  face.  And  then  he  rather  Jaw  than  felt  his 
need  of  Chrift.  Yet  when  he  called  upon  him 
even  in  his  dull  way,  he  was  foon  affured  of  his 
love  ; and  continued  praifing  and  rejoicing,  till 
his  fpirit  returned  to  God. 

Monday  16.  I rode  to  Colchefler,  and  found 
more  life  there  than  for  feveral  years.  Why 
fhould  we  defpair  of  feeing  good  done  in  any 
place  ! How  foon  can  God  turn  the  wildernefs 
into  a fruitful  field?  Wednefday  18. 1 preached 
at  Herringswell,  and  the  next  day  came  to  Nor- 
wich. Here  I fpent  a few  days  much  to  my  fa- 
tisfa&ion,  finding  the  people  far  more  fettled 

than 


[ 92  ] 

than  ever.  Monday  23.  I rode  to  Yarmouth,  and 
found  the  fociety,  after  the  example  of  Mr. 

W p,had  entirely  left  the  church.  I judged  it 

needful  to  fpeak  largely  upon  that  head.  They 
flood  reproved,  and  refolved,  one  and  all,  to  go 
to  it  again. 

Tuefday  24.  I was  defined  to  ride  over  to  Leo- 
floff.  The  houfe  would  not  contain  one  fourth  of 
the  people  : fo  that  I was  obliged  to  preach  in 
the  open  air.  And  all  behaved  with  great  feri- 
oufnefs. 

Wednefday  25.  I took  a lift  of  the  prefent  fo- 
ciety in  Norwich,  confilling  of  one  hundred  and 
fixty  members.  But  1 have  far  more  comfort  in 
it  now  than  when  it  conlifted  of  fix  hundred. 
Thefe  know  what  they  are  about,  and  the 
greater  part  are  not  ignorant  of  Satan’s  de- 
vices. 

Thurfday  26.  I fet  out  for  London.  A good 
part  of  the  dav,  we  had  furious  wind  and  rain 
full  in  our  faces.  However  we  pufhed  on 
to  Lakenheath.  Notwithftanding  the  feverity 
of  the  weather,  the  church  was  pretty  well  filled 
in  the  evening.  The  next  evening  we  reached 
Hockerill,  and  London  on  Saturday  in  the  after- 
noon. 

On  Afh  Wednefday,  March  4.  I dined  at  a 
friend’s  with  Mr.  Whitefield,  ftill  breathing  no- 
thing but  love.  Thurfday  5.  I at  length  obliged 
Dr.  D.  by  entering  into  the  lifts  with  him.  i he 

letter 


[ 93  ] 


letter  I wrote  (though  not  publifhed  till  two  or 
three  weeks  after)  was  as  follows. 

To  the  Editor  of  Lloyd’s  Evening  Poll. 

S i R, 

“ Many  times  the  publiiher  of  the  Chriftian 
Magazine,  has  attacked  me  without  fear  or  wit. 
And  hereby  he  has  convinced  his  impartial  rea- 
ders, of  one  thing  at  lead,  that  (as  the  vulgar  fay) 

“ his  fingers  ich  to  be  at  me  that  he  has  a paf- 
fionate  defire  to  meafure  fwords  with  me.  But 
I have  other  work  upon  my  hands:  I can  em- 
ploy the  fhort  remainder  of  my  life  to  better 
purpofe. 

“ The  occafion  of  his  late  attack,  is  this  : Five 
or  fix  and  thirty  years  ago,  I much  admired  the 
chara&er  of  a perfect  Chrillian  drawn  by  Cle- 
mens Alexandrinus.  Five  or  fix  and  twenty 
years  ago,  a thought  came  into  my  mind,  of 
drawing  fuch  a charafler  myfelf,  only  in  a more 
fcriptural  manner,  and  moltly  in  the  very  words 
offcripture:  this  I intitled  the  “ Charafter  of  a 
Methodift,”  believing  that  curiofity  would  incite 
more  perfons  to  read  it,  and  alfo  that  fome  pre- 
judice might  thereby  be  removed  from  candid 
men.  But  that  none  might  imagine,  I intended  a 
panegyric  either  on  myfelf  or  my  friends,  I 
guarded  againfl  this  in  the  very  title  page,  faying 
both  in  the  name  of  myfelf  and  them,  Not  as 
though  I had  already  attained , either  were  already 

perfett. 


[ 94  ] 


perfeft.  To  the  fame  effed  I fpeak  in  the  condit- 
ion, “ Thefe  are  the  principles  and  pradices  of 
our  fed  ; thefe  are  the  marks  of  a true  Metho- 
dift,”  (i.  e.  a true  Chriftian,  as  I immediately  af- 
ter explain  myfelf.)  “ By  thefe  alone  do  thofe, 
who  are  in  dertfion  fo  called,  defire  to  be  diflin- 
guilhed  from  other  men,'"  p.  1 1.  By  thefe  marks 
do  we  labour  to  diftinguifh  ourfelves  from  thofe 
whofe  minds  or  lives  are  not  according  to  the 
gofpel  of  Chri{f,”p.  12. 

Upon  this  Rufticulus,  or  Dr.  Dodd,  fays,  “ A 
Methodiff,  according  to  Mr.  Wefley,  is  one  who 
is  perfed,  and  finneth  not  in  thought,  word,  or 
deed.” 

“ Sir,  have  me  excufed.  This  is  not  according 
to  Mr.  Wefley.  I have  told  all  the  world  lam  not 
perfcdl : and  yet  you  allow  me  to  be  a Methodift. 
I tell  you  flat,  I have  not  attained  the  charader  I 
draw.  Will  you  pin  it  upon  me  in  fpite  of  my 
teeth  ?” 

“ But  Mr.  Wefley  fays,  the  other  Methodifts 
have.”  I fay  no  fuch  thing.  What  I fav,  after 
having  given  a fcriptural  account  of  a perfed 
Chriftian,  is  this  : “ By  thefe  marks  the  Metho- 
difls  defne  to  be  did inguifhed  from  other  men ; 
by  thefe  we  labour  to  diftinguifh  ourfelves.”  And 
do  not  you  yourfelf  dfire  and  labour  after  the 
very  fame  thing  ? 

“ But  you  in fi ft,  “ Mr.  Wefley  affirms  the 
Methodiffs,  i.  e.  all  Methodifls,  to  be  perfectly 

holy 


[ 9.5  ] 


holy  and  righteous.”  Where  do  I affirm  this  ? 
Not  in  the  traft  before  us.  In  the  front  of  this,  I 
affirm  juft  the  contrary  ; and  that  I affirm  it  any 
where  elfe,  is  more  than  I know:  be  pleafed, 
Sir,  to  point  out  the  place  ; till  this  is  done,  all 
you  add  (bitterly  enough)  is  mete  brutum fulmen. 
And  the  Methodifts  fo  called  may  dill  “ declare, 
(without  any  impeachment  of  their  fincerity,) 
that  they  do  not  come  to  the  holy  table  trujiing  in 
their  own  mghteoufnefs , but  in  God's  manifold  and 
great  mercies." 

I am,  Sir,  your’s,  &c. 

John  Wesley. 


Sunday  S.  In  the  evening  I left  London,  and 
reached  Bath  on  Tuefday  in  the  afternoon,  time 
enough  to  wait  on  that  venerable  man,  the  Bi- 
fliop  of  Londonderry.  After  fpending  an  agree- 
able and  a profitable  hour  with  him,  my  brother 
read  prayers,  and  I preached  at  Lady  H.’s  chapel. 

I know  not  when  I have  feen  a more  ferious,  or 
more  deeply  attentive  congregation.  Is  it  poffi- 
ble?  Can  the  gofpel  have  place,  where  Satan’s 
throne  is? 

Thurfday  12.  and  the  two  following  days,  I 
examined  the  fociety  in  Briflol.  Still  I find  the 
greateft  part  to  be  in  peace  and  love,  and  none 
blameable  as  to  their  outward  converfation.  But 
life,  power  and  “ itruggling  into  God”  are  want- 
ing.  Few  are  agonizing  to  be  altogether  Chriftians. 

Monday 


[ 96  ] 

Monday  1 6.  Finding  no  (hip  which  could 
take  over  me  and  my  horfes,  I fet  out  with  Tho- 
mas Dancer  for  Liverpool.  Wednefdav  18  I 
reached  Wednefbury,  but  with  difficulty.  For 
my  horfc,  which  1 left  in  OHober,  to  reft  for 
fix  months,  had  been  rode  all  the  winter,  and 
was  now  galled,  jaded  and  worn  to  fltin  and 
bones. 

Thurfday  19.  Puffiing  through  the  rain  and 
violent  wind,  wre  came  in  the  evening  to  Namp- 
wich.  But  I knew  not  where  to  go,  till  a good 
woman  in  the  ftreet  alked  me,  “ If  Mr.  Wefley 
was  come  ?”  And  conducted  me  to  the  place 
where  the  people  were  waiting.  Many  were  noify 
at  firft,  becaufe  they  could  not  get  in.  But  when 
they  did,  all  were  lilent. 

Friday  20.  I rode  on  through  more  ftorms  to 
Liverpool.  But  here  too,  I found  no  ffiip  to  carry 
my  horfes.  So  Monday  23.  I fet  out  for  Port- 
patrick.  This  day  we  rode  but  about  forty  miles: 
the  next  to  Kendal,  where  1 preached  at  fix,  and 
fpent  a comfortable  evening  at  Serjeant  South- 
well’s. Wednefday  25.  The  rain,  which  began 
yellerday  noon,  continued  till  noon  to-day, 
without  intermiffion  : but  though  driven  againft 
us  by  a ftrong  wind,  it  was  nothing  fo  trouble- 
fome  as  the  piercing  cold,  while  we  afterwards 
rode  between  the  fnowy  mountains,  the  road  alfo 
being  covered  with  fnow.  However  after  a fhort 
bait  at  Kefwick,  we  reached  Cockermouth  in  the 
afternoon. 


The 


[ 97  ] 

The  mare  T.  Dancer  rode  being  now  quite 
lame,  I left  him  to  crofs  over  at  Whitehaven. 
And  Mr.  Allay,  who  came  juft  in  time,  offered  to 
accompany  me  to  Portpatrick.  Thurfday  26. 
We  rode  through  miferable  roads  to  Solway- 
frith.  But  the  guides  were  fo  deeply  engaged  at 
a cock-fight,  that  none  could  be  procured  to  {hew 
us  over.  We  procured  one  however  between 
three  and  four.  But  there  was  more  fea  than  we 
expefted  : fo  that  notwithftanding  all  I could  do, 
my  legs  and  the  fkirts  of  my  coat  were  in  the 
water.  The  motion  of  the  waves  made  me  a little 
giddy  : but  it  had  a ftranger  effefl:  on  Mr.  Atlay. 
He  loft  his  fight,  and  was  juft  dropping  off  his 
horfe,  when  one  of  our  fellow  travellers  caught 
hold  of  him.  W e rode  on  nine  or  ten  miles,  and 
lodged  at  a village  called  Ruthwell.  Friday  27. 
We  rode  by  Dumfries  and  the  Bridge  of  Orr, 
over  the  Military-Way,  to  Gatehoufe  of  Fleet. 
But  the  houfe  was  filled  with  fo  noify  com- 
pany, that  we  expefiled  little  reft.  Before 
eleven  however  I fell  afleep,  and  heard  nothing 
more,  till  between  three  and  four  in  the  morn- 
ing. 

Saturday  28.  We  rode  to  Portpatrick.  Sunday 
29.  The  packet-boat  was  ready  in  the  morn- 
ing ; but  waited  for  the  mail,  hour  after  hour, 
till  paft  three  in  the  afternoon.  Hereby  we 
avoided  a violent  ftorm,  and  had  only  what  they 
called  a frejh  breeze.  However  this  breeze  drove 
Vol.  XXXII.  E 


us 


t S3  ] 

us  to  Donaghadee,  thirty  miles,  in  about  three 
hours. 

Monday  30.  I rode  to  Newtown,  and  in  the 
evening  preached  in  the  markel-houfe  to  a large 
number  of  ferious  hearers.  The  fociety,  I found, 
had  been  fhattered  in  pieces,  but  were  uniting 
'again.  To  thefe  I fpoke  more  particularly  in  the 
morning.  It  may  be  they  will  yet  have  ears  to 
hear. 

Tuefday  31.  After  meeting  the  fociety  at  Bel- 
faft,  I rode  on  to  Lifburn.  At  fix  I preached  in 
the  Linen-hall,  (a  ftnall  fquare  fo  called)  as  alfo 
the  two  following  evenings.  We  had  many  peo- 
ple of  fafhion  there,  and  the  congregation  in- 
creafed  continually.  Friday,  April  3.  At  the  end 
of  Dromore  I met  Robert  Williams,  who  {hewed 
me  the  way  to  Newry.  A little  after  fix  I went  to 
the  market-houfe.  But  when  1 began  I had  only 
four  hearers.  A good  number  affembled  before  I 
had  done ; only  none  of  the  gentry.  They  were 
hindered  by  a buGnefs  of  more  importance ! 
Dreffing  for  the  ajfembly. 

Sunday  5.  I was  in  hopes  of  reaching  Tandra- 
gee,  before  the  church  began.  But  it  was  farther 
off  than  we  expe&ed.  At  Gve  in  the  evening  we 
had  the  largeft  congregation  I had  feen  in  Ulfler. 
And  I believe  many  found  much  of  the  prefence 
of  God,  but  Gill  more  at  the  meeting  of  the  fo- 
ciety. Monday  6.  The  congregation  was  fur- 
prizingly  large  this  morning,  and  Gil)  larger 

every 


C 99  ] 

£'very  morning  and  evening.  Wednefday  8.  I 
preached  at  noon  to  our  old  fociety  at  Terry  hu- 
gan,  the  mother-church  of  all  thefe  parts.  Thurf- 
day  9.  The  houfe  would  not  contain  the  people 
at  Tandargee,  even  at  live  in  the  morning. 
So  I went  to  the  market-houfe,  where  God  gave 
us  a folemn  and  affedfionate  parting. 

* I was  not  glad  to  hear  that  fome  of  the  fee- 
ders had  fettled  in  thefe  parts  alfo.  Thofeofthem 
who  have  yet  fallen  in  my  way,  are  more  un- 
charitable than  the  Papilfs  themfelves.  I never 
yet  met  a Papift,  who  avowed  the  principle  of 
murdering  Heretics.  But  a feceding  minifler  be- 
ing afked,  “ Would  not  you,  if  it  was  in  your 
power,  cut  the  throats  of  all  the  Methodifts  ?” 
Replied  dire&ly,  “ Why  did  not  Samuel  hew 
Agag  in  pieces  before  the  Lord?"  I have  not  yet 
met  a Papift  in  this  kingdom,  who  would  tell 
me  to  my  face,  r<  All  but  themfelves  muft  be 
damned."  But  I have  feen  feceders  enough,  who 
make  no  fcruple  to  affirm,  “ None  but  themfelves 
could  be  faved.”  And  this  is  the  natural  confe- 
quence  of  their  doftrine:  for  as  they  hold,  1. 
That  we  are  faved  bv  faith  alone  : 2.  That  faith 

j 7 

is,  the  holding  fuch  and  fuch  opinions  : it  fol- 
lows, all  who  do  not  hold  thofe  opinions,  have 
no  faith,  and  therefore  cannot  be  faved. 

About  noon  I preached  near  Dawfon’s  Grove, 
to  a large  and  ferious  congregation:  but  to  a far 
•larger  in  the  evening  at  Killma:  arty.  1 do  not 
wonder  the  gofpel  runs  fo  fwiftly  in  thefe  parts. 

E 2 The 


C 100  ] 

The  people  in  general  have  the  fifleft  natural 
tempers  which  I ever  knew  : they  have  the  foft- 
nefs  and  courtefy  of  the  Irifh,  with  the  feri- 
oufnefs  of  the  Scots,  and  the  opennefs  of  the 
Englifh. 

Friday  to.  At  one  I preached  at  Portadown,  a 
place  not  troubled  with  any  kind  of  religion.  I 
flood  in  the  flreet  and  cried,  Nou.' God  command- 
eth  all  men  every  where  to  repent.  The  people  ga- 
thered from  all  fides,  and  when  I prayed,  kneeled 
down  upon  the  Hones,  rich  and  poor,  all  round 
me.  In  the  evening  I preached  again  at  Kilma- 
rarty.  At  five  in  the  morning  the  houfe  was  fil- 
led : and  a little  after  fix  I cheat  fully  commended 
them  to  the  grace  of  God. 

Saturday  11.  About  three  I preached  at  a vil- 
lage called  The  Grange.  The  people  came  from 
feveral  miles  round,  and  feemed  to  hear  with  the 
fpirit,  and  with  the  underflanding  alfo.  At  fix  I 
preached  near  Cock-hill:  where  at  nine  in  the 
morning,  Sunday  12,  we  had  a congregation  from 
all  parts.  But  this  was  more  than  doubled  at  five 
in  the  evening.  All  were  ferious,  and,  according 
to  the  cuflom  of  the  country,  when  I went  to 
prayer  immediately  kneeled,  though  it  was  in 
the  high  road.  I believe,  not  a few  were  deeply 
wounded.  O may  none  heal  the  wound 
flightly  ! 

Monday  13.  I preached  at  Mount-Roe,  a gen- 
tleman’s feat,  about  three  miles  from  Cock- hill : 

Tuefday 


[ 101  ] 

Tuefday  14.  At  Clanmain.  This,  I believe,  was, 
two  years  fince,  the  only  fociety  in  thefe  parts.  I 
think  they  are  now  one  or  two  and  twenty, 
within  the  compafs  of  ten  miles. 

Wednefday  15.  I rode  ter  Armagh.  Half  an 
hour  before  the  time  of  preaching,  an  officer 
came  and  faid,  “ Sir,  the  fovereign  (or  mayor) 
-orders  me  to  inform  you,  you  fliall  not  preach  in 
bis  town.”  In  order  to  make  the  trial,  I walked 
to  the  market-houfe  at  fix.  I had  juft  begun 
when  the  fovereign  came.  I was  informed  his 
name  was  Harcourt.  He  was  talking  very  loud, 
and  tolerably  fall,  when  a gentleman  came  and 
faid,  “ Sir,  if  you  are  not  allowed  to  preach  here, 
you  are  welcome  to  preach  in  Mr.  M'Gough’s 
avenue.”  Mr.  M'Gough,  one  of  the  chief  mer- 
chants in  the  town,  himfelf  (hewed  us  the  way. 
I fuppofe  thrice  as  many  people  flocked  toge- 
ther there,  as  would  have  heard  me  in  the  mar- 
ket-houfe. So  did  the  wife  providence  of  God 
draw  Q-ood  out  of  evil  ! And  his  word  had  indeed 
free  courfe. 

Thurfday  16.  About  one  I preached  to  a large 
congregation  at  Dungannon,  in  the  county  of 
Tyrone  : and  in  the  evening  before  the  gate  of 
the  great,  old  houfe  at  Caftle-Caulfield.  The  fo- 
ciety here,  the  firft  fruits  of  this  county,  feemed 
to  be  all  alive.  Early  in  the  morning  I took  horfe 
and  got  to  Londonderry  juft  at  feven,  where  the 
congregation  was  waiting  for  me.  My  voice  was 
E 3 weak : 


[ 102  ] 

weak  : but  I think  mod  of  them  cquld  hear : and 
fome,  I trull,  heard  the  voice  of  God. 

Saturday  18.  1 found  we  were  Hill  honourable 
men  here,  fome  of  eminence  in  the  citv  being 
both  hearers  and  doers  of  the  word.  I employed 
Monday,  Tuefday,  and  part  of  Wednefday,  in 
ipeaking  feverally  to  the  members  of  the  fociety, 
and  was  glad  to  find  the  greater  part  of  them  had 
tafied  that  the  Lord  is  gracious.  Saturday  25.  I 
rode  to  Air.  Knox’s  farm,  and  preached  to  a lit- 
tle company,  on  By  grace  \e  me  faced  through 
faith.  1 fpoke  exceeding  plain  to  them  at  Derry 
m the  evening,  on  How  long  halt  ye  between  two 
opinions?  And  more  plain,  if  poilible,  both 
morning  and  evening,  on  Sunday  26.  Surely  this 
is  an  underfunding  people.  But  it  is  only  love  that 
idifies. 

Alonday  27.  I rode  to  Augher,  and  preached 
at  fix  in  the  Caflle-yard,  to  a large  and  deeply- 
ferious  congregation.  Tuefday  28,  I preached 
near  Athenacly,  after  riding  through  one  of  the 
fined  countries  in  the  kingdom.  Wednefday  29. 
A little  beyond  Swadling  bar  I found  a lively 
congregation,  of  plain,  country  people,  as  fimple 
and  artlefs  as  if  they  had  lived  upon  the  Wellh 
mountains.  So  has  God  thofn  the  foolijh  things 
of  the  world , to  conjound  the  wife. 

Thurfdav  30.  Some  of  the  chief  pet  Tons  in  the 
town  defiring  I would  give  them  a fermon  there, 
I went  thither  in  the  morning.  A large  room 


was 


[ 103  ] 


was  offered ; but  it  was  quickly  fo  full  and  fo 
hot,  that  I was  obliged  to  go  out  into  the  flreet. 
I had  hardly  named  my  text,  before  a poor  Pa- 
pift,  at  a fmall  diflance  from  me,  began  blow- 
ing a horn.  But  a gentleman  ftepping  up, 
fnatched  his  horn  away,  and  without  ceremony 
knocked  him  down.  In  the  evening  I preach- 
ed in  the  country  again,  to  a ftill  larger  congre- 
gation. And  God  made  his  word  quick  and 
powerful.  Many  were  wounded,  and  many 
comforted. 

Friday*  May  1.  We  rode  by  a large  feat, 
elegantly  built,  and  finely  fituated.  But,  to  my 
furprize,  the  gates  of  the  grand  avenue  were 
painted  blue,  green  and  yellow,  like  a child’s 
rattle.  Surely  the  owner  has  never  feeri  the 
pretty  bauble.  But  will  no  one  inform  him  of 
it  ? In  the  evening  1 preached  in  the  market- 
houfe  at  Sligo,  to  a larger  congregation,  as  well 
as  better  behaved,  than  when  I was  here  before. 
The  next  evening  was  exceeding  cold  and  bluf- 
tering.  However,  the  provoft  refufing  me  the 
ufe  of  the  court-houfe,  abundance  of  people 
flood  with  me  in  the  flreet,  and  moll  of 
them  behaved  well.  Sunday  3.  I preached, 
morning  and  evening,  in  the  market-houfe,  and 
had  much  hope,  both  from  the  number  and  be- 
haviour of  the  hearers,  that  even  here,  our  la- 
bour will  not  be  in  vain. 

Monday  4.  We  rode  to  Caftle-barr,  thirty  old 
Irifh,  about  fifty- fix  Englifh  miles.  Between  fix 
E 4 ’ and 


[ 104  ] 


and  feven  I began  preaching  in  the  court-houfe  ; 
but  few  of  the  rich  were  there.  Many  of  thefe 
dare  not  hear  me  above  once  : they  find  it  is  play- 
ing with  edged  tools.  Many  of  the  poor  were 
prefent  at  five  in  the  morning,  and  many  more, 
both  rich  and  poor,  in  the  evening.  And  the 
power  of  the  Lord  was  prefent  to  heal : but  how 
many  re]  elded  his  counfcl  againjl  themf elves  \ 

Wednef.  6.  I rode  to  Newport,  and  preach- 
ee  in  the  evening,  and  at  fix  in  the  morning. 
Fach  and  poor  behaved  extremely  well,  and 
feemed  almojl  perjuaded  to  be  Chrijiians.  In  the 
evening  I took  my  leave  of  the  congregation  at 
Cable- barr,  by  fpeaking  from  thofe  words, 
Come , Lord  Jefus  ! But  who  will  abide  his  com- 
ing in  the  clouds  ? Thofe  who  are  partakers  of 
his  holinefs. 

Friday  8.  We  rode  to  Galway  (above  fifty 
Englifh  miles.)  It  rained  almoft  every  flep  of 
the  way.  I preached  at  Ballinrobe  in  the  court- 
houfe  between  eight  and  nine,  and  at  Galway 

about  fix.  Colonel  E , and  all  his  family, 

were  there.  Perhaps  a word  might  reach  their 
hearts. 

Saturday  g.  I rode  to  Ennis,  but  found  the 
preaching  had  been  difcontinued,  and  the  fo- 
ciety  was  vanifhed  away.  So  having  no  bufi- 
nefs  there,  I left  it,  in  the  morning,  preached 
at  Clare  about  eight,  and  in  the  evening  at  Li- 
merick. The  continued  rain  kept  me  from 
preaching  abroad  this  week:  and  I was  fcanda- 

lized 


C 10  5 ] 


lized  at  the  fmallnefs  of  the  congregation  in  the 
houfe.  I am  afraid  my  glorying,  touching  ma- 
ny of  thefe  focieties,  is  at  an  end.  Almoft 
throughout  the  province  of  Ulfter  I found  the 
work  of  God  increafing  : and  not  a little  in  Co- 
naught, particularly  at  Sligo,  CafUe-barr  and 
Galway.  But  in  Munfter,  a land  flowing  with 
milk  and  honey,  how  widely  is  the  cafe  altered  P 
At  Ennis  the  god  of  this  world  has  wholly  pre- 
vailed : at  Clare,  there  is  but  a fpark  left  : and 
at  Limerick  itfelf,  I find  only  the  remembrance 
of  the  fire  which  was  kindled  two  years  ago. 
And  yet  one  of  the  two  preachers  who  was  here 
laff,  was  almoft  univerfally  admired  l But,  alas  ! 
how  little  does  this  avail  ? “ He  is  the  heft  Phy- 
fician,  faid  a fenfible  man,  not  who  talks  bejl,  or 
who  writes  bejl , but  who  performs  the  moji  cures.'9 

Sunday  17.  The  weather  being  fair,  I took 
my  ftand  in  the  old  Camp,  and  had,  I believe, 
as  many  hearers  as  all  the  preceding  week  put 
together.  There  was  a folemn  awe  throughout 
the  congregation,  and  I began  to  hope,  God 
would  revive  his  work.  Monday  18.  I fpoke 
to  the  members  of  the  fociety  feverally  : molt 
of  them  appeared  to  be  honeft  and  upright.  But 
a general  faintnefs  feemed  to  have  fpread  among 
them  ; there  was  no  zeal,  no  vigour  of  grace. 

Thurfday  21.  I preached  about  noon  at  Bal- 
lygarane,  to  what  is  left  of  the  poor  Palatines. 
Many  are  gone  to  America  ; many  fcattered  up 
and  down  in  various  parts  of  the  kingdom. 

E 5 Every 


[ »o6  ] 

Every  where  they  are  patterns  of  induftry  and 
frugality.  In  the  evening  I preached  at  New- 
market. Sunday  24.  The  old  Camp  would 
ill  contain  the  congregation,  clofely  wedged  in 
together.  Afterwards  we  had  a folemn  hour  at 
the  meeting  of  the  fociety  : in  w'hich  God 
caufed  many  of  the  bones  which  had  been 
broken  to  rejoice.  So  they  are  fet  upon  their 
feet  once  again.  Now  let  them  run  with  pati- 
ence the  race  fet  before  them  ! 

Monday  25.  I rode  to  Shronill,  and  preach- 
ed at  twelve  to  the  largefl  congregation  I have 
ever  feen  there.  Thence  we  croffed  the  coun- 
try to  Kilfianan.  I had  hardly  begun  to  fpeak, 
when  a young  perfon,  a kind  of  a gentleman, 
came,  and  took  great  pains  to  make  a difturbance. 
Mr.  Dancer  mildly  defired  him  to  defift  ; but 
•was  arsfwered  with  a volley  of  oaths  and  a blow. 
One  of  the  town  then  encountered  him,  and 
beat  him  well.  But  the  noife  preventing  my  be- 
ing heard,  I retired  a few  hundred  yards,  with 
the  ferious  part  of  the  congregation,  and  quiet- 
ly fini filed  my  difcourfe. 

Tuefday  26.  I went  on  to  Cork,  and  on  Thurf- 
day  28,  to  Bandon.  This  evening  I preached  in 
the  houfe  ; the  next,  in  the  main  ftreet ; but  the 
wind  was  fo  high  and  fo  cold,  that  none  either 
could  or  would  bear  it  but  thofe  who  really  de- 
filed to  fave  their  fouls.  I judged  the  houfe  would 
hold  thefe.  So  the  next  evening  I preached 
within,  and  when  the  benches  were  removed,  it 

held 


* 


C *°7  ] 

held  the  greate  ft  part  of  the  congregation.  And' 
thofe  who  could  not  get  in  heard  tolerably  well* 
either  at  the  doors  or  windows.  Sunday  31.  We 
had  moll  of  them  again  at  feven  ; and  I took 
my  leave  of  them  with  much  fatisfaflion,  after 
having  ftrongly  inforced,  To-day,  if  ye  will  hear 
his  voice,  harden  not  your  hearts. 

I w'ould  fain  have  preached  abroad  at  Cork  in 
the  evening,  but  the  wind  and  rain  would  not 
permit.  Two  years  ago  I left  above  three  hund- 
red in  the  fociety.  I find  an  hundred  and  eighty 
feven.  What  has  occafioned  fo  confiderable  a 
redu&ion  ? I believe  the  real  caufe  is  this  : 

Between  two  and  three  years  ago,  when  the 
fociety  was  nearly  as  low  as  it  is  now,  Thomas- 
Taylor  and  William  Penington  came  to  Cork. 
They  were  zealous  men  and  found  preachers  ; 
full  of  afifivity  and  ftrift  in  difcipline,  without  re- 
fpe£l  of  perfons.  They  fet  up  meetings  for  prayer 
in  feveral  places,  and  preached  abroad  at  both 
ends  of  the  city,  hearers  fwiftly  increafed ; the 
fociety  increafed  : fo  did  the  number  both  of 
the  convinced  and  the  converted.  I came  when 
the  flame  was  at  the  height,  and  preached 
abroad,  in  the  heart  of  the  city,  on  the  South- 
fide  of  it,  near  the  barracks,  and  feveral  times  in 
Blackpool,  which  lies  on  the  'north- fide  of  it. 
More  and  more  were  ftirred  up,  and  there  was 
a greater  awakening  here  than  in  any  part  of  the 
kingdom. 

But  mifunderftandings  crept  in  between  the 

E-  6 leader^ 


[ »o8  ] 

leaders,  and  between  fome  of  them  and  the  preach- 
ers. And  thefe  increafed  feven-fold,  when  one 
of  the  leaders  was  expelled  the  fociety  : fome 
believing  him  faulty,  fome  not,  and  neither  fide 
having  patience  with  the  other.  Hence  a flame 
of  anger  fucceeded  the  flame  of  love,  and  many 
were  deftroyed  by  it.  At  the  fame  time  fome  of 
our  brethren  learned  a new  opinion,  and  warmly 
propagated  it.  This  heat  was  almofl  as  deftruc- 
tive  as  the  former  : and  the  effeft  of  both  was, 
the  fpirit  of  God  was  grieved  ; his  bleffing  was 
withheld,  and  of  ccurfe  the  flock  was  fcattered. 
When  they  are  convinced  of  their  fin,  and  hum- 
bled before  him,  then  and  not  before,  he  will 
return. 

Wednefdav,  June  3.  As  it  was  fair,  tho’  the 
wind  was  high  and  extremely  fharp,  I preached 
in  an  open  place  at  Blackpool,  to  a large  number 
of  quiet  hearers.  On  the  three  following  evenings 
the  wind  and  rain  confined  us  in  the  houfe  : 
much  againft  my  will,  as  thofe  who  wanted  us 
mofl,  could  not  or  would  not  come  thither. 

Sund.  7.  (Whitfunday)  The  weather  turning 
fair,  between  four  and  five  in  the  afternoon  I be- 
gan preaching  in  George’s-fireet,  to  fuch  a con- 
gregation as  that  in  the  old  Camp  at  Limerick. 
A folemn  awe  fat  on  the  faces  of  the  whole  af- 
fembly  while  I explained,  If  any  man  thirf},  let 
him  come  unto  me  and  drink.  Surely  fome  of  jhem 
found  the  promife  fulfilled,  and  did  drink  of  the 
living  water  ! 


Monday 


[ 309  ] 


Monday  8.  I rode  to  Youghall.  When  I was 
here  two  \ ears  ago,  a flame  was  kindled  among 
the  people.  But  it  was  gone  out.  And  I could 
not  wonder  at  it : for  they  have  fcarce  had  any 
preaching'fince.  I purpofed  flaying  only  a night, 
but  obferving  the  number  and  deep  attention  cf 
the  congregation,  I flayed  another  day,  and  on 
Tuefday  9.  preached  in  the  exchange  again.  The 
hearers  were  much  increafed  and  all  but  a few 
gentlemen,  fo  called,  behaved  with  great  feriouf- 
nefs.  Wednefday  10,  After  preaching  to  a 
multitude  of  people,  I took  horfe,  and  in  the  even- 
ing of  a very  hot  day  reached  Waterford. 

Here  I found  a fmall,  poor,  dead  fociety,  and 
but  an  handful  of  even  dull,  carelefs  hearers. 
However  I preached  in  the  yard,  and  found  more 
life  among  them  than  I expedfed.  In  the  morn- 
ing I fpoke  to  the  feveral  members  of  the  fociety, 
fome  of  whom  feemed  much  devoted  to  God.  I 
defired  Mr.  Morgan  to'preach  at  noon.  God  gave 
him  acceptable  words  : and  the  whole  congrega- 
tion, rich  and  poor,  appeared  to  be  greatly  mov- 
ed. They  feemed  to  be  flill  more  affeHed  in  the 
evening.  What  pity,  that  this  fhould  pafs  away 
like  a cloud  ! 

Friday  12.  We  rode  to  Killkenny.  The  fun 
was  exceeding  hot : but  did  not  incommode  us 
much,  as  we  had  the  wind  in  our  face  all  the 
way.  The  congregation  at  the  town-hall  in  the 
evening  was  large  and  tolerably  ferious  : a few 
of  the  gentry  excepted,  who  feemed  neither  to 

underftandj 


[ 110  ] 

tmderftand,  nor  care  for  any  of  thefc  things.  Yv'e 
had  great  part  of  them  at  five  in  the  morning. 
At  noon,  when  Mr.  Morgan  preached  I expe&ed 
to  have  feen  the  largeft  company  of  all.  But  I 
wasmiflaken.  The  ladies  could  not  rife  fo  foon  ; 
at  leaf!,  they  could  not  huddle  on  their  cloaths 
fit  to  be  feen.  In  the  evening  I fpoke  exceeding 
plain,- both  to  the  rich  and  poor.  Andafew,  at 
lead  received  the  truth  in  love.  But  who  will 
endure  to  the  end  ! 

Sunday  14.  In  the  evening  I preached  at  Birr 
to  a wilder  congregation  than  1 ever  faw  at  Kil- 
kenny, however,  as  I flood  near  the  barracks, 
the  number  of  foldiers  that  attended,  kept  them 
fo  far  in  awe,  that  they  durft  only  laugh  and 
make  a little  noife,  till  the  whole  body  of  "the 
Papifls  ran  away  together.  The  reft  were  then 
tolerably  attentive,  and  grew  more  and  moreferi- 
ous  till  I concluded. 

Monday  15.  I rode  through  a pleafant  and 
well  cultivated  county  to  Aghrim.  For  many 
years  I have  not  feen  fo  large  a congregation 
here,  and  fo  remarkably  well-behaved.  At  the 
prayer,  both  before  and  after  fermon  all  of  them 
kneeled  upon  the  grafs.  A few  of  the  poor  Pa- 
pifts  only  remained  Handing,  at  a diftance  from 
the  reft  of  the  . people.  Thefe  would  come  in 
droves  at  every  place,  if  the  priefts  as  well  as  tire 
king,  would  grant  liberty  of  confcience. 

At  the  defire  of  the  good  old  widow,  Mrs. 
M — , I went  with  Mr.  S—  to  C — . Lord  and 

Lady 


[ <**  ] 

Lady  M—  were  there- before  us ; to  whom  I was 
probably 

“ A not  expected,  much-unwelcome  gueft.” 

But  whatfoever  it  was  to  them,  it  was  a heavy 
afternoon  to  me,  as  I had  no  place  to  retire  to, 
and  fo  was  obliged  to  be  in  genteel  company, 
for  two  or  three  hours  together.  O what  a dull 
thing  is  life  without  religion  ? I do  not  wonder, 
thattime  hangs  heavy  upon  the  hands  of  all  who 
know  not  God,  urdefs  they  are  perpetually  drunk 
with  noife  and  hurry  of  one  kind  or  another. 

Wednefday  17.  We  came  to  Athlone.  Here 
the.fcene  was  changed  : I was- among  thofe  that 
both  feared  and  loved  God.  But  to  this  day  they 
have  not  recovered  the  lofs  which  they  fuilained, 
when  they  left  off  going  to  church.  It  is  true,  they 
have  long  been  convined  of  their  miflake  ; yet 
the  fruit  of  it  ftill  remains.  So  that  there  are  very 
few  who  retain  that  vigor  of  fpirit  which  they 
before  enjoyed. 

At  feven  I preached  in  the  new  houfe,  which 
Mr.  S.  has  built  entirely  at  his  own  expence.  TJie 
congregation  was  as  ufual,  both  large  andferious. 
I refted  the  four  following  days,  only  preaching 
morning  and  evening.  Sunday  21.  We  had  a fo- 
lemn  meeting  ofthe  fociety  at  five.  After  preach- 
ing  at  eight,.  I would  willingly  have  gone  to 
church,  but  was  informed  there  had  been  no  fer- 
vice  for  near  two  years,  and  would  be  none  for 

a year 


[ 112  ] 

a year  or  two  longer,  the  in  fide  of  the  church 
wanting  to  be  repaired!  In  the  evening,  I preach- 
ed in  the  barracks.  I know  not  that  ever  I faw 
fuch  a congregation  at  Athlone  before.  Rich  and 
poor,  Proteftants  and  Papifls,  gathered  together 
from  every  fide.  And  deep  attention  fat  on  all, 
while  I explained  that  folemn  declaration,  (part 
of  the  gofpel  for  the  day  ) If  they  hear  not  Mofes 
and  the  prophets,  neither  will  they  be  perfuaded 
though  one  ro/e from  the  dead. 

It  was  about  this  time,  that  a remarkable  paf- 
fage  happened  at  Macclesfield  in  Chefhire.  One 
Ellen  Stanyers,  a young  woman  of  that  town, 
very  religious  in  her  own  way,  but  quite  a ftran- 
ger  to  the  fcripture-way  of  falvation  had  her  work 
from  one  of  the  fhops  in  the  town.  A young  man 
belonging  to  the  fame  fhop,  fell  in  love  with  her. 
Fearing  left  her  refufing  him  would  difoblige  her 
mafter,  fhe  gave  him  encouragement  ; and  after- 
wards, though  file  never  intended  it,  promifed  to 
marry  him.  One  day  as  fhe  was  fitting  at  her 
work,  this  fin  was  brought  to  her  remembrance, 
and  lay  fo  exceeding  heavy  upon  her  mind,  that 
flie  was  utterly  diftreft.  She  took  her  work,  and 
carried  it  to  her  mafter,  telling  him,  fhe  had  de- 
ftroved  her  foul  with  it.  At  the  fame  time  fhe 
told  the  young  man,  “ She  was  refolved,  never 
“ to  have  him.”  He  came  to  her  and  faid  “ If 
“ you  do  not  keep  your  word,  I will  hang  my- 
“ fell  at  your  door.  And  then  I will  come  and 
“ take  you  away  with  me  to  the  devil.  ” She 

was 


[ “3  ] 

was  fo  frighted  fhe  fell  into  black  defpair.  Her 
father  carried  her  to  a clergyman,  and  afterward 
to  another  who  feemed  to  pity  her  cafe,  but 
knew  not  how  to  comfort  her.  Willing  to  try 
every  way,  he_ordered  one  to  read  to  her  in  Bur- 
kit  upon  the  new  teftament  till  fhe  cried,  “ Take 
it  away  ; I cannot  bear  it ; and  attempted  to  run 
away.”  But  her  father  held  her,  and  when  fhe 
flruggled,  beat  her,  and  told  her,  fhe  fhould  hear 
it,  whether  fhe  would  or  no.  She  grew  worfe  and 
worfe  : could  neither  eat,  drink  rior  deep;  and 
pined  away  to  a mere  fkeleton.  She  wandered 
about,  as  one  diftra&ed,  in  the  fields  and  lanes 
feekingreft,  but  finding  none.  She  was  exceed- 
ingly tempted  to  defiroy  herfelf ; but  that  thought 
came  into  her  mind,  “ If  I do,  I fhall  leap 
“ into  hell  immediately.  I muft  go  thither  : but 
“ I will  keep  out  of  it  as  long  as  I can.”  She  was 
wandering  about  one  day,  when  a perfon  met 
her,  and  advifed  her  to  hear  the  Methodifls.  Al- 
though file  hated  them,  yet  fhe  was  willing  to  do 
any  thing  for  eafe  and  fo  one  evening  came  to 
the  preaching.  After  the  fervice  was  over,  file 
defired  to  fpeak  to  the  preacher.  Mr.  Pawfon  ; 
but  fhe  talked  quite  wildly.  However  he  encou- 
raged her  to  come  to  the  Saviour  of  finners,  and 
cry  to  him  for  deliverance,  “ The  next  day 
(fo  Mr.  P.  continues  the  account)  about  twelve 
of  us  met  together,  and  prayed  with  her.  I 
found  great  freedom,  and  a full  confidence,  that 
God  would  deliver  her.  After  prayer,  file  faid, 

“ I never 


[ «4  J 

“ I never  felt  my  heart  pray  before.  I felt  my 
heart  go  along  with  the  preacher’s  words.  They 
have  done  me  good  at  my  heart.  My  defpair  is 
all  gone,  I have  a hope  that  I fhall  be  faved.  ’ 
The  next  morning  two  or  three  prayed  with  her 
again.  She  fpent  all  the  day  with  one  or  another 
of  the  Methodifls,  and  did  not  go  home  till  night. 
Her  father  then  afked,  “ Nelly  where  have  you 
been  all  this  time?”  She  anfwered,  “ I have 
been  among  the  Methodifls.”  “ The  Methodifls ! 
Said  he,  have  you  got  any  good  there  !”  She  re- 
plied, “ Yes,  I blefs  God,  I have.  I now  hope  I 
fhall  be  faved.”  “Well,  faid  he,  I care  not  where 
you  go,  if  you  only  get  relief.”  She  then  went  to 
bed,  but  could  not  fleep.  While  fhe  was  meditat- 
ing on  what  fhe  had  heard,  thofe  words  were 
brought  to  her  mind,  Is  there  no  balm  in  Gilead? 
Is  there  no  phyjieian  there?  With  the  words  the 
Lord  fpoke  peace  to  her  foul  : and  in  one  and 
the  fame  moment,  all  pain  and  borrow  fled  away, 
and  fhe  was  entirely  healed,  both  body  and  mind. 
Early  in  the  morning  fhe  came  to  the  houfe  of 
one  of  our  friends,  and  clapping  her  hands  to- 
gether, cried  out  in  an  extafy  of  joy,  “ O my 
Jefus,  my  Jefus,  my  Jefus!  What  is  it,  that  he 
has  done  for  me  ? I feel,  he  has  forgiven  all  my 
fins.”  Taking  up  an  hymn-book,  fhe  opened  it 
on  thofe  words, 


“I 


[ li5  ] 

“ I the  chief  of  finners  am, 

“ But  Jefus  died  for  me  !” 

She  was  quite  tranfported,  being  overwhelmed 
with  peace  and  joy  unfpeakabie.  At  the  fame 
time  fire  was  refiored  to  the  full  ufe  of  her  rea- 
fon,  and  in  a little  while  was  firong  and  healthy 
as  ever.  She  immediately  defired  to  be  admitted 
into  the  fociety,  and  for  about  a year  enjoyed 
unfpeakabie  happinefs.  She  then  received  a call 
from  her  Beloved,  and  died  full  of  faith  and 
love.” 

Tuefday  23.  About  one  I preached  in  the 
market-place  at  Clara.  I admired  the  ferioufnefs 
of  the  whole  congregation.  Indeed  one  or  two 
gentlemen  appeared  quite  unconcerned.  But  the 
prefence  of  the  greater  gentlemen  kept  them 

within  bounds.  So  they  were  as  quiet as  if 

they  had  been  at  the  play-houfe. 

This  and  the  following  evening  I preached  in 
the  market  place  at  Tullamore.  Thurfday  23.  I 
was  defired  to  look  at  the  monument  lately  erec- 
ted for  the  Earl  of  Charleville.  It  obferves,  “ That 
he  w'as  the  lafl  of  his  family,  the  great  Moore’s 
of  Croghan.”  But  how  little  did  riches  profit  ei- 
ther him,  who  died  in  the  flrength  of  his  years ; 
or  his  heir,  w'ho  was  literally  overwhelmed  by 
them  ; being  fo  full  of  care,  that  fleep  departed 
from  him,  and  he  was  refflefs  day  and  night : till: 
after  a few  months,  life  itfelf  was  a burden,  and  an, 
untimely  death  clofed  the  fcene  ! 


In 


C »6  ] 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  Mouhtmelick, 
near  the  raarket-houfe.  The  congregation  was 
exceeding  large : and  God  made  his  word 
quick  and  powerful , and Jliarper  than  a two-edged 
fword. 

* Friday  26.  Findingfome  of  the  moll  earneft 
perfons  in  the  fociety  were  deeply  prejudiced 
againft  each  other,  I defued  them  to  come  face 
to  face,  and  laboured  much  to  remove  their  pre- 
judice. I ufed  both  argument  and  perfuafion  ; but 
it  was  all  in  vain.  Perceiving  that  reafoning  pro- 
fited nothing,  we  betook  ourfelves  to  praver.  On 
a fudden  the  mighty  power  of  God,  broke  in 
upon  them.  The  angry  ones  on  both  Tides  burfi 
into  tears,  and  fell  on  each  other’s  necks.  All  an- 
ger and  prejudice  vanifhed  away,  and  they  were 
as  cordially  united  as  ever. 

Saturday  27.  The  congregation  in  the  market- 
houfe  at  Portarlington  was  widely  different  from 
that  at  Mountmelick.  I endeavoured  to  fuit  my 
fubjeft  to  my  audience,  preaching  from  Gallio 
cared  for  none  ofthefe  things.  But  fome  of  them 
were  quite  above  convidlion.  So,  finding  that 
they  had  neither  fenfe,  nor  good  manners,  (of 
religion  I did  not  fufpefl  them)  the  next  day  I 
adjourned  to  the  fhell  of  our  new  houfe,  in  which 
I preached  morning  and  evening.  And  here  the 
greateft  part  of  the  congregation,  both  Papifts 
and  Protefiants,  behaved  with  decency. 

Monday  29.  We  took  horfe  about  a quarter 
paft  three,  and  before  eight  preached  Cooly- 

lough. 


[ *77  ] 

lough.  At  twelve  I preached  in  the  ffiady  walk  ; 
afterwards  we  had  the  quarterly  meeting.  I found 
no  reafon  tocomplain  of  any  of  the  focieties; 
only  they  want  more  life,  and  zeal. 

Tuefday  go.  I obferved  more  good  manners  at 
Tyrrel’s-pafs  in  rich  as  well  as  poor,  than  at  Port- 
arlington.  Wednefday,  July  1.  A friend  carried 
me  to  Belvidere,  a feat  built  on  the  fide  ofa  clear 
lake,  with  walks  and  gardens  adjoining,  fo  curi- 
oufly  laid  out,  as  to  exceed  even  the  late  Earl  of 
Charleville’s.  One  would  fcarce  think  it  poffible, 
to  have  fuch  a variety  of  beauties  in  fo  final!  a 
compafs.  But 

How  foon,  alas ! will  thefe  “ upbraid 
Their  tranfitory  mafter  dead  !” 

We  went  on  to  Molingar,  where  for  many 
years  no  Methodifi  preacher  could  appear.  The 
feffions-houfe  here  was  fifed  as  a guard-houfe.  I 
fent  to  the  commanding  officer,  and  defired  leave 
to  preach  there.  This  he  not  only  gave,  but  came 
himfelf.  So  did  many  of  the  foldiers  as  well  as 
the  townfmen.  In  the  evening,  notwithfianding 
the  cold  and  bluftering  winds,  I was  obliged  to 
preach  abroad  at  Tyrrel!S-pafs,  But  the  rain,  on 
the  two  following  evenings,  drove  ns  into  the 
houfe  at  Edinderry.  Saturday  4.  Having  now 
finiffied  my  circuit,  I went  on  chearfully  to  Dub- 
lin. 


C 118  3 

Sunday  5.  Our  houfe  was  throughly  filled,  g 
light  which  I have  feldom  feen.  Friday  10.  We 
obferved  as  a day  of  falling  and  prayer.  It  was  at 
our  lafl  meeting,  that  we  found  the  anfwerofour 
prayers.  It  feemed  as  if  the  windows  of  heaven 
were  opened  ; the  fpirit  of  grace  and  fupplication 
was  poured  out.  Many  were  filled  with  confola- 
tion  ; and  many  who  had  grown  weary,  refolved 
to  fet  out  anew. 

Tuefday  14.  A poor  backflider,  whom  I found 
ten  days  ago  dying  in  black  defpair,  told  me, 
“ Now  I am  not  afraid  to  die.  I fee  Jefus  juft  be- 
fore me  ; and  his  face  is  all  glory.”  Inftances  of 
this  kind  do  by  no  means  prove  that  a faint 
cannot  fall,  even  /or  ever  ; but  only  that  God  is 
pitiful  and  of  tender  mercy,  not  willing  any  Jhculd 
.perijli. 

Thurfday  16.  About  ten  I reached  Don-ard, 
Feven  or  eight  and  twenty  Englifh  miles  from 
Dublin.  Standing  under  fome  fhady  trees,  I in- 
forced  upon  a ferious  congregation,  All  things 
are  ready  • come  unto  the  marriage.  From  hence 
I rode  on  to  Baltinglafs,  and  preached  on,  By 
grace  ye  are  favtd  through  faith.  It  was  fultry 
hot  as  we  rode  to  Carlow  : fo  that  I was  weary 
and  faint  when  we  came  in  : but  I foon  reco- 
vered, and  at  feven  preached  in  the  feffions- 
houfe,  to  a numerous  congregation.  But  the 
greater  part  of  them  were  like  blocks,  and  fome 
like  wild  affes  colts.  I was  conftrained  to  reprove 

them 


C u9  ] 

them  fharply.  They  received  it  well,  and  be- 
haved with  more  decency. 

Friday  17.  We  loft  our  way  in  fetting  out  of 
the  town.  It  rained  moft  of  the  day.  However 
this  was  far  better  than  fultry  heat.  In  the  even- 
ing we  returned  to  Dublin. 

In  my  fcraps  of  time  this  week,  I read  over 
that  wonderful  poem,  Fingal.  If  it  is  genuine,  if 
it  is  really  extant,  (as  many  allure  me  it  is)  in  the 
Erfe  language,  it  is  an  amazing  proof  of  a genius 
in  thofe  barbarous  times,  little  inferior  to  Homer 
or  Virgil  ! 

Monday  20.  A friend  fhewed  me  the  apart- 
ments in  the  Caftle,  the  refidence  of  the  Lord 
Lieutenant.  The  Duke  of  Bedford  made  a no- 
ble addition  to  the  lodgings,  which  are  now  both 
grand  and  convenient.  But  the  furniture  fur- 
prized  me  not  a little.  It  is  by  no  means  equal 
to  the  building.  In  England,  many  gentlemen  of 
five  hundred  a year,  would  be  utterly  afhamed 
of  it. 

Tuefday  21.  I received  an  account  of  a 
youhg  woman,  the  fubftance  of  which  was  as 
follows : 

“ Katherine  Murray-,  Was  born  February  e, 
TL7 29,  at  Carrick  on  Sure.  She  feared  God  from 
a child,  and  abftained  from  lying  and  fpeaking 
bad  words.  When  about  thirteen,  fhe  Hole  fome 
twigs  of  goofe-berry  bulhes  from  a neighbour* 
and  planted  them  in  her  father’s  garden.  Imme- 
diately 


C 12°  ] 

diately  fhe  felt  fhe  had  finned,  knew  (he  de- 
ferved  hell,  and  feared  it  would  be  her  portion. 
She  began  praying  three  times  a day  ; but  not- 
withftanding,  her  fin  followed  her  every 
where.  Day  and  night  it  was  before  her,  till 
after  fome  time,  that  conviffion  gradually  wore 
off. 

“ In  the  year  1749,  her  filler  heard  the  Me- 
thodiftsj  fo  called.  She  was  foon  convinced  of 
fin,  joined  the  fociety,  and  advifed  her  to  do  fo 
too.  But  hearing  one  named  that  was  in  it,  fhe 
was  filled  with  difdain,  “ What  ! Meet  withfuch 
a man  as  that  ?”  Yet  not  long  after,  fhe  was  con- 
vinced, that  the  fins  of  her  own  heart,  pride  and 
paffion  in  particular,  were  as  abominable  in  the 
fight  of  God,  as  the  fins  of  that  man,  or  any 
other.  This  conviction  was  exceeding  fharp. 
She  could  no  longer  defpife  any,  but  only  cry 
out,  day  and  night,  God  be  merciful  to  me  a fin- 
11  er. 

“ In  February  file  went  to  hear  Mr.  Reeves. 
He  preached  on  part  of  the  103d  pfalm.  She 
was  now  more  deeply  than  ever  convinced 
of  heart-fin,  of  unbelief  in  particular,  and 
had  fuch  a fight  of  the  excellency  of  faith, 
that  (lie  determined  to  feek  it  with  all  her 
heart. 

“ In  the  May  following,  fhe  was  fitting  in  her 
room,  lamenting  her  fiate,  and  crying  to  God  for 
mercy,  when  fuddenly  fhe  had  a fight  of  our  Lord, 
from  the  manger  to  the  crofs.  But  it  did  not 

bring 


[ 121  ] 

bring  comfort:  onthe  contrary,  it  fo  heightened 
her  diftrefs,  that  fhe  cried  aloud  and  alarmed  the 
family:  nor  could  fhe  refrain  till  her  ftrength 
failed,  and  Hie  fainted  away.  Often  her  fleep  de- 
parted from  her  ; her  food  was  taftelefs,  and  fhe 
mingled  her  drink  with  weeping;  being  refolved 
never  to  reft,  till  fhe  found  reft  in  him,  whom 
alone  her  foul  defired. 

“ It  was  not  long  before  the  Lord  looked  upon 
her.  As  fhe  was  in  prayer,  fhe  had  a clear  repre- 
fentation  of  our  bleffed  Lord,  as  crowned  with 
thorns,  and  clothed  with  the  purple  robe.  In  a 
moment  her  foul  refted  on  him,  and  fhe  knew 
he  had  taken  away  her  fms.  Diftrefs  was  gone: 
the  love  of  God  flowed  into  her  heart,  and  fhe 
could  rejoice  in  God  her  Saviour.  Her  foul  was 
fo  ravifhed  with  his  love,  that  fhe  could  not  hold 
her  peace  : but  cried  out  to  all  fire  knew,  You 
may  know  your  fins  forgiven,  if  you  will  come 
unto  Jefus. 

“ Yet  a while  after,  fhe  drefted  herfelf  as  fine 
as  ever  fire  could,  and  went  to  worfhip  God,  as 
lhe  exprefled  it,  “ proud  as  a devil.”  Upon  the 
fpot  God  convinced  her  of  her  folly,  of  her  pride 
and  vanity.  She  was  ftript  of  all  her  comfort, 
yea  and  bi  ought  to  doubt  the  reality  of  all  fhe  had 
before  experienced.  The  devil  then  laboured  to 
perfuade  her,  that  fhe  had  finned  the  fin  againft 
the  Holy  Ghoft  ; and  pufhed  it  fo,  that  fire 
thought  her  life  would  fail,  and  fhe  fhould  in- 
■ftantly  drop  into  the  pit.  But  the  Lord  did  not 
Vol.  XXXII.  F leave 


[ 122  ] 

leave  her  long  in  the  fnare  : he  appeared  again, 
to  the  joy  of  her  foul.  Her  confidence  was  more 
flrorig  than  ever,  and  the  fear  of  God  more 
deeply  rooted  in  her  heart.  She  abhorred  all  fin, 
that  in  particular  which  had  occafioned  her  dif- 
ir efs : of  which  indeed  fhe  had  a peculiar  detef- 
tation  to  her  lafl  hours. 

* “ God  now  made  her  heart  flrong : fhe 
walked  feven  years  in  the  clear  light  of  his  coun- 
tenance, never  feeling  a moment’s  doubt  of  his 
favour,  but  having  the  uninterrupted  witnefs  of 
his  Spirit.  It  was  her  meat  and  drink  to  do  his 
will.  His  word,  read  or  preached,  was  her  delight, 
and  all  his  ways  w’ere  pleafant  to  her.  She  faid, 
fire  never  came  from  a fermon  unimproved ; of- 
ten lo  relrefhed  as  to  iorget  wearinefs  or  pain. 
And  fhe  w’as  truly  diligent  in  bujinejs,  as  well  as 
fervent  in  Jpirit. 

“ And  now  fire  thought,  fhe  fiiould  never  be 
removed-,  God  had  made  her  hill  fo  Jlrong.  But 
foon  after  this,  fire  was  prefent  when  her  fifler 
was  ill  ufed  by  her  hufband.  She  gave  way  to 
the  temptation,  fell  into  a paflion,  and  again  loft 
all  her  happinefs.  Yet  not  long  : fhe  continued 
inftantin  prayer;  till  God  again  healed  her  back- 
fliding. 

* “ But  from  this  time,  as  her  temptations 
were  more  violent,  fo  fhe  had  a keener  fenfeof  j 
the  remains  of  fins.  Though  fhe  enjoyed  a con- 
ftant  fenfe  of  the  favour  of  God,  yet  fhe  had  alfo 
much  fear,  left  inbred  fin  fhould  prevail  over 

her, 


[ 123  ] 

her,  and  make  her  bring  afcandal  upon  the  go£ 
pel.  She  fpent  whole  days  in  prayer,  that  God 
would  not  fuffer  her  to  be  tempted  above  that  Jhe 
was  able , and  that  with  every  temptation  he  would 
make  a way  for  her  to  efcape.  And  fine  was  heard; 
fo  that  her  whole  converfation  adorned  the  doc- 
trineofGod  her  Saviour. 

* “ Yet '(lie  fuffered  much  reproach,  not  only 
from  the  children  of  the  world,  but  alfo  from  the 
children  of  God.  Thefe  wounds  funk  deep  into 
her  foul,  and  often  made  her  weep  before  the 
Lord.  Sometimes  fhe  felt  refentment  for  a fhort 
time,  of  which  darknefs  wTas  the  fure  confe- 
quence  : but  if  at  any  time  fhe  loll  the  confeioni- 
nefs  of  pardon,  it  almoft  took  away  Iter  life  ; nor 
could  fhe  refl  fatisfied  a moment,  till  fhe  regained 
the  light  of  his  countenance.  She  always  judged 
it  was  the  privilege  of  every  believer,  conltantly 
to  walk  in  the  light:  and  that  nothing  but  fin 
could  rob  any,  who  had  true  faith,  of  their  con- 
fidence in  a pardoning  God. 

“ She  was  tried  from  within  and  without  for 
about  live  years,  yet  kept  from  all  known  fin. 
In  the  year  1761,  it  pleafed  God  to  fhew  hef 
more  clearly  than  ever,  under  a fermon  preached 
by  John  Johnfon,  the  abfolute  neceffity,  of  be- 
ing  laved  from  all  fin,  and  perfected  in  love. 
And  now  her  conflant  cry  was,  “ Lord,  take  full 
poffeffion  of  my  heart,  and  reign  there  without 
a rival.”  Nor  was  this  at  all  hindered  by  her  dif- 
F 2 orders. 


[ 124  ] 

orders,  the  gravel  and  coiick,  which  about  this 
time  began  to  be  very  violent. 

“*  In  the  year  1762,  fhe  believedGod  did  hear 
her  prayer;  that  her  foul  was  intirely  filled  with 
love,  and  all  unholy  tempers  deflroyed.  And  for 
feveral  months  fire  rejoiced  evermore , prayed, 
without  ceafing,  and  in  every  thing  gave  thanks. 
Her  happinefs  had  no  intermiffion,  day  or  night, 
yea,  and  increafed,  while  her  diforder  increafed 
exceedingly. 

* “ But  in  the  beginning  of  the  year  1763, 
when  fome  unkind  things  were  whifpered  about 
concerning  her,  fhe  gave  way  to  the  temptation, 
and  felt  again  a degree  of  anger  in  her  heart. 
This  foon  occafioned  a doub'  whether  fhe  was 
not  deceived  before  in  thinking  fhe  was  faved 
from  fin  ? But  fhe  faid,  “ Whether  I was  or  no, 
I am  fure,  I may  he.  And  I am  determined  roiv 
to  feek  it  from  the  Lord.” 

“ From  this  time  her  diforders  gradually  in- 
creafed. Whenever  I was  in  town,  t I vifited 
her  from  time  to  time,  and  always  found  her, 
<*  whatever  her  pains  were,  reftgncd  to  the  will  of 
God:  having  a clear  fenfe  of  his  favour,  and  a 
flrong  confidence  that  he  would  finifli  his  work 
in  her  foul. 

“ So  foon  as  I came  to  town,  January,  1767, 
fhe  fent  for  me.  I found  her  confined  to  her  bed, 
and  frequently  in  fuch  racking  pain,  that  it  was 
thought  lire  could  not  live  many  minutes.  But 

fhe 


+ Mr.  Johnfon. 


[ 12.5  ] 

fhe  faid,  “ My  pain  is  nothing:  the  prefence  of 
the  Lord  bears  me  up  above  it  all.  I have  not  a 
murmuring  thought:  neither  the  fhadow  of  a 
doubt.  My  way  to  glory  is  plain  before  me.”  I 
afked,  “ If  fhe  was  not  afraid  of  having  great 
fufferings  before  the  foul  and  body  were  parted  ?” 
She  faid,  “ Not  in  the  lead.  I expeft  to  have 
fnarp  pain,  juft  before  I depart;”  (which  was  fo) 
“ but  I do  not  concern  myfelf  about  what  I 
fhall  fuffer.  It  is  all  at  the  difpofal  of  the 
Lord.” 

* “ Two  days  after  I went  again  to  fee  her. 
She  faid,  “ My  happinefs  is  much  increafed.  For 
a day  and  a night  my  pains  have  been  exquilite  : 
yet  in  the  midftofall,my  heart  did  dance  and  fing. 
The  Lord  fofmiles  upon  me,  I cannot  exprefs  it 
in  words.”  February  6.  She  fent  for  me  again.  I 
found  her  in  a rapture  of  love,  finging  and  praif- 
ing  God  : fo  that  I was  conftrained  to  fay,  “ O 
Lord,  thou  haft  highly  favoured  me,  in  permit- 
ting me  to  fee  fuch  a Chriftian  !”  I cannot  at- 
tempt to  defcribe  how  fhe  then  appeared  : it  was 
with  fuch  afmile  as  I never  faw  before.  Moft  of 
the  preceding  day  fhe  had  fpent  in  finging  praife 
to  God,  and  telling  of  his  goodnefs  to  all  that 
came  near  her  ; her  foul,  fhe  faid,  being  fo  hap- 
py, that  fhe  could  not  be  filent. 

* “ When  I fpoke  to  her  of  death,  flue  faid, 
“ It  is  not  death  to  me  : it  is  only  fleep  : death  is 
my  friend  ! Death  is  welcome  ! Its  fting  is  gone : 

F 3 I fhall 


[ »6  1 

I (hall  foon  be  with  my  Lord  ! O that  I could 
hug  on  to  all  eternity  ! My  work  of  praife  is  be* 
gun,  and  /hall  never  end.”  I a/ked,  “ Do  you 
hnd  the  greateft  inclination  to  prayer  or  praife?’’ 
She  faid,  “ O praife!  Praife.  I am  full  of  love. 
And  I cannot  doubt  but  I fhall  love  and  praife 
him  to  all  eternity.”  I then  afked  her  concerning 
her  former  profeflion,  of  being  faved  from  fin. 
She  faid,  “ Sir,  I have  it  now!  I have  it  now! 
And  more  abundantly.  My  foul  is  fo  full  of  love, 
that  my  bbdy  is  almo/t  overpowered.  It  will 
be  but  a little  while,  and  we  fliall  meet  in 
glory.” 

* “ Monday  9.  I vifited  her  again,  and  found 
iter  finging  as  well  as  her  weak  body  would  per- 
mit. I a/ked,  “ Are  you  as  happy  now,  as  when 
I faw  you  laft  ? She  faid,  “ Yes,  I am  : I have 
not  the  /hadow  of  a doubt.  I had  many  conflicts 
with  a wicked  heart : but  thofe  are  all  over  now; 
the  Lord  has  finifhed  his  w-ork.”  She  converfed 
now  like  one  on  Pifgah’s  top,  in  fight  of  the  New 
Jerufalem  ; often  faying,  “ My  work  is  begun, 
which  fliall  never  end  ; I fliall  praife  him  to  all 
eternity.” 

“ She  was  a/ked,  “ Can  you  wait  the  Lord’s 
leifure  to  releafe  you  ?”  She  faid,  “ Yes,  yes:  as 
long  as  he  pleafes.  My  pain  is  gone  ; this  alfo  he 
has  done  for  me  ; and  why  fhould  I not  w'ait  pa- 
tiently ?”  But  it  was  not  long  before  her  pains 
returned  with  redoubled  violence.  And  fome- 
times  a groan  was  extorted  from  her : but  not 


[ 127  ] 


the  leaft  complaint.  Yea,  fhe  often  broke  out  in 
a rapture  of  love,  crying,  “ I cannot  exprefs  the 
happinefs  I feel.” 

“ Friday  13.  After  dozing  a little,  (he  awaked 
in  a tranfport,  faying,  “ O ! You  can’t  conceive 
the  joy  I feel.  You  know  but  in  part  : but  when 
that  which  is  perfeft  is  come,  you  fhall  know 
even  as  you  are  known.”  She  fpoke,  with  regard 
to  fome  glorious  views  which  fhe  then  had  of 
her  dear  Redeemer. 

* “ During  her  laft  pains,  which  were  the 
fharpeft  of  all,  the  devil  made  his  laft  effort. 
She  was  in  a violent  llruggle  about  half  an  hour. 
Then  Ore  ftretched  out  her  hands  and  faid, 
“ Glory  to  Jefus  ! Olove  Jefus!  Love  Jefus!  He 
is  a glorious  Jefus ! He  has  now  made  me  fit  for 
himfelf.  When  the  harveft  is  ripe,  the  fickle  is 
put  in.”  She  afked  for  a little  wine  and  water  : 
but  (he  could  not  fwallow  it.  She  faid,  “ I 
have  long  been  drinking  wine  and  water  here  : 
now  I fhall  drink  wine  in  my  father’s  kingdom.” 
She  lay  ftill  about  a quarter  of  an  hour,  ar.d  then 
breathed  her  foul  into  the  hands  ofher  Redeem- 
er.” 


OnWednefday  and  Thurfday  we  had  our  little 
conference  atDublin.  Friday  weobferved  as  a day 
of  faffing  and  prayer  : and  concluded  it  with  the 
moft  folemn  watch-night,  that  I ever  remem- 
ber in  this  kingdom.  I was  much  tired  between 
F 4 feven 


[ 128  ] 

feven  and  eight  o’clock,  but  lefsand  lefs  fo  as  the 
fervice  went  on.  And  at  the  conclufion,  a little 
after  twelve  I was  frefher  than  at  fix  in  the 
morning. 

Sunday  26.  was  a comfortable  day  indeed. 
But  the  conclufion  of  it  tried  my  ftrength,  as  I 
was  fpeaking  with  fcarce  any  infermiffion, 
from  a little  after  five  till  between  nine  and 
ten. 

Monday  27.  Having  a fever e cold,  I was  in 
hopes  of  liding  it  away.  So  I took  horfe  a little 
after  four,  and  reached  Newry  in  the  evening. 
But  my  voice  was  frill  fo  weak,  that  I doubt  if 
many  of  the  congregation  in  the  market-houfe 
could  hear  me.  And  my  cough  was  fo  violent  at 
night,  I could  hardly  deep  a quarter  of  an  hour 
together.  However  I preached  at  five  in  the 
morning,  without  much  difficulty.  Wednefday 
eg.  1 haded  on  to  Donaghadce,  but  found  all  the 
pacquet-boats  were  on  the  other  fide.  So  I 
agreed  with  the  captain  of  a fmall  veffel,  and 
went  on  board  about  two  o’clock.  But  it  was 
fo  late  when  we  landed  (afte  r a paffage  of  five 
hours)  that  we  could  only  reach  Stranrawer  that 
night. 

Thurfday  30.  We  rode  through  a country 
fwiftly  improving  to  Aire,  and  pa  fie  d a quiet  and 
comfortable  night.  Friday  31.  Before  two  we 
reached  Glafgow.  In  the  evening  I preached,  and 
again  at  five  in  the  morning.  Saturday,  Auguft  1. 

As 


[ 129  -] 

As  both  my  horfe  and  myfelf  were  a little  tired, 
I took  the  ffage-coach  to  Edinburgh. 

Before  I left  Glafgow  I heard  fo  flrange  an 
account,  that  I defired  to  hear  it  from  the  perfon 
himfelf.  He  was  a fexton,  and  yet  for  many  years 
had  little  troubled  himfelf  about  religion.  I fet 
down  his  words,  and  leave  every  man  to  form 
his  own  judgment  upon  them.  “ Sixteen  weeks 
ago,  1 was  walking  an  hour  before  fun-fet,  behind 
the  high  kirk,  and  looking  on  one  fide  I faw  one 
clofe  to  me,  who  looked  in  my  face,  and  afked 
me,  How  I did  ? I anfwered,  Pretty  well.  He 
faid,  “ You  have  had  many  troubles.  But  how 
have  you  improved  them  ?”  He  then  told  me  all 
that  ever  I did,  yea,  and  the  thoughts  that  had 
been  in  my  heart,  adding,  “ Be  ready  for  my  fe- 
cond  coming.”  And  he  was  gone  I knew  not 
how,  I trembled  all  over,  and  had  no  ftrengthin 
me,  but  funk  down  to  the  ground.  From  that 
time  I groaned  continually  under  the  load  of 
fin,  till  at  the  Lord’s  fupper  it  was  all  taken 
away.” 

# Sunday  2.  I was  forry  to  find  both  the  fo- 
ciety  and  the  congregations  fmaller  than  when  I 
was  here  laft.  I impute  this  chiefly,  to  the  man- 
ner of  preaching  which  has  been  generally  u fed. 
The  people  have  been  told  frequently  and 
ftrongly,  of  their  coldnefs,  deadnefs,  heavinefs, 
and  littlenefs  of  faith,  but  very  rarely  of  any  thing 
that  would  move  thankfulnefs.  Hereby  many 

were 


[ w ] 

were  driven  away,  and  thofe  that  remained  were 
kept  cold  and  dead. 

I encouraged  them  ftrongly  at  eight  in  the 
morning,  and  about  noon  preached  upon  the 
Caftle-hill,  on  There  is  joy  in  heaven  over  one  fin- 
zicr  that  repenteth.  The  fun  fhone  exceeding  hot 
upon  my  head  : but  all  was  well ; for  God  was 
in  the  midllof  us.  In  the  evening  I preached  on 
Luke  xx.  34,  &c.  and  many  were  comforted  : 
efpecially  while  I was  inlarging  on  thofe  deep 
words,  Neither  can  they  die  any  more,  but  are  equal 
to  the  angels,  and  are  the  children  of  God,  being  the 
children  of  the  refurretlion. 

Monday  3.  I vifited  as  many  as  I could,  fick 
and  well,  and  endeavoured  to  confirm  them.  In 
the  evening  I preached  at  feven,  and  again  at 
nine.  We  concluded  about  twelve.  One  then 
came  to  me  with  an  unexpefted  melTage.  A 
gentleman  in  the  weft  of  Scotland,  was  a ferious, 
fenfible  man,  but  violently  attached  both  to  the 
dothine  and  difcipline  of  the  kirk.  His  eldeft 
daughter,  dreamed  fome  months  fince,  that  fhe 
was  poifoned,  and  mull  die  in  an  hour.  She 
waked  in  (he  utmoft  confternation,  which  iftued 
in  a deep  conviftion  of  fin.  Soon  after  fhe  had 
an  earned  defire  to  fee  me,  though  not  perceiv- 
ing any  poffibility  of  it.  But  bufinefs  calling 

Mr.  H to  Edinburgh,  he  brought  her  with 

him,  three  days  before  lcame.  On  Sunday  morn- 
ing he  heard  the  preaching  for  the  firft  time, 

and 


C *3*  ] 

and  afterwards  omitted  no  opportunity.  He 
now  fent  his  daughter,  to  beg  I would  come 
if  pofTible  to  the  weft,  and  to  defire  that  I or  any 
of  our  preachers  would  make  his  houfe  our 
home. 

Tuefday  4.  I rode  to  Dunbar,  and  endeavour- 
ed, if  poflible,  to  rouze  fome  of  the  fleep- 
ers,  by  ftrongly,  yea,  roughly  inforcing  thofe 
words,  Lord  are  there  few  that  be  faved?  And 
this  I muft  fay  for  the  Scots  in  general,  I 
know  no  men  like  them,  for  bearing  plain- 
dealing. 

On  Thurfday  I reached  Newcaftle.  Saturday 
8.  At  the  requeft  of  Mr.  Whitaker  of  New- 
England,  I preached,  and  afterwards  made  a col- 
leftion,  for  the  Indian  fchools  in  America.  A 
large  fum  of  money  is  now  colle&ed : but  will 
money  convert  Heathens  ? Find  preachers  of 
David  Brainerd’s  fpirit,  and  nothing  can  ftand  be- 
forethem.  But  without  this, what  will  gold  orfilver 
do  ? No  more  than  lead  or  iron.  They  have  in- 
deed fent  thoufands  to  hell ; but  never  yet  brought 
a foul  to  heaven. 

Sunday  9.  I preached  about  ten  in  Mr., 
Goodday’s  church  at  Monk-Weremouth.  About 
two  I preached  to  a willing  multitude  at  Gatef- 
head-fell,  and  at  five,  near  the  GarttaHeads  at 
Newcaftle. 

Monday  10.  I laboured  to  fet  fome  right,, 
who  have  much  grace,  but  little  underftand- 
ing.  And  I prevailed  on  all  but  one  who  ap- 
F 6 pearetF 


[ J32  ] 

peared  indeed  to  be  the  twin-foul  of  poor  George 
Bell. 

Tuefday  11.  I came  to  a friendly  conclufion 
fblelfed  be  God  !)  with  Mr.  L.  He  agreed  to 
pay  the  legacies  on  the  fecond  of  November: 
and  we  relinquilhed  the  refidue  of  the  ellate. 
So  the  Harpy-lawyers  are  happily  difappointed  : 
and  the  defign  of  the  dying  faint  in  fome  mea- 
fure  anfwered. 

Wednefday  12.  I took  coach.  The  next  day 
we  reached  Grantham,  and  London  about  fe- 
ven  on  Friday  evening,  having  run  that  day 
an  hundred  and  ten  miles.  On  the  road  I 
read  over  Seller’s  hi ftory  of  Palmyra,  and  Nor- 
den’s  travels  into  Egypt  and  Abyffinia : two  as 
dry,  and  unfatisfying  books,  as  ever  I read  in  my 
life. 

Sunday  16.  I hoped  to  preached  in  the  fields: 
but  the  rain  prevented.  However  one  of  our 
brethren  preached  there  at  feven,  to  thoufands 
upon  thoufands.  And  there  was  not  the  leaf!  flia- 
dow  of  interruption.  How  long  will  thefe  Hal- 
cyon-days continue ! 

Tuefday  18.  I met  in  conference  with  our 
affiftants,  and  a feleft  number  of  preachers.  To 
thefe  were  added  on  Thurfday  and  Fridav,  Mr. 
Whitefield,  Howell  Harris,  and  manv  ftewards 
and  local  preachers.  Love  and  harmony  reigned 
from  the  beginning  to  the  end.  But  we  have  all 
need  of  more  love  and  holinefs ; and  in  order 

thereto, 


[ *33  J 

thereto,  of  crying  continually,  “ Lord,  increaft 
our  faith  ! 

Having  finilhed  fny  work  at  London  for  the 
prefent,  on  Monday  24,  I rode  to  Wycombe, 
and  preached  in  the  evening  to  a numerous  and 
deeply  attentive  congregation. 

Tuefday  25.  I read  Mr.  Crantz’s  account  of 
of  the  Million  into  Groenland.  Although  I make 
much  allowance  for  the  liberty  which  I know 
the  brethren  take,  in  their  accounts  of  one  another, 
yet  I do  not  fee  any  reafon  to  doubt,  that  fome 
of  the  heathens  have  been  converted.  But  what 
pity,  thatfo  affediing  an  account  fhould  be  dif- 
graced  with  thofe  vile,  doggrel  verfes,  juft  cal- 
culated to  make  the  whole  performance  {link  in 
the  noftrils  of  all  fenfible  men  ! In  the  evening 
the  multiude  that  flocked  together,  obliged  me 
to  preach  abroad.  I faw  but  three  or  four  that 
feemed  unaffected.  And  thofe,  I fuppofe,  were 
footmen  ; a race  of  men  who  are  commonly 
loft  to  all  fenfe  of  fhame,  as  well  as  of  good  and 
evil. 

Wednefday  26.  I rode  to  Ipftone-hall,  near 
Stoken  church,  and  preached  about  ten  o’clock  : 
and  in  the  evening  at  Witney.  The  next  even- 
ing I preached  on  Wood-Green,  near  the  town, 
to  an  huge  congregation,  on  Seek  ye  the.  Lord , while 
he  ?nay  be  found  : Call  ye  upon  him  while  he  is 
near  Scarce  any  were  light  or  unattentive.  Sure- 
ly fome  will  bring  forth  fruit  unto  perfedtion. 

Friday  28.  I preached  at  Stow  in  the  Wold, 

about 


[ J34  ] 


about  ten,  to  a very  dull,  quiet  congregation,  and 
in  the  evening  to  almoft  fuch  another  at  Glocef- 
ter,  Saturday  29.  We  rode  to  Brecknock.  Sun- 
day 30.  One  of  Trevecha  gave  us  a Orange  ac- 
count. A young  woman  who  ferved  as  dairy- 
maid there,  was  beloved  by  all  the  family.  She 
was  loving  to  every  one,  never  angry,  never  out 
of  humour.  That  morning  fhe  was  much  happier 
and  had  a fuller  manifeftation  of  the  love  of  God 
than  ever.  As  (he  was  coming  through  the  entry, 
a lad  met  her  with  a gun  in  his  hand,  which  he 
did  not  know  was  charged.  He  prefentedit,  and 
faid,  “ Nanny,  I will  (hoot  you.”  The  gun  went 
off  and  fhot  her  thro’  the  heart.  She  fell  on  her 
face,  and  without  any  ftruggle  or  groan,  immedi- 
ately expired. 

I preached  at  eight  to  a large  and  ferious  con- 
gregation, and  on  the  Bulwarks  at  five.  A multi- 
tude of  people  attended  : and  even  the  gentry 
feemed,  for  the  prefent,  almojl  perfuaded  to  be 
Chrijiians. 

Monday  31.  I rode  to  Carmarthen,  and,  a- little 
before  fix  went  down  to  the  green . The  congre- 
gation was  near  as  large  as  that  at  Brecknock, hut 
nothing  fogay,  being  almoft  all  poor  or  middling 
people  To  thefe  therefore  I direcfly  preached 
the  gofpel.  They  heard  it  withgreedinefs.  And 
though  I was  faint  and  weary  when  I began,  I 
was  foon  as  a giant  refreJJied  with  wine. 

Tuefday,  Sept.  1.  I rode  on  to  Pembroke, 
and  this  and  the  next  evening  preached  in  the 

main 


[ »3  5 3 

main  flreet,  to  far  more  than  the  houfe  could 
have  contained.  In  the  mornings  we  were  within. 
Wednefday  2,  Upon  enquiry,  I found  the  work 
of  God  in  Pembrokefhire  had  been  exceedingly 
hindered,  chiefly  by  Mr.  Davie’s  preachers,  who 
had  continually  inveighed  againft  ours,  and  there- 
by frighten’d  abundance  of  people  from  hearing, 
or  coming  near  them.  This  had  fometimes 
provoked  them  to  retort,  which  always  made  a 
bad  matter  worfe.  The  advice  therefore  which  I 
-gave  them  was,  l.  Let  all  the  people  facredly  ab- 
ftain  from  backbiting,  talebearing,  evil-fpeaking, 
2. Let  all  our  preachers  abflain  from  returning  rail- 
ing for  railing,  either  in  public  or  in  private,  as 
well  as  from  difputing.  3.  Let  them  never  preach 
controverfy,  but  plain,  pra&ical  and  experimen- 
tal religion. 

Thurfday  3.  About  noon  I preached  at  Lam- 
phy,  a village  two  miles  from  Pembroke.  The 
rain  a little  leffened  the  congregration,  but  did 
not  hinder  the  bleffing.  God  was  eminently  pre- 
fent  to  comfort  the  mourners  : as  likewife  at 
Pembroke  in  the  evening. 

Saturday  5.  I rode  to  Haverford-Weft,  but 
knew  not  what  to  do,  becaufe  of  the  rain.  How- 
ever at  fix  I was  conftrained  by  the  number  of 
people  to  Hand  abroad,  near  the  caftle.  And  the 
whole  congregation  as  quietly  attended,  as  if  we 
had  been  in  a cathedral. 

Sunday  6.  I had  a large  and  earned:  congre- 
gation at  fix.  About  ten  I began  the  fervice  at 

St. 


[ *36  ] 


St.  Daniel’s,  a little  church  about  half  a mile  from 
Pembroke,  which  till  lately  lay  in  ruins.  It  was 
throughly  filled  during  the  prayers  and  fermon, 
and  a confiderable  number  gladly  partook  of  the 
Lord’s  fupper.  Afterwards  I rode  back  to  Haver- 
ford,  and  notwithftanding  the  rain,  flood  in  the 
fame  place  as  before  and  applied,  0 that  thou 
hadjl  known,  at  leaf,  in  this  thy  day , the  things  that 
make  for  thy  pace  ! 

Monday  7. 1 rode  to  Carmarthen,  and  preach- 
ed on  the  green  on,  Is  there  no  Balm  in  Gilead? 
In  the  afternoon  finding  none  that  could  direft 
us  to  Oxwych,  we  were  obliged  to  ride  round  by 
Swanfey.  The  next  morning  we  came  to  Ox- 
wych," and  found  George  Story  there,  who  had 
come  to  Swanfey  the  day  before  in  his  way  to 
Cork.  Hearing  I was  near  he  came  over  juft  in 
fealon,  to  preach  to  the  congregation  who  waited 
for  me.  At  noon  I preached  to  I fuppofe,  all  the 
inhabitants  of  the  town,  and  then  rode  to 
Neath. 

I had  defigned  to  preach  abroad,  but  the  rain 
would  not  permit.  The  preaching-houfe  was 
muchcrouded.  And  the  power  of  God  was  in 
the  midft  of  the  congregation  ; prejudice  funk 
down  before  it.  And  the  innumerable  lies,  which 
moft  of  them  had  heard  of  me,  vanifhed  into  air. 
The  fame  power  refted  upon  them  early  in  the 
morning.  The  bigots  on  all  fides  were  afhamed, 
and  felt,  that  in  Chrift  Jefus,  nothing  avails,  but 
the  Faith  that  worketh  by  Love. 


Wednefday 


[ *3  7 1 

Wednefday  g.  About  twelve  I preached  to  a 
large  and  ferious  congregation,  in  the  affembly 
room  atCowbridge  : and  in  the  evening,  in  the 
court-houfe  at  Cardiff,  where,  both  this  and  the 
following  evening,  we  had  moft  of  the  gentry  in 
the  town  : and  both  the  mornings,  the  hearers 
were  more  than  for  many  years.  V/ho  knows, 
but  even  in  this  defolate  town,  God  may  build 
up  the  wafte  places  ? 

Friday  1 1.  I rode  to  Lambraddock,  a Angle 
houfe  delightfully  fituated  near  the  top  of  an  high 
mountain,  and  in  the  evening  preached  to  a feri- 
ous company  of  plain  welchmen,  with  uncom- 
mon enlargement  of  heart.  Saturday  12.  Set- 
ting out  early,  1 reached  Chepflow  before  noon, 
and  preached  at  a friend’s  door,  to  a civil,  un- 
concerned congregation.  We  came  to  the  Old 
Paffage,  (being  told  we  had  time  to  fpare)  a few 
minutes  after  the  boat  was  gone  off.  Finding  they 
would  not  pafs  again  that  day,  I left  my  horfes 
behind,  and  crofling  over  in  a fmall  boat,  got  to 
Briflol,  foon  enough  to  preach  in  the  even- 
ing. 

The  following  week  I vifited  moft  of  the  Somer- 
fetfhire  focieties.  Sunday  20.  (as  the  Sunday 
before)  I preached  in  Princes-ftreet  at  eight, 
about  two  under  the  fycamore-tree  atKingfwood, 
and  at  five  in  the  New-fquare,  to  a larger  con- 
gregation, than  I think,  was  ever  there  before. 
Monday  21.  I preached  at  Pensford,  Pauhon 
and  Coleford  ; on  Tuefday  noon  at  Midfum- 

mer 


C *3%  ] 

mer-Norton  ; (fo  called,  I fuppofe,  becaufe  for- 
merly it  was  acceflible  at  no  other  time  of  the 
year)  and  in  the  evening  at  Coleford  again, 
where  we  had  a comfortable  love-feaft,  at  which 
many  fpoke  their  experience  with  all  ftmplicity. 
Wednefday  23.  About  noon  I preached  at  Buck- 
land,  and  in  the  evening  at  Frome  ; but  the 
houfe  was  too  fmall,  fo  that  many  were  conftrain- 
ed  to  go  away.  So  the  next  evening  I preach- 
ed in  a meadow,  where  a multitude  of  all  denomi- 
nations attended.  It  feems  that  God  is  at  length 
giving  a more  general  call  to  this  town  alfo  : the 
people  whereof  feemed  before,  in  every  fenfe, 
to  be  rich  and  incrcajed  in  goods , and  needing 

Friday  25.  I was  defired  to  preach  at  Frefh- 
ford ; but  the  people  durft  not  come  to  the 
houfe,  becaufe  of  the  fmall-pox,  of  which  Jofeph 
Allen , an  lfraeliie  indeed  had  died  the  day  before. 
So  they  placed  a table  near  the  church-yard.  But 
1 had  no  fooner  begun  to  fpeak  than  the  bells 
began  toring.by  the  procurement  of  a neighour- 
ing  gentleman.  However  it  w^as  labour  loft  ; for 
my  voice  prevailed,  and  the  people  heard  me  dif- 
tindlly.  Nay  a perfon  extremely  deaf,  who  had 
not  been  able  to  hear  a fermon  for  feveral  years, 
told  his  neighbours  w’ith  great  joy,  “ That  he 
had  heard  and  underftood  all,  from  the  begin- 
ning to  end.” 

I preached  at  Bi  iftol  in  the  evening  on  2 Cor. 
iv.  17.  a text  which  had  been  chofen  by  William 

New, 


[ 1 39  ] 

New  a little  before  God  called  him  hence.  He 
laboured  under  a deep  aflhma  for  feveral  years, 
and  for  feven  or  eight  months  was  confined  to  his 
bed  where  he  was  from  time  to  time  vifited  by  a 
friend,  who  wrote  the  following  account. 

“ He  was  one  of  the  firfh  methodifts  in  Briftol, 
and  always  walked  as  became  the  gofpel.  By 
the  fweat  of  his  brow  he  maintained  a large  fa- 
mily, leaving  fix  children  behind  him.  When 
he  was  no  longer  able  to  walk,  he  did  not  dif- 
continue  his  labour:  and  after  he  kept  his 
room,  he  ufed  to  cut  out  glafs,  (being  a glazier) 
to  enable  his  eldeft  fon,  a child  about  fourteen, 
to  do  fomething  toward  the  fupporc  of  his  fa- 
mily. Yea,  when  he  kept  his  bed,  he  was  not 
idle,  but  fiill  gave  him  what  affifiance  he 
could. 

“ He  was  formerly  fond  of  company  and  di- 
verfions,  but  as  foon  as  God  called  him,  left 
them  all  : having  a nobler  diverfion,  vifiting  the 
fick  and  affli&ed,  in  which  he  fpent  all  his  lei- 
fure  hours.  He  was  diligent  in  the  ufe  of  all 
the  means  of  grace;  very  rarely,  during  his 
health,  miffing  the  morning  preaching  at  five, 
though  he  lived  above  a mile  from  the  room. 

“ About  a year  ago  he  took  his  leave  of  the 
fociety,  telling  them,  “ That  it  was  with  great 
pleafure  he  had  joined  and  continued  with  them  : 
that  it  was  in  this  defpifed  place,  the  Lord  firft 
manifefled  himfelf  to  his  foul  : that  no  tongue 
could  tell  what  he  had  fince  enjoyed  under  that 

roof ; 


[ 14°  ] 

roof : that  the  fame  Jefus  had  enabled  him  to 
hold  on  thus  far,  and  he  hoped  to  be  with  him 
foon  adding,  “ I do  not  expe£t  to  ' you 
any  more  here,  but  have  no  doubt  of  meeu  ecu 
in  glory.” 

During  the  lall  twenty  days  of  his  life, 
took  no  other  fuftenance,  than  no  - and  then  a 
tea-fpoon  full  of  wine,  or  of  babn-tea.  . out 
fourteen  days  before  his  death,  bis  tongue  turn- 
ed black  with  large  chops  in  it  through  the  heat 
of  his  ftomach  : and  his  lips  were  drawn  two  or 
three  inches  apart,  fo  that  it  was  difficult  for  him 
to  fpeak.  In  this  condition  he  lay  waiting  for  his 
difeharge,  faying  fometimes.  “ I am,  as  it  were, 
two  perfons.  The  body  is  in  torturing  pain,  the 
foul  is  in  fweet  peace.”  He  frequently  faid,  I 
long  to  be  gone,  come,  Lord  Jefus  ! Come 
quickly.”  When  I afked,  “ Do  you  defireto  fee 
fuch  a perfon  ?”  He  faid,  “ I defile  to  fee  none 
but  Jefus.  To  him  I leave  my  dear  wife  and 
children.  I have  no  care  about  them.” 

“ The  next  day  Satan  violently  a {faulted  his 
faith  : but  inftantly  our  Lord  appeared  in  a 
his  glory,  and  he  was  filled  with  love  and  joy 
unfpeakable,  and  faid,  “ call  my  friend,  and  let 
him  fee  a dying  Chriftian.  O what  do  I feel  ? I 
fee  my  Lord  has  overcome  for  me.  I am  his  : 
praife  the  Lord  ! Praife  the  Lord  ! Hallelujah ! 
Hallelujah  !”  Hedefired  them  that  were  prefent 
to  fing,  and  began,  “ Jefu,  Lover  of  my  foul.” 

He 


[ M*  ] 

He  then  defired  the  text  for  his  funeral  ferraon 
might  be  i Cor.  iv.  17. 

“ The  next  time  I faw  him,  having  defired 
him  to  make  figns  rather  than  fpeak,  which  was 
painful  to  him,  he  faid,  “ Here  is  a fign,  (pufh- 
ing  out  his  feet,  and  holding  up  his  hands)  a dy- 
ing Chrillian,  full  of  love  and  joy  ! A crown,  a 
never  fading  crown  awaits  me  : I am  going  to 
everlalting  habitations.”  He  then  defired  us  to 
fing,  and  quickly  added,  “ He  is  come!  He  is 
come  ! I want  to  be  gone  ; Farewel  to  you  all.” 
When  he  could  no  longer  fpeak,  he  continued 
finding,  clapping  his  hands,  and  difcovering  ail 
extafy  of  joy  in  every  motion. 

“ After  a while  his  fpeecli  returned,  and  he 
faid,  “ To-day  is  Friday  : To-morrow  I expe£l 
to  go.  One  faid,  “ Poor  Mr.  New  !”  He  faid,  It 
is  rich  New.  Though  poor  in  myfelf,  I am  rich 
in  Chrift.’* 

“ I faw  him  on  Saturday  in  the  fame  fpirit, 
praifing  God  with  every  breath.  He  appeared 
quite  tranfported  pointing  upwards,  and  turning 
his  fingers  round  his  head,  alluding  to  the  crown 
prepared  for  him.  I faid,  “ Your  Lord  has  kept 
the  beft.  wine  unto  the  !afi.”~“  Yes,  yes,  faid  he,  it 
is  in  my  foul.”  When  I took  my  leave  he  prefixed 
ray  hand,  pointed  upward,  and  again  clapped  his 
hands.  Afterward  he  fpoke  little,  till  he  cried 
out,  “ The  chariot,  the  chariot  of  Ifrael,”  and 
died.” 

Saturday  26.  I was  informed  between  twelve 

and 


r 142  ] 

and  one,  that  Mrs.  B.  was  dying.  Judging  I had 
no  time  to  lofe,  about  one  I left  Brillol,  and 
about  feven  on  Sunday  morning  came  to  London. 
Learning  there  that  fhe  was  better,  I flayed  to 
preach  and  adminifler  the  facrament  at  the 
cbappel,  and  then  haltened  on,  and  fpent  a fo- 
lemn  and  profitable  hour  at  Lewifham.  1 preach* 
ed  again  at  Welf-flreet  Chappel  in  the  afternoon, 
and  made  a collefilion  for  the  poor,  as  I had 
done  in  the  morning.  Soon  after  I took  chaife 
again,  and  on  Monday  about  noon  came  to 
Brillol. 

Wednef.  30.  I preached  to  a large  and  very 
ferious  congregation  on  Redcliff-Htll.  This  is 
the  wav  to  overturn  Satan’s  kingdom.  In 
field-preaching,  more  than  any  other  means, 
God  is  found  of  them  that  fought  him  not.  By 
this,  death,  heaven  and  hell,  come  to  the  ears, 
if  not  the  hearts,  of  them  that  cart  for  none  of 
tkefe  things. 

Friday,  Ofitober  2,  and  feme  davs  in  the  fol- 
lowing week  I vifited  the  other  focieties  round 
Brillol.  Sun.  1 1.  I pi  eached  at  eight  in  Princes- 
Street,  and  a little  before  five,  near  the  New- 
Square  ; where  notwithflanding  the  keenefs  of 
the  wind  the  congregation  was  exceeding  large. 
I permitted  all  of  Mr.  Whitefield's  focietythat 
pleafed,  to  be  prefent  at  the  love-feaft  that  fol- 
lowed, I hope  we  lhall  not  know  rear  any  more , 
unlefswith  the  world,  the  flelh  and  the  devil. 

Mon.  12.  I preached  at  Bradford,  on  Tuef- 

day 


[ M3  ] 


day  at  Salilbury.  On  Wednefday  about  one 
atRumfey  ; whence  I rode  to  Southampton,  and 
the  wind  being  fo  high,  that  I could  not  well 
preach  abroad,  I fent  a line  to  the  mayor,  requeft- 
ing  leave  to  preach  in  the  Town-hall.  In  an  hour 
he  fent  me  word,  I might  ; but  in  an  hour  more 
he  retrafted.  Poor  mayor  of  Southampton  ! So 
I preached  in  a fnrall  room,  and  did  not  repent 
my  labour. 

Thurfday  15.  About  noon  I preached  at  Fare- 
ham,  then  went  on  to  Portfmouth  Common.  I 
fent  to  defire  the  ufe  of  the  tabernacle  : but  was 
anfwered,  Not  unlefs  I would  preach  the  perfe- 
verance  of  the  faints.”  At  fix  I preached  in  our 
own  room,  which  was  fufficiently  crouded  both 
within  and  without.  Refolving  there  fhould  be 
room  for  all  that  would  come,  I preached  the 
next  afternoon  on  the  fide  of  the  Common.  And 
the  wdiole  congregation  was  as  quite  as  that 
in  the  fquare  at  Briftol.  Saturday  17,  I fet  out 
early,  and  in  the  evening  came  to  London. 

Tuefday  20.  I went  to  Colchefier,  and  fpent 
three  days  very  agreeably,  among  a quiet  and 
loving  people.  All  their  little  mifunderftandings 
are  now  at  an  end.  Yet  they  had  not  the  life 
which  they  had  once.  A lofs  of  this  kind  is  not 
eafily  recovered.  Saturday  2q.  I returned  to 
London. 

Monday  26.  I began  my  little  tour,  through 
Northaraptonfhire  and  Bedfordihire.  I preached 
at  Whittlebury  in  the  evening.  Tuefday  27.  I 

rode 


[ *44  ] 

rode  to  Weedon,  where  the  ufe  of  the  church 
being  refufed,  I accepted  the  offer  of  the  Prefby- 
terian  meeting- houfe,  and  preached  to  a crowded 
audience.  Wednef.  20.  About  two  in  the  after- 
noon I preached  at  Towceller,  where  though 
many  could  not  get  in  yet  all  were  quiet.  Hence 
we  rode  to  Northampton,  where  in  the  evening 
(our  own  room  being  far  too  fmall)  I preached 
in  the  riding-fchool  to  a large  and  deeply  ferious 
congregation.  After  fervice,  I was  challenged, 
by  one  that  was  my  parifhioner  at  Epworth,  near 
forty  years  ago.  I drank  tea  at  her  houfe  the  next 
afternoon  with  her  daughter-in-law  from  Lon- 
don, very  big  with  child,  and  greatly  afraid  that 
fiiefhould  die  in  labour.  When  we  went  to  pray- 
ers, I inlarged  in  prayer,  for  her  in  particular. 
Within  five  minutes  after  we  went  away  her 
pains  began,  and  focal  after  file  was  delivered 
of  a fine  boy.  Friday  30.  I rodeacrofs  the  coun- 
try to  Bedford,  and  preached  in  the  evening  to  a 
civil,  heavy  congregation.  Saturday  31.  After 
preaching  at  Luton  in  the  way,  I returned  to 
London. 

Sund.  Nov.  1.  Being  All-Saints  day.-  (a  fefii- 
Val  I dearly  love)  I could  not  but  obferve  the  ad- 
mirable propriety  with  which  the  collefl,  epiftle 
and  gofpel  for  the  day  are  fuited  to  each  other. 
As  I was  to  fet  out  for  Kent  in  the  morning.  Mr. 
B.  invited  me  to  lpend  the  evening  with  him  at 
Lewifham.  Soon  after  we  took  horfe,  we  found 
one  of  our  horfes  lame.  On  enquiry,  it  appeared 

that 


[ H5  ] 

that  five  nails  were  driven  into  the  quick.  So 
we  were  at  a full  flop.  But  Mr.  B.  fupplyinsr  us 
with  another  horfe,  we  rode  on,  through  heavy 
rain,  to  Staplehurft.  In  the  evening  I met  with  a 
young  clergyman,  who  feemedtc  have  no  defire, 
but  to  fave  his  own  foul  and  thofe  that  heard  him. 
I advifed  him,  to  expeft  croffes  and  perfecuiion. 
But  he  was  fure,  his  re£k>r  would  Hand  by  him. 
Vain  hope.  That  the  children  of  the  world 
fhould  long  ftand  by  the  children  of  Goi  ! 
Soon  after,  his  redtor  told  him,  “ Unlefs  he 
kept  away  from  this  people,  he  mull  leave  his 
curacy.” 

Tuefday  3.  I rode  to  Rye,  and  preached  in  the 
evening.  A poor  prodigal,  who  was  cut  to  the 
heart  the  firll  time  I was  there,  was  one  of  the 
audience:  but  exceeding  drunk.  He  dined  with 
us  the  next  day  : but  was  ftill  fo  muddled,  that  I 
could  make  no  impreflion  on  him.  He  reur  almoff 
perfuaded  to  be  a Chrifiian  ! But  I doubt  is  now 
farther  off  than  ever.  In  the  evening  I dealt  once 
more  exceeding  plain  with  him,  and  his  fellow 
finners.  If  they  now  perifh  in  their  iniquity, 
their  blood  is  on  their  own  head.  Thurfday  5. 
About  noon  I preached  at  Norjam.  I was  fur- 
prized  at  one,  to  hear  the  Tower-guns  fo  plain  at 
above  fifty  miles  dillance.  In  the  afternoon  we 
rode  through  miferable  roads  to  the  pleafant  vil- 
lage of  Ewhurfl,  where  I found  the  moil  lively 
congregration  that  I have  met  within  the  county. 
Saturday  7.  I called  at  the  home  of  mourning  at 
; Vol.  XXXII,  G Shoreham. 


C 146  1 

Shcreham,  where  I found  Mr.  P.  borrowing 
hke  a Chriflian,  for  his  youngeft  fon,  the 
fiaff  of  his  age,  the  fourth  that  has  been  fnatch- 
ed  from  him  in  the  bloom  of  youth.  After 
fpending  a profitable  hour  here,  I rode  forward 
to  London. 

Sun.  8.  I buried  the  remains  of  that  excel- 
lent young  man  Benjamin  Colley.  He  did  rejoice 
evermore,  and  pray  without  ceafing  ; and  I be- 
lieve his  backfliding  cofl  him  his  life.  From  the 
time  he  miffed  his  way,  by  means  of  Mr.  Max- 
field,  he  went  heavily  all  his  days.  God  indeed 
reflored  his  peace  but  left  him  to  be  buffeted  of 
Satan,  in  an  uncommon  manner.  And  his  trials 
did  not  end  but  with  his  life.  However  fome  of 
his  lafl  words  were,  tell  all  the  fociety,  tell  all  the 
world,  I die  without  doubt  or  fear.” 

Thurfd.  12.  I occafionally  looked  into  a book 
which  I had  long  thrown  by,  as  not  worth  read- 
ing, entitled,  “ Thoughts  on  God  and  Na- 
ture.” But  how  agreeably  was  I furprized  ? It 
contains  a treafure  of  antient  learning,  delivered 
in  clear  and  firong  language  ; and  is  indeed  a 
maffer-peice  in  its  kind,  a thunder-bolt  to  Lord 
Bolingbrooke  and  all  his  admirers. 

Sunday  15.  I buried  the  remains  of  Rebecca 
Mills.  She  found  peace  with  God  many  years 
fince,  and  about  five  years  ago  was  entirely  chang- 
ed, and  enabled  to  give  her  whole  foul  to  God. 
From  that  hour  fhe  never  found  any  decay,  but 
loved  and  ferved  him  with  her  whole  heart.  Pain 

and 


[ M 7 ] 

and  ficknefs,  and  various  trials  fucceeded  almoft 
without  any  intermiffion.  But  fhe  was  always  the 
Tame,  firm  and  unmoved,  as  the  rock  on  which 
fhe  was  built  ; in  life  and  in  death  uniformly 
praifing  the  God  of  her  falvation.  The  attainable- 
nefs  of  this  great  falvation,  is  put  beyond  all 
reafonable  doubt,  by  the  teftimony  of  one 
fuch  (were  there  but  one)  living  and  dying 
witnefs. 

Friday  20.  I preached  to  the  condemned  fe- 
lons in  Newgate,  on  To  day  Jlialt  thou  be  with  me 
in paradife.  All  of  them  were  (truck  andmehed 
into  tears  : who  knows  but  fome  of  them  may 
reap  in  joy  ? 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  Laton-flone. 
How  good  would  it  be  for  me  to  be  here,  not 
twice  in  a year,  but  in  a month  ! So  it  appears  to 
me.  But  God  is  wifer  than  man.  When  it  is  really 
bell,  will  he  not  bring  it  to  pafs  P 

About  this  time  I received  two  or  three  re- 
markable letters  ; extrafls  from  which  I here  fub- 
join. 

“ Reverend  Sir, 

“ Lately  I was  requelled  to  read  Mr.  Marfhal’s 
gofpel-myfiery  of  fandlificatiori  : it  was  repre- 
fented  to  me,  as  the  moll  excellent  piece,  ever 
publifhed  on  that  fubjeft.  I have  read  it,  and 
left  I fhould  be  miftaken,  fubmit  to  you  the  fol- 
lowing fhort  remarks. 

“ L tnuft  be  acknowledged,  he  is  on  the  one 
G 2 hand 


[ M ] 

hand  copious  in  fhewing  the  impracticability  of 
real,  genuine  holinefs,  or  of  doing  any  works 
acceptable  to  God,  till  we  repent  and  believe  the 
gofpel.  On  the  other  hand,  he  (hews  the  deadly 
confequences  of  that  faith,  which  fets  afide  our 
obligations  to  obferve  God’s  holy  law. 

“ I rejoice  likewife,  to  find  him  fhewing,  how 
well  able  a believer  is  to  keep  this  law,  and  prov- 
ing that  this  faith  implies  a divine  affuranceof 
our  belonging  to  Chrift:  but  mod  of  all,  to  ob- 
ferve him  fpeaking  fo  excellently  of  the  growth  of 
a believer  in  holinefs.  “ We  are  always  fays  he, 
to  refill  the  devil,  to  quench  all  his  fiery  darts , and 
to  perfedl  holinefis  in  thefiear  oj  God.  We  are  to  be 
built  up  in  Chrift  until  zee  come  to  a perfect  man , 
to  the  me aj ure  of  the  filature  of  the  fullnefs  of 
Chrift 

“ But  how  does  this  agree  with  his  affecting, 
our  natural  Hate  doth  remain  in  a meafure  with 
all  its  corrupt  principles  and  practices  as  long  as 
we  live  in  the  pre/ent  world  ? You  may  as  well 
wafh  a blackamoor  white,  as  purge  the  flelh 
from  its  evil  lulls.  It  will  lull  againft  the  fpirit  in 
the  heft  faints  upon  earth.”  How  then  am  I to 
come  to  a pnfcdl  man,  to  the  meafure  of  the  filature 
of  the  fulnefs  ofChrifil  ? Is  there  a reconciliation 
between  the  fulnefs  ofChrifil  in  a believer,  and  all 
his  corrupt  principles  and  practice  ? Is  it  thus, 
that  the  ftrong  man  armed  is  to  be  ca.fl  out,  with 
the  [polling  of  his  goods  f Does  he  tell  me,  I am 
to  quench  all  the  fiery  darts  of  the  devil : and  in 

the 


'[  ‘49  J 

the  fame  breath  that  “ I may  as  well  wafh  a blacka- 
moor white.”  That  I can  do  all  things  through 
Chrifl  ffrengthning  me  : and  yet,  that  the  flefh 
fhall  never  be  purged  from  its  evil  luffs  ; no,  not 
in  the  bell  faints  on  earth,  fo  long  as  they  live 
in  the  prefent  world  ? What  a wonderful  com- 
munion is  here  between  light  and  darknefs  ? 
What  flrange  fellowfhip  between  Chrilt  and 
Belial?” 

“ What  can  we  infer  from  hence  but  that  Mr. 
Marfhall’s  book,  containing  fo  much  poifon  mixt 
with  food,  is  an  exceeding  dangerous  one,  and 
not  fit  to  be  recommended  to  any  but  experi- 
enced Chriflians  ?” 

The  following  letter  is  of  a very  different  kind. 

“ Sir, 

“ I was  yefferday  led  to  hear,  what  God  would 
fay  to  me  by  your  mouth.  You  exhorted  us,  to 
Strive  to  enter  in  at  the  jlrait  gate.  I am  willing  fo 
to  do.  But  I find,  one  chief  part  of  my  driving, 
muff  be,  to  feed  the  hungry,  to  clothe  the  naked, 
to  inldruft  the  ignorant,  to  vifit  the  fick,  and  fuch 
as  are  in  prifon,  bound  in  mifery  and  iron. 

“ But  if  you  purge  out  all  who  fcorn  fuch  prac- 
tices, or  at  lead  are  not  found  in  them,  how 
many  will  remain  in  your  fociety  ? I fear,  fcarc  e 
enough  to  carry  your  body  to  the  grave  ! Alas, 
how  many  even  among  thofe  who  are  called  be- 
lievers, have  plentv  of  all  the  neceffaries  of  life, 
and  yet  complain  of  proverty  ? How  many  have 
G 3 houfes 


[ *5°  ] 

houfes  and  lands,  or  bags  of  money,  and  yet  can- 
not'find  in  their  hearts  to  fpare  now  and  then  to 
God’s  poor  a little  piece  of  gold  ? How  many 
have  linen  in  plenty,  with  three  or  four  fuits  of 
clothes,  and  can  fee  the  poor  go  naked?  They 
will  change  them  away  for  painted  clay,  or  let  the 
moths  devour  them,  before  they  will  give  them 
to  cover  the  nakednefs  of  their  poor  brethren, 
many  of  whofe  fouls  are  clothed  with  glorious 
robes,  though  their  bodies  are  covered  with 
rags.  Pray,  Sir,  tell  thefe,  you  cannot  believe 
they  are  Chriflians, unlefs  they  imitate  Chrifl  in 
doing  good  to  all  men,  and  hate  covetoufnefs, 
which  is  idolatry.” 

I do  tell  them  fo  : and  I tell  them,  It  will  be 
?nore  tolerable  in  the  day  of  judgment  for  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah  thanfor  them  ! I tell  them,  the  Meth'o* 
difis  that  do  not  fulfil  all  righteoufnefs,  will  have 
the  hotteft  place  in  the  lake  of  fire  ! 

To  awaken,  if  poffible,  thefe  fleepers,  I add 
one  extraft  more, 

“ Reverend  and  dear  Sir, 

“ Some  time  ago  I acquainted  you  how  graci- 
oufly  the  Lord  had  dealt  with  me,  in  delivering 
me  out  of  all  my  troubles.  For  fome  time  part  I 
have  been  amazed  at  my  fpeech,  memory  and 
underflanding,  in  all  which  I was  remarkably  de- 
feftive.  I have  had  power  to  explain  the  fcriptures 
to  my  friends  that  meet  here,  in  a manner  that 

aftonifhed 


[ ] 

aftonifhed  me.  But  I immediately  faw  from 
whence  thefe  bleffings  came,  and  with  an  over- 
flow of  love  and  joy,  worfhipped  the  great  foun- 
tain of  all  goodnefs.  I never  was  fo  fenfible  of 
my  unprofitablenefs,  never  fo  abhorred  myfelf  as 
I do  now.  And  yet  I feel  no  condemnation,  nor 
any  withdrawing  of  my  Redeemer’s  love.  He  is 
my  fhield  and  buckler,  my  God  and  my  all. 
Glory  be  to  God  and  the  Lamb  for  ever  ! Praife 
him  for  me,  and  praife  him  for  ever.  Let  every 
thing  that  hath  breath,  praife  the  Lord. 

“ Since  the  Lord  has  not  only  been  gracious 
to  my  foul,  but  has  intrufled  me  with  a (hare  of 
this  world’s  good.  I am  under  an  equal  obliga- 
tion to  be  faithful,  in  this  as  in  the  other  gifts  of 
God.  Now  efpecially,  when  help  is  fo  much 
wanted,  I ought  to  he  the  more  careful.  Suffer 
me,  Sir,  to  fpeak  freely  of  myfelf.  I have  about 
forty  feven  pounds  a year.  As  to  my  difburfe- 
ments,  for  apparel,  I buy  the  moll  lading,  and  in 
general,  the  plained  I can.  I buy  no  furniture 
but  what  is  neceflary  and  cheap.  I make  my  own 
fire,  and  get  my  own  breakfad  and  fupper.  I pay 
fixpence  to  one  of  our  friends  for  my  dinner. 
I drink  herb-tea,  and  thereby  fave  at  lead  a 
dulling  a week.  I feldom  drink  tea  in  an  after- 
noon, but  fup  at  fix,  on  bread  and  cheefe,  with 
milk  and  water.  So  I fave  at  lead  eight  pence 
by  dropping  tea  in  the  afternoon.  I faded  much, 
till  my  health  was  greatly  impaired.  Then  I ufed 
abdinence  on  Wednefdays,  Fridays  and  other 
G 4 ' fad- 


f *5®  ] 

fall  days,  till  I was  obliged  to  leave  this  off  too  : 
but  not  till  I was  quite  indifferent  as  to  what  I 
eat.  So  I determined,  if  I can’t  retrench  a meal 
I can  retrench  the  expence  of  a meal  twice  a 
week,  and  on  other  fall-days,  ufing  potatoes, 
milk,  or  fume  other  cheap  tiling.  Thus  I fave  four 
pence  per  dinner  twice  a week,  which  with  the 
one  fhilling  and  eight-pence  makes  two  {hillings 
and  four  pence  per  week,  without  retrenching 
one  neceffary  meal.  Now  this  two  lhillings  and 
four. pence  would  buy  as  much  meat,  as  made 
into  broth,  would  nearly  fufkce  for  a fmall 
family,  7 o be  fhort,  the  expence  for  inyfelf, 
meat,  drink,  clothes  and  walking,  is  not  twenty 
eight  pounds  per  annum,  fo  that  I have  near 
twenty  pounds  to  return  to  God  in  the  poor. 
Now  if  every  chrillian  family,  while  in  health, 
would  thus  far  deny  themfelves,  would  twice  a 
week  dine  on  the  cheapell  food,  drink  in  gene- 
ral herb-tea,  faithfully  calculate  the  money  fared 
thereby,  and  give  it  to  the  poor  over  and  above 
their  ufual  donations  ; we /hould  then  hear  no 
complaining  in  our  ftreets,  but  the  poor  would 
eat  and  be  fatisfied.  He  that  gathered  much 
would  have  nothing  over,  and  he  that  gathered 
little,  would  have  no  lack.  O how  happy  Ihould 
we  all  be,  if  this  was  the  cafe  with  us  ! 1 men- 
tioned this  fome  time  ago  in  a meeting  at  London 
when  a brother  faid,  “ Thefe  are  but  little  things. 
As  I went  home,  I thought  of  his  words : “ Little 
things  !”  Is  the  want  of  fire,  in  froft  and  fnow 

a little 


[ *53  3 

a little  thing  ? Or  the  want  of  food,  in  a diftref- 
ied,  helplefs  family  ? Gracious  God  ! Feed  me 
with  food  convenient  for  me  ! Give  me  not  poverty  ; 
left  I fteal , and  take  the  name  of  my  God  in 
vain  ! 

“ Dear  Sir,.  I know  what  you  feel  for  the  poor, 
and  I alfo  fympathize  with  you.  Here  is  a hard 
feafon  coming  on,  and  every  thing  very  dear, 
thoufands  of  poor  fouls,  yea,  Chrifiians,  dread 
the  approaching  calamities.  O that  God  would 
ftir  up  the  hearts  of  all,  that  believe  themfelves 
his  children,  to  evidence  it  by  fhewing  mercy  to 
the  poor,  as  God  has  fhewn  them  mercy  ! Surely 
the  real  children  of  God  will  do  it  of  themfelves  v 
For  it  is  the  natural  fruit  of  a branch  in  ChrifF.. 
I would  not  defire  them  to  lofe  one  meal  in  a 
week,  but  to  ufe  as  cheap  food,  clothes,-  &c,  as 
poffible.  And  I think  the  poor  themfelves  ought 
to  be  queftioned,  with  regard  to  drinking  tea  and 
beer.  For  I cannot  think  it  right  for  them  to  in- 
dulge themfelves  in  thofe  things  which  I refrain 
from,  to  help  them.  My  earned  prayers  fhall 
accompany  yours,  that  God  would  give  us  all,  in 
this  our  day,  to  know  the  things  which  belong 
unto  our  peace,  and.  to  acknowledge  the  bleffings 
which  are  freely  given  to  us  of  God  !” 

Monday  23..  I went  to  Canterbury.  Here  I 
met  with  the  life  of  Mahomet,  wrote,  I fuppofe 
by  the  Count  de  Roulanvillers.  Whoever  the 
author  is,  he  is  a very  pert,  (hallow,  felf-conceit- 
ed  coxcomb,  remarkable  for  nothing  but  his  inc- 

menfs. 


C ] 

menfe  affurance  and  thorough  contempt  of  Chrif- 
tianity.  And  the  book  is  a dull  ill-digefted  ro- 
'mance,  fupported  by  no  authorities  at  all  : where- 
as Dean  Prideaux  (a  writer  of  ten  times  his 
fenfe)  cites  his  authorities  for  every  thing  he  ad- 
vances. 

In  the  afternoon  I rode  to  Dover  ; but  the 
gentleman  I was  to  lodge  with,  was  gone  a long 
journey.  He  went  to  bed  well:  but  was  dead  in  the 
morning  ; fuch  a vapour  is  life  ! At  fix  I preach- 
ed : but  the  houfe  would  by  no  means  con- 
tain the  congregation,  moil  of  the  officers  of  the 
garrifon  were  there,  I have  not  found  fo  much 
life  here  for  fome  years.  After  preaching  at  Sand- 
wich and  Margate,  and  fpending  a comfortable 
day  at  Canterbury,  on  Saturday  I returned  to 
London. 

Monday  30.  I took  coach  for  Norwich,  and  in 
the  evening  came  to  New-market.  Tuefday,  De- 
cember 1,  being  alone  in  the  coach,  I was  con- 
fidering  feveral  points  of  importance.  And  thus 
much  appeared  clear  as  the  day  : 

That  a man  may  be  faved,  who  cannot  exprefs 
himfelfproperly  concerning  imputed righteouj he/s. 
Therefore  to  do  this,  is  not  neceffary  to  falva- 
tion  : 

That  a man  may  be  faved,  who  has  not  clear 
conceptions  of  it:  (yea  that  never  heard  the 
phrafe.)  Therefore  clear  conceptions  of  it  are  not 
necejfary  to  falvation  : yea,  it  is  not  neceffary  to 
falvation.  to  ufe  the  phrafe  at  all : 


That 


[ 1 55  ] 


That  a pious  church-man,  who  has  not  clear 
conceptions  even  of  jujlification  by  faith , may  be 
faved  : therefore  clear  conceptions  even  of  this 
are  not  neceffary  to  falvation  : 

That  a myftic,  who  denies  juftification  by 
faith,  (Mr.  Law  for  inffance]  may  be  faved.  But 
if  fo,  what  becomes  of  “ Articulus  ftantis  vel  ca- 
dentis  ecclefiae  ?”  If  fo,  is  it  not  high  time  for 
us. 

Projicere  ampullas  & fefquipedalia  verba; 

And  to  return  to  the  plain  word,  He  that  fearetk 
God , and  woiketh  right  eoufne/s , is  accepted  with 
him ! 

Every  evening  this  week,  I preached  at  Nor- 
wich, to  a quiet,  well-behaved  congregrauon. 
Our  friends,  the  mob,  feera  to  have  taken  their 
leave.  And  fo  have  triflers  : all  that  remain 
feem  to  be  deeply  ferious.  But  how  eafily  are 
even  thefe  turned  out  of  the  way  ? One  of  our 
old  members,  about  a year  ago  left  the  fociety, 
and  never  heard  the  preaching  fince,  “ Becaufe 
Mr.  Lincoln  faid,  Mr.  Wefley  and  all  his  fol- 
lowers would  go  to  hell  together  !”  However  on 
Tuefday  night  he  venturned  to  the  houfe  once 
more.  And  God  met  him  there,  and  revealed 
his  Son  in  his  heart. 

Saturday  5.  Believing  it  was  my  duty  to  fearch' 
to  the  bottom,  fome  reports  which  I had  heard 
concerning  Mr.  B — — , I went  to  his  old  friend. 

G 6 Mr. 


Mr.  G an  Ifraelite  indeed,  but  worn  almoli. 

to  a fkeleton.  After  I had  explained  to  him  the 
motives  of  my  enquiry,  he  fpoke  without  referve. 
And  if  his  account  be  true,  that  hot,  four  man, 
does  well  to  hold  fall  his  opinion  ; for  it  is  all 
the  religion  he  has. 

Monday  7. 1 went  on  to  Yarmouth,  and  found 
“ Confufion  worfe  confounded.”  Not  only  B — 
W — ’s  fociety  was  come  to  nothing,  but  ours 
feemed  to  be  fwiftly  following.  They  had  almoft 
all  left  the  church  again,  being  full  of  prejudice 
againfl  the  clergv  and  againft  one  another.  How- 
ever as  two  or  three  retained  their  humble, 
fitnple  love,  I doubled  not  but  there  would  be  a 
bleflingin  the  remnant.  My  fir ff  bnunefs  was  to 
reconcile  them  to  each  other  : and  this  was  ef- 
fecfually  done,  by  hearing  the  contending  par- 
ties, fir ff  feparately,  and  afterwards  face  to  face. 
It  remained,  to  reconcile  them  to  the  church; 
and  this  was  done  partly  by  arguments,  partly 
by  pcrfuafion. 

Friday  1 1.  We  fet  out  at  three  in  the  morning, 
but  did  not  reach  Bury  till  pad  feven  in  the  even- 
ing. The  people  being  ready  I began  preach- 
ing immediately.  Many  feemed  really  defirous 
to  fave  their  fouls.  The  next  day  we  went  on  to 
London. 

Sunday  13.  I was  defired  to  preach  a funeral 
fermon  for  W — O — . He  came  to  London  near 
thirty  years  ago,  and  from  nothing  increafed  more 
and  more,  till  he  was  worth  feveral  thoufand 


[ *57  ] 

pounds.  He  was  a good  man,  and  died  in  peace, 
Neverthelefs,  I believe  his  money  was  a great 
clog  to  him,  and  kept  him  in  a poor,  low  ftate 
all  his  days,  making  no  fuch  advance  as  he 
might  have  done,  either  in  holinefs  or  happi- 
nefs. 

To-day  I found  a little  forenefs  on  the  edge  of 
my  tongue,  which  the  next  day  fpread  to  my 
gums,  then  to  my  lips,  which  inflamed,  fwelled, 
and  the  fkin  burffing,  bled  confiderably.  After- 
ward the  roof  of  my  mouth  was  extremely  fore, 
fo  that  I could  chew  nothing.  To  this  was  added 
a continual  fpitting.  I knew  a little  reft  would 
cure  all.  But  this  was  not  to  be  had ; for  I had 
appointed  to  be  at  Sheernefs  on  Wednefday  the 
i6tb.  According  I took  horfe  between  five  and 
fix,  and  came  thither  between  five  and  fix  in  the 
evening.  At  half  an  hour  after  fix  I began  read- 
ing prayers,  (the  governor  of  the  fort  having  gi- 
ven me  the  ufe  of  the  chapel)  and  afterwards 
preached,  though  not  without  difficulty,  to  a 
large  and  ferious  congregation.  The  next  even- 
ing it  was  confiderably  increafed,  fo  that  the  cha- 
pel  was  as  hot  as  an  oven.  In  coming  out,  the 
air  being  exceeding  fharp,  quite  took  away  my 
voice,  fo  that  I knew  not  how  I fhould  be  able 
the  next  day,  to  read  prayers  or  preach  to  fo 
large  a congregation.  But  in  the  afternoon  the 
good  governor  cut  the  knot,  fending  word,  “ I 
muft  preach  in  the  chapel  no  more.”  A room 

being 


[ »s8  ] 

being  offered,  which  held  full  as  many  people  a3 
I was  able  to  preach  to,  we  had  a comfortable 
hour,  and  many  feemed  refolved,  to  feek  the  Lord 
while  he  may  be  found . 

Examining  the  fociety,  confining  of  four  or 
five  and  thirty  members,  I had  the  comfort  to 
find  many  of  them  knew  in  whom  they  had  be- 
lieved. And  all  of  them  feemed  really  defirous 
to^adorn  the  doftrine  of  God  their  Saviour. 

Such  a town  as  many  of  thefe  live  in,  is  fcarce 
to  be  found  again  in  England.  In  the  dock  ad- 
joining to  the  fort,  there  are  fix  old  men  of  war. 
Thefe  are  divided  into  fmall  tenements,  forty, 
fifty  or  fixty  in  a fhip,  with  little  chimnies  and 
windows  and  each  of  thefe  contains  a family.  In 
one  of  them,  where  urn  called,  a man  and  his 
wife,  and  fix  little  children  lived.  And  yet  all  the 
fhip  was  fweet  and  tolerably  clean,  fweeter  than 
moft  failing  {hips  I have  been  in.  Saturday  19. 
I returned  to  London. 

Saturday  26.  I vifited  poor  Mrs.  H.  whofe 
wild  hufband  has  very'  near  murdered  her,  bv  ve- 
hemently affirming,  “ It  was  revealed  to  him, 
that  {he  ffiould  die  before  fuch  a day.”  Indeed 
the  day  is  part  ; but  her  weak,  nervous  conftitu- 
tion  is  fo  deeply  ffiockedbyit,  that  fhe  ftiil  keeps 
her  bed,  and  perhaps  will  feel  it  all  the  days  of 
her  life. 

Saturday,  January  2,  1768.  I called  on  a poor 
man  in  the  Marfhalfea,  whofe  cafe  appeared  to 

be 


[ 159  J 

be  uncommon.  He  is  by  birth  a Dutchman,  a 
chymift  by  profeffion.  Being  but  half  employed 
at  home,  he  was  advifed  to  come  to  London, 
where  he  doubted  not  of  having  full  employment. 
He  was  recommended  to  a countryman  of  his  to 
lodge,  who  after  fix  weeks  arrefled  him,  for 
much  more  than  he  owed,  and  hurried  him  away 
to  prifon,  having  a wife  near  her  time,  without 
money,  friend,  or  a word  of  Englifh  to  fpeak.  I 

wrote  the  cafe  to  Mr.  T , who  immediately 

gave  fifteen  pounds,  by  means  of  which  with  a 
little  addition,  he  was  fet  at  liberty,  and  put  in 
a way  of  living.  But  I never  faw  him  fince. 
And  reafon  good;  for  he  could  now  live  without 
me. 

Monday  4.  At  my  leifure  hours  this  week,  I 
read  Dr.  Priefllj  ’s  ingenious  book  on  ele&ricity. 
He  feems  to  have  accurately  collefted  and  well 
digefled,  all  that  is  known  on  that  curious  fub- 
je£t.  But  how  little  is  that  all  ! Indeed  the  ufe 
of  it  we  know  ; at  leaff,  in  fome  good  degree. 
We  know  it  is  a thoufand  medicines  in  one  ; in 
particular,  that  is  the  molt  efficacious  medicine, 
in  nervous  diforders  of  every  kind,  which  has 
ever  yet  been  difcovered.  But  if  we  aim  at  theo- 
ry, we  know  nothing.  We  are  foon 

“ Loft  and  bewilder’d  in  the  fruitlefs  fearch.” 

Monday  11,  This  week  I fpent  my  fcraps  of 

time 


C 160  ] 

time  in  reading  Mr.  Wodrow’s  hiftory  of  the 
fufferings  of  the  church  of  Scotland.  It  would 
tranfcend  belief,  but  that  the  vouchers  are  too 
authentic,  to  admit  of  any  exception.  O what  a 
bieffed  governor,  was  that  good-natured  man,  fo 
called,  King  Charles  the  fecond  ! Bloody  Queen 
Mary  was  a lamb,  a mere  dove,  in  comparifonof 
him  1 

Monday  25.  And  the  following  days,  in  the 
intervals  of  more  important  work,  1 carefully 
read  the  pleadings  at  Edinburgh,  in  the  famous 
Douglas  caufe.  So  intricate  a one  I never 
heard,  I never  read  of  before.  I cannot  but 
believe  the  birth  was  real.  But  the  objections  are 
fo  numerous,  and  fo  hrongly  urged,  I cannot 
at  all  wonder  that  many  fhould  believe  other- 
wife. 

* Monday,  February  8.  I met  with  a furprifing 
poem,  intitled,  Choheleth  ; or,  The  Preacher. 
It  is  a paraphrafe  in  tolerable  verfe,  on  the  book 
of  Ecclefiaftes.  I really  think  the  author  of  it, 
(aTurky  merchant)  underhands  both  the  difficult 
expreffions,  and  the  connexion  of  the  whole, 
better  than  any  other,  either  antient  or  modern 
writer,  whom  I have  feen.  He  was  at  Lifbon 
during  the  great  earthquake,  juh  then  fitting  in 
his  night-gowm  and  flippers.  Before  he  could 
drefs  himfelf,  part  of  the  houfe  he  was  in,  fell 
and  blocked  him  up.  By  this  means  his  life  was 
faved  : for  all  who  had  run  out,  were  daffied  in 
pieces  by  the  falling  houfes. 

Thurfday 


[ i6i  ] 

Thurfday  18.  Having  been  importunately 
preft  thereto,  I rode  (through  a keen  eaflwind) 
to  Chatham.  About  fix  in  the  evening  I preached 
at  the  barracks,  in  what  they  cal),  the  church.  It 
is  a large  room,  in  which  the  chaplain  reads 
prayers,  and  preaches  now  and  then.  It  was  foon 
as  hot  as  an  oven  through  the  multitude  of  peo- 
ple, fome  hundreds  of  whom  were  foldiers.  And 
they  were  all  ear , as  Mr.  Boflon  fays,  fcarce  al- 
lowing themfelves  to  breathe.  Even  between  five 
and  fix  the  next  morning,  the  room  was  warm 
enough.  1 fuppofe  upwards  of  two  hundred  fol- 
diers were  a part  of  the  audience.  Many  of  thefe 
are  already  warring  a good  warfare,  knowing  in 
whom  they  have  believed. 

Tuefday  23.  I rode  to  Shoreham  and  preached 
at  five  in  Mr.  P.’s  houfe:  but  the  next  day  I 
preached  in  the  church,  being  St.  Matthias’  day. 
I then  rode  back  to  a large  room,  which  is  taken 
in  Redriff,  above  three  miles  from  London- 
bridge.  Although  the  people  were  flrangely 
fqueezed  together,  yet  they  appeared  to  be  all 
attention.  Not  a cough  was  to  be  heard.  I 
flrongly  exhorted  them,  To  call  upon  the  Lord 
while  he  is  near.  And  when  I had  concluded, 
no  one  offered  to  move,  but  every  one  flood 
flill  in  his  place,  till  I had  paffed  through  them. 

Friday  26.  I tranflated  from  the  French  one  of 
the  moft  ufeful  trafls  I ever  faw,  for  thofe  who 
defire  to  be  fervent  in  fpirit.  How  little  does 
God  regard  mens  opinions ! What  a multitude 

ef 


[ >6*  ] 

of  wrong  opinions  are  embraced  by  all  the  mem- 
bers of  the  church  of  Rome  ? Yet  how  highly 
favoured  have  many  of  them  been  ? 

Monday  29.  I dined  at  Mr.  M ’s.  His 

ftrangenefs  is  now  gone.  He  has  drank  of  my 
cup.  Reproach  has  at  length  found  out  him  alfo. 

Afterwards  I fpent  an  hour  at  Mr.  G ’s.  I 

can  truft  myfelf  about  once  a year  in  this  warm 
fun  fhine ; but  not  much  oftener,  or  I Ihould 
melt  away. 

Sunday,  March  6.  In  the  evening  I went  to 
Brentford,  and  on  Tuefday  8,  reached  Briftol, 
where  I did  not  find  any  decay  in  the  work  of 
God,  though  it  did  not  go  on  fo  vigoroufly  as  at 
Kingfwood.  Here  the  meetings  for  prayer  had 
been  exceedingly  bleft : fome  were  convinced  or 
converted  almoft  daily.  And  near  feventv  new 
members  had  been  added  to  the  fociety,  in  about 
three  months  time.  The  fchool  likewife  is  in  a 
flourifhing  condition.  Several  of  the  chil- 
dren continue  ferious  : and  all  of  them  are 
in  better  order  than  they  have  been  for  fome 
years. 

Monday  14.  I fet  out  on  my  northern  jour- 
ney, and  p-eacbed  at  Stroud  in  the  evening. 
Tuefday  15.  About  noon  I preached  at  Painf- 
wick,  and  in  the  evening  at  Glocefier.  The  mob 
here  was  for  a confiderable  time  both  noify  and 
mifchievous.  But  an  honed  magiftrate,  taking 
the  matter  in  hand,  quickly  tamed  the  beads  of 

the 


[ i63  3 

the  people.  So  may  any  magiftrate,  if  he  will : fo 
that  wherever  a mob  continues  anytime,  all  they 
do  is  to  be  imputed,  not  fo  much  to  the  rabble, 
as  to  the  jufiices. 

Wednefday  to.  About  nine  I preached  at 
Cheltenham,  a quiet,  comfortable  place  ; though 
it  would  not  have  been  fo,  if  either  the  reftor  or 
the  baptift  minifler  could  have  prevented.  Both 
thefe  have  blown  the  trumpet  with  their  might  : 
but  the  people  had  no  ears  to  hear.  In  the  af- 
ternoon I preached  at  Upton,  and  then  rode  on 
to  Worcefter.  But  the  difficulty  was,  where  to 
preach  ? No  room  was  large  enough  to  contain 
the  people:  and  it  was  too  cold  for  them  to  hand 
abroad.  At  length  we  went  to  a friend’s  near  the 
town,  whofe  barn  was  larger  than  many 
churches.  Here  a numerous  congregation  foon 
affembled  ; and  again  at  five,  and  at  ten  in  the 
morning.  Nothing  is  wanting  here,  but  a com- 
modious houfe.  And  will  not  God  provide  this 
alfo? 

In  the  afternoon  we  rode  to  Evefham.  As  all 
was  liurry  and  confufion  on  account  of  the  elec- 
tion, I was  glad  Mr.  D.  aiked  me  to  preach  in  his 
church,  where  we  had  a large  and  exceeding 
quiet  congregation.  How  long  a winter  has  been 
at  this  place  P Will  not  the  fpring  at  length  re- 
turn ? 

Friday  18.  The  vicar  of  Pebworth  had  given 
notice  in  the  church  on  Sunday,  that  I was  to 
preach  there  on  Friday.  But  the  Tquire  of  the 

parifh 


[ i64  ] 

parifh  faid,  “ It  is  contrary  to  the  canons,  (wife 
’fquire  !)  and  it  fball  not  be.”  So  I preached 
about  a mile  from  it,  at  Broadmarflon,  by  the 
fide  of  Mr.  Eden’s  houfe.  The  congregation  was 
exceeding  large,  and  remarkably  attentive.  In 
the  morning  the  chapel  (fo  it  anciently  was) 
was  well  filled  at  five.  The  fimplicity  and 
earneflnefs  of  the  people,  promife  a glorious 
harveft. 

Saturday  19.  We  rode  to  Birmingham.  The 
tumults  which  fubfifled  here  fo  many  years  are 
now  wholly  fuppreffed  by  a refolute  magiftrate. 
* After  preaching,  I was  pleafed  to  fee  a venera- 
ble monument  of  antiquity,  George  Bridgins,  in 
the  one  hundred  and  feventh  year  of  his  age. 
He  can  flill  walk  to  the  preaching,  and  retains 
hisfenfes  and  underflanding  tolerably  well.  But 
what  a dream  will  even  a life  of  an  hundred 
years  appear  to  him,  the  moment  he  awakes  in 
eternity ! 

Sunday  20.  About  one  I preached  on  Weft- 
Bromwich-Heath : in  the  evening  near  the 
preaching- houfe  in  Wednefbury.  The  north 
wind  cut  like  a razor:  but  the  congrega- 
tion, as  well  as  me,  had  fomething  elfe  to 
think  of. 

Tuefday  22. 1 read  over  afmall  book,  “ Poems 
by  Mifs  Whately,”  a farmer’s  daughter.  She 
had  little  advantage  from  education,  but  an  afto- 
nifhing  genius.  Some  of  her  elegies  I think 


[ l65  ] 

quite  equal  to  Mr.  Grey’s.  If  fhe  had  had  pro- 
per helps  for  a few  years,  I queftion  whether  (he 
would  not  have  excelled  any  female  poet,  that 
ever  yet  appeared  in  England. 

Wednefday  23.  After  preaching  at  feveral 
other  places,  I rode  on  to  Wolverhampton. 
Here  too  all  was  quiet.  Only  thofe  who  could 
not  get  into  the  houfe,  made  a little  noife  for  a 
time.  And  fome  hundreds  attended  me  to  my 
lodging.  But  it  was  with  no  other  intent  than  to 
flare. 

Turfday  24.  I rode  to  Newcaflle-under-Line 
fa  river  fo  called)  one  of  the  prettiefl  towns  in 
England.  Many  here  already  know  themfelves; 
not  a few  know  Chrift.  The  largenefs  of  the 
congregation  conflrained  me,  though  it  was  very 
cold,  to  preach  in  the  open  air,  on  God  command- 
eth  all  men,  every  where,  to  repent.  I fcarce  ever 
faw  a more  attentive,  or  better  behaved  congre- 
gation. 

Friday  25.  I turned  afide  a little  to  Borflem, 
and  preached  in  the  new  houfe.  That  at  Congle- 
ton  is  about  the  fame  ftze,  but  better  contrived, 
and  better  finifhed.  We  had  an  elegant  congre- 
gation at  Congleton,  yet  earneflly  attentive.  It 
feems  the  behaviour  of  the  fociety  in  this  town, 
has  convinced  all  the  people  in  it,  but  the  cu- 
rate : who  Hill  refufes  to  give  the  facrament  to 
any  that  will  not  piomife  to  hear  thefe  preachers 
no  more. 

Saturday  26.  We  rode  to  Macclesfield.  Sun- 
day 


[ 1 66  ] 


day  27.  At  eleven,  one  of  the  minifters  preached  | 
aufeful  fermon,  as  did  the  other  in  the  afternoon. 
At  five  in  the  evening  we  had  thoufands  upon 
thoufands.  And  all  were  ferious,  while  I in- 
forced,  Now  is  the  day  of  falvalion  ! 

Monday  28.  I met  the  ftewards  of  the  feveral 
focieties  at  Manchefter.  The  times  of  out-  j 
ward  diftrefs  are  now  over.  God  has  given  us  1 
plenty  of  all  things.  It  remains  only,  to  give  our-  | 
felves  up  to  him,  who  giveth  us  all  things  richly 
to  enjoy. 

Tuefday  29.  I preached  in  Stockport  at  noon,  j 
and  Manchefter  in  the  evening.  Wednefday  30.  1 
I rode  to  a little  town  called  New  Mills,  in  the 
High  Peak  of  Derbylhire.  I preached  at  noon,  i 
in  their  large,  new  chapel,  which  (in  confidera-  ; 
tion  that  preachingboufes  have  need  of  air)  has  ,1 
-a  cafement,  in  every  window,  three  inches  t 
fquare  ! That  is  the  cuftom  of  the  country  1 

In  the  evening  and  the  following  morning,  I 
brought  ftrange  things  to  the  ears  of  many  in 
Manchefter,  concerning  the  government  of  their 
families,  and  the  education  of  their  children, 

* Butfome  Hill  made  that  very  filly  anfwer,  “ O, 
he  has  no  children  of  his  own.”  Neither  had  St. 
Paul,  nor  (that  we  knowj  any  of  the  apoftles.  1 
What  then  ? Were  the)’  therefore  unable  to  in- 
ftruft  parents  ? Not  fo.  They  were  able  to  in-  j 
ftruft  every  one,  that  had  a foul  to  be  faved. 

Saturday,  April  2.  I preached  at  Little-Leigh,  j 

and  . 


[ i67  ] 

and  in  the  evening  at  Chefter.  At  eight  in  the 
morning,  (Eafter-day)  I took  my  old  hand,  in 
the  little  fquare  at  St.  Martin’s-Alh.  The  people 
were  as  quiet  as  in  the  houfe.  While  I hayed 
here,  I correfted  Mifs  Gilbert’s  journal,  a maher- 
piece  in  its  kind.  What  a prodigy  of  a child  ! 
Soon  ripe,  and  foon  gone  1 

Tuefday  5.  About  noon  I preached  at  War- 
rington; I am  afraid,  not  to  the  tafte  of  fome 
of  my  hearers,  as  my  fubjedl  led  me  to  fpeak 
ftrongly  and  explicitly  on  the  godhead  of  Chrift. 
But  that  I cannot  help;  for  on  this  I infill, 
as  the  foundation  of  all  our  hope. 

Wednefday  6.  About  eleven  I preached  at 
Wigan,  in  a place  near  the  middle  of  the  town, 
which  I fuppofe  was  formerly  a playhoufe.  It 
was  very  full,  and  very  warm.  Moll  of  the  con- 
gregation were  wild  as  wild  might  be;  yet  none 
made  the  leaft  dihurbance.  Afterwards  as  I 
walked  down  the  ftreet,  they  hared  fufficiently ; 
but  none  faid  an  uncivil  word. 

In  the  evening  we  had  an  huge  congregation 
at  Liverpool.  But  fome  pretty,  gay,  buttering 
things, did  not  behave  with  lo  much  good  manners 
as  the  mob  at  Wigan.  The  congregations  in  ge- 
neral were  quite  well-behaved,  as  well  as  large, 
both  morning  and  evening.  And  I found  the  fo- 
ciety  both  more  numerous  and  more  lively,  than 
ever  it  was  before. 

Sunday  10.  I rode  to  Prefcot,  eight  miles  from 
Liverpool,  and  came  thither  juft  as  the  church 

began. 


C 168  ] 

began.  The  vicar  preached  an  excellent  fermon, 
on,  Whatfoever  is  born  of  God,  overcometh  the 
world.  And  this  is  the  vidlory  that  overcometh  the 
world,  even  our  faith.  After  fervice,  many  fol- 
lowed me  to  a vacant  place,  where  we  were  to- 
lerably fheltered  from  the  cold  wind.  Fifty  or 
fixty  of  our  Liverpool  friends  alfo  were  there, 
who  had  walked  over.  And  God  made  it  both 
a folemn  and  a comfortable  opportunity  to  many 
fouls. 

Monday  11.  I rode  to  Bolton  ; on  Wednefday 
to  Kendal.  Seceders  and  mongrel  Methodifls, 
have  fo  furfeited  the  people  here,  that  there  is 
fmall  profpefl  of  doing  good.  However  I once 
more  cajl  my  bread  upon  the  waters,  and  left  the 
event  to  God. 

Thurfday  14.  I rode  on,  through  continued 
rain,  to  Amblefide.  It  cleared  up  before  we 
came  to  Kefwick,  and  we  fet  out  thence  in  a 
fair  day.  But  on  the  mountains  the  ftorm  met 
us  again,  which  beat  on  us  fo  impetuoufly,  that 
our  horfes  could  fcarce  turn  their  faces  againft 
it.  However  we  made  fhift  to  reach  Cocker- 
mouth.  But  there  was  no  room  for  preaching, 
the  town  being  in  an  uproar,  through  the  eleflion 
for  members  of  parliament.  So  after  drying 
ourfelves,  we  thought  it  befl  to  go  on  to  White- 
haven. 

I found  the  fociety  here  more  alive  to  God 
than  it  had  been  for  feveral  years.  And  God  has 
chofen  the  weak  to  make  them  {Irons; : the 

O 

change 


[ *65  3 

change  has  been  wrought  chiefly  by  means  of 
Jofeph  G.  Many  of  the  children  likewife  are 
ferious  and  well-behaved,  and  fome  of  them  feem 
to  be  awakened.  Sunday  17. 1 commended  them 
to  the  grace  of  God,  and  rode  to  Cockermouth. 
I haddefigned  to  preach  near  the  market-houfe ; 
but  the  rain  conflrained  us  to  go  into  the  houfe ; 
where  I explained  (out  of  the  firft  Jeffon)  Let  me 
die  the  death  of  the  righteous.  In  the  evening  I 
preached  at  Coldbeck,  in  the  mountains,  to  an 
exceeding  ferious  congregation.  Monday  18. 
Taking  horfe  at  four,  I reached  Solway-frith  be- 
fore eight,  and  finding  a guide  ready,  croffed 
without  delay,  dined  at  Dumfries,  and  then  went 

to  Dtumlanric. 

Tuefday  19.  I rode  through  heavy  rain  to 
Glafgow.  On  Thurfday  and  Friday,  I fpoke  to 
mofl  of  the  members  of  the  fociety.  I doubt  we 
have  few  focieties  in  Scotland  like  this : the 
greater  part  of  thofe  I faw,  not  only  have  found 
peace  with  God,  but  continue  to  walk  in  the 
light  of  his  countenance.  Indeed  that  wife  and 

good  man  Mr.  G , has  been  of  great  fer- 

vice  to  them  : encouraging  them  by  all  poflible 
means  to  abide  in  the  grace  of  God. 

Saturday  23.  I rode  over  the  mountains  to 
Perth.  I had  received  magnificient  accounts  of 
the  work  of  God  in  this  place  ; fo  that  I ex- 
pended to  find  a numerous  and  lively  fociety. 
Inftead  of  this,  I found  not  above  two  believers, 
and  fcarce  five  awakened  perfons  in  it.  Finding  I 
Vol.  XXXII.  H had 


[ 17°  ] 


had  all  to  begin,  I fpoke  exceeding  plain  in  the 
evening  to  about  an  hundred  perfons  at  the 
room.  But  knowing  this  was  doing  nothing,  on 
Sunday  24.  I preached  about  eight  at  the  end  of 
Watergate.  A multitude  of  people  were  foon 
aflembled,  to  whom  I cried  aloud,  Seek  ye  the 
Lord,  while  he  may  be  found ; call  upon  him  while 
he  is  near.  All  were  deeply  attentive,  and  I had 
a little  hope,  that  fome  were  profited. 

At  the  Old  Kirk  we  had  ufeful  fermons,  both 
in  the  morning,  and  at  five  in  the  afternoon, 
immediately  after  fervice,  I preached  on,  God 
forbid  that  I fioutd  glory  ,fave  in  the  crofs  oj  our 
Lord  Jcfus  Chriji.  The  congregation  was  io 
exceeding  large,  that  I doubt  many  could  not 
hear.  After  preaching,  I explained  the  na- 
ture of  a Methodif  fociety  : adding,  that  I 
fhould  not  look  on  any  perfons  at  Perth 
as  fuch,  unlefs  they  fpoke  to  me  before 
I left  the  city.  Four  men  and  four  wo- 

men did  fpeak  to  me,  two  of  whom  I think 
were  believers  : and  one  or  two  more  feemed 
juft  awakening,  and  darkly  feeling  after  God.  In 
truth,  the  kingdom  of  God  among  thefe,  is  as  yet 
but  as  a grain  of  mufiard-feed. 

Monday  25.  Mr.  Ff , minifier  of  a neigh- 

bouring parifli,  defired  us  to  breakfaft  with  him  : 
I found  him  a ferious,  benevolent,  fenfible  man, 
not  bigotted  to  any  opinions.  I did  not  reach 

Brehcin, 


[ *7*  3 


Brechin,  till  it  was  too  late  to  preach.  Tuefday 
26.  I came  to  Aberdeen. 

Here  I found  a fociety  truly  alive,  knit  toge- 
ther in  peace  and  love.  The  congregations  were 
large  both  morning  and  evening,  and  as  ufual, 
deeply  attentive.  But  a company  of  Broiling 
players,  who  have  at  length  found  place  here 
alfo,  hole  away  the  gay  part  of  the  hearers. 
Poor  Scotland  I Poor  Aberdeen ! This  only  was 
wanting,  to  make  them  as  compleatly  irreligious 
as  England. 

* Friday  29.  I read  over  an  extremely  fenfible 
book  ; but  one  that  furprized  me  much.  It  is, 
“ An  enquiry  into  the  proofs  of  the  charges  com- 
monly advanced  againfl  Mary  Queen  of  Scot- 
land.” By  means  of  original  papers,  lie  has 
made  it  more  clear  than  one  would  imagine  it 
poffible  at  this  diflance,  x.  That  fire  was  alto- 
gether innocent  of  the  murder  of  Lord  Darnley, 
and  no  way  privy  to  it:  2.  That  fhe  married 
Lord  Bothwell,  (then  near  feventy  years  old,  her- 
felf  but  four  and  twenty)  from  the  preffing  in- 
flanceof  the  nobility  in  a bod}-,  who  at  the  fame 
time  affix  red  her,  “ He  was  innocent  of  the 
king’s  murder.”  3.  That  Murray,  Morton  and 
Lethington,  thernfelves  contrived  that  murder, 
in  order  to  charge  it  upon  her,  as  well  as  forged 
thofe  vile  letters  and  fonnets,  which  they  palmed 
upon  the  world  for  hers.” 

“ But  how  then  can  we  account  for  the  quite 
H 2 contrary 


C **»  3 


contrary  ftory,  which  has  been  almoll  univerfaUy 
received  ?”  Moft  eafily.  It  was  penned  and  pub- 
lifhed  in  French,  Englifh  and  Latin,  (by  Queen 
Elizabeth’s  order)  by  George  Buchanan,  who 
was  fecretary  to  Lord  Murray,  and  in  Queen 
Elizabeth’s  pay.  So  he  was  fure  to  throw  dirt 
enough  : nor  was  (he  at  liberty  to  anfwer  for  her- 
felf.  “ But  what  then  was  Queen  Elizabeth  ?” 
As  juft  and  merciful  as  Nero,  and  as  good  a 
Chriftian  as  Mahomet. 

Sunday,  May  1.  I preached  at  feven  in  the 
New  Room  : in  the  afternoon  at  the  College- 
kirk  in  Old  Aberdeen.  At  fix,  knowing  our 
houfe  could  not  contain  the  congregation,  I 
preached  in  the  caftle-gate  on  the  paved  ftones. 
A large  number  of  people  were  all  attention: 
but  there  were  many  rude,  ftupid  creatures  round 
about  them,  who  knew  as  little  of  reafon  as  of 
religion  : I never  faw  fuch  brutes  in  Scotland 
before.  One  of  them  threw  a potatoe,  which  fell 
on  my  arm.  I turned  to  them  : and  fome  were 
afhamed. 

Monday  2.  I fet  out  early  from  Aberdeen,  and 
about  r.oon  preached  in  Brechin.  After  fermon, 
the  provoft  defired  to  fee  me  ; and  faid,  “ Sir, 
my  foil  had  epileptic  fits  from  his  infancy.  Dr. 
Ogylvie  prefrribed  for  him  many  times,  and  at 
length  told  me,  he  could  do  no  more.  I de- 
fined Mr.  Blair  laft  Monday  to  {peak  to  you. 
On  Tuefday  morning  my  fon  faid  to  his  mo- 
ther, 


[ *73  ] 

ther,  he  had  juft  been  dreaming,  that  his  fits 
were  gone,  and  he  was  perfe&ly  well.  Soon 
after  I gave  him  the  drops  you  advifed,  He 
is  perfe&ly  well,  and  has  not  had  one  fit  fince.’’ 
In  the  evening  I preached  to  a large  congrega- 
tion at  Dundee.  They  heard  attentively,  but 
feemed  to  feel  nothing.  The  next  evening  I 
fpoke  more  ftrongly,  and  to  their  hearts  rather 
than  their  underftanding  : and  I believe  a feu- 
felt  the  word  of  God  fliarp  as  a two-edged 
fword. 

Thurfdav  5.  We  rode  through  the  pleafimt 
and  fruitful  Carfe  of  Gowry,  a plain  fifteen  or 
fixteen  miles  long,  between  the  river  Tay  and 
the  mountains,  very  thick  inhabited,  to  Perth. 
In  the  afternoon,  we  walked  over  to  the  royal 
palace  at  Scoon.  It  is  a large  old  houfe,  delight- 
fully fituated,  but  fwiflfy  tunning  to  ruin.  Yet 
there  are  a few  good  pifitures,  and  fome  fine 
tapiftry  left,  in  what  they  call  the  Queen’s, 
and  the  King’s  chambers.  And  what  is  far 
more,  curious,  there  is  a bed  and  a fet  of  hang- 
ings, in  the  (once)  royal  apartment,  which  was 
wrought  by  poor  Queen  Mary,  while  fhe  was 
imprifoned  in  the  caftle  of  Lochlevin.  It  is 
fome  of  the  fineft  needle- work  I ever  faw,  and 
plainly  fhews,  both  her  exquifite  {kill  and  un- 
wearied induftry. 

About  this  time  a remarkable  work  of  God 
broke  out  among  the  children  at  Kingfwood 
H 3 fchooh 


[ *74  J 

fchool.  One  of  the  matters  fent  me  a fhort  ac- 
count of  it,  as  follows: 


April  27,  1768, 

“ Rev.  and  dear  Sir, 

“ On  Wednefday  the  20th,  God  broke  in 
“ upon  our  boys  in  a furprizing  manner.  A 
“ ferious  concern  has  been  obfervable  in  fame 
“ of  them  for  fome  time  patt.  But  that  night, 
“ while  they  were  in  their  private  apartments, 
“ the  power  of  God  came  upon  them,  even 
“ like  a mighty,  rufhing  wind,  which  made 
“ them  cry  aloud  for  mercy.  Lail  night,  I 
“ hope,  will  never  be  forgotten,  when  about 
“ twenty  were  in  the  utmott  diftrefs.  But 
“ God  quickly  fpoke  peace  to  two  of  them, 

.<  j G1 1,  and  T M e. 

“ A greater  difplay  of  his  love,  I never  faw  : 
“ they  indeed  rejoice  with  joy  unfpeakable. 
“ For  my  own  part,  I have  not  often  felt  the 
“ like  power.  We  have  no  need  to  exhort 
“ them  to  prav  ; for  that  fpirit  runs  through 
“ the  whole  fchool;  fo  that  this  houfe  may 
“ well  be  called,  An  Houfe  of  Prayer.  V\  hile 
“ I am  writing,  the  cries  of  the  boys  from 
“ their  feveral  apartments  are  founding  in  my 
“ ears.  There  are  many  ftdl  lying  at  the  pool, 
“ who  wait  every  moment  to  be  put  in. 
“ They  are  come  to  this,  “ Lord,  I will  not, 

“ I cannot 


[ *75  3 

“ I cannot  reft  without  thy  love.”  Since 
“ I began  to  write,  eight  more  are  fet  at 
“ liberty,  and  now  rejoice  in  God  their  Sa- 
“ viour.  The  names  of  thefe  are  John 
“ Coward,  John  Lion,  John  Maddern,  John 
“ Boddily,  John  Thurgar,  Charles  Brown, 
“ William  Higham,  and  Robert  Hindmarfh. 
41  Their  age  is  from  eight  to  foutteen.  There 
“ are  but  few  who  withftand  the  work,  nor 
44  is  it  likely  they  fhould  do  it  long.  For 
“ the  prayers  of  thofe  that  believe  in  Chrift, 
“ feem  to  carry  all  before  them.  Among  the 
“ colliers  likewife  the  w'ork  of  God  increafes 
“ greatly : two  of  the  colliers  boys  were 
“ juftified  this  week.  The  number  added  to  the 
“ fociety  fince  the  conference  is  an  hundred 
“ and  thirty. 

“ I had  fealed  my  letter,  but  have  opened 
“ it  to  inform  you,  that  two  more  of  our  chii- 
“ dren  have  found  peace.  Several  others 
“ are  under  deep  conviflion.  Some  of  our 
“ friends  from  Briftol  are  here,  who  are 
“ thunderftruck.  This  is  the  day  we  have 
“ wifhed  for  fo  long,  the  day  you  have  had 
“ in  view,  which  has  made  you  go  through  fo 
“ much  oppofition,  for  the  good  ol  thefe 
44  poor  children. 

James  Hindmarfh.” 

h4 


“ A few 


[ *76  ] 

A few  days  after,  one  wrote  thus : 

“ I cannot  help  congratulating  you  on  the 
“ happy  fituation  of  votir  family  here.  The 
“ power  of  God  continues  to  work,  with 
“ almofl  irrefiffible  force.  And  there  is  good 
“ reafon  to  hope,  it  will  not  be  withdrawn, 
“ till  every  foul  is  converted  to  God. — 1 have 
“ had  frequent  opportunities  of  converfmg 
“ alone  with  the  boys,  and  find  the  work  has 
*'  taken  deep  root  in  many  hearts.  The  houfe 
“ rings  with  praife  and  prayer,  and  the  whole 
u behaviour  of  the  children  flrongly  fpeaks  for 
“ God.  The  number  of  the  new-born  is  in* 
“ creafed  fince  you  received  your  laft  infor- 
*•  matioji.  I have  been  a witnefs  of  part: 
11  but  the  whole  exceeds  all  that  language  can 
“ paint.” 

Another  writes,  May  18.  “ The  work  of 

“ God  hill  goes  on  at  Kingfwood.  Of  the 
“ hundred  and  thirty  members  who  have  been 

added  to  the  fociety  fince  the  lad  confe- 
“ rence,  the  greater  part  have  received  jufti- 
“ fying  faith,  and  are  ftill  rejoicing  in  God 
“ their  Saviour : and  (what  is  the  mod  re- 
“ markable)  I do  not  know  of  one  backflider  in 
“ the  place.  The  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  on 
“ the  children  in  the  fchool,  has  been  exceed- 
“ ing  great.  I believe,  there  is  not  one  among 

“ them, 


f m J 

“ them,  who  has  not  been  affe&ed,  more  or 
“ lefs.  Twelve  of  them  have  found  peace 
“ with  God  : and  fome,  in  a very  remarkable 
“ manner.  Thefe  have  no  more  doubt  of  the 
“ favour  of  God,  than  of  their  own  exiftence. 
“ And  the  Lord  is  ilill  with  them,  though  not 
*'  fo  powerfully,  as  he  was  two  or  three  weeks 
“ fince.” 


L 278  ] 


A N 

E X 

TRACT 

OF  THE 

Rev. 

Mr.  John  Wesley’s 

j 0 

U R N A L 

From  M A Y 

14,  1768,  toSlETEMBER  1. 
177°. 

Number  XIV. 

Saturday,  May  14,  1768. 

I Walked  once  more  through  Holyrood-houfe, 
a noble  pile  of  building ; but  the  greateft  part 

of  it  left  to  itfelf,  and  fo  (like  the  palace  at  Scone) 

fwiftly 


[ 179  3 

fwiftly  running  to  ruin.  The  tapiftrv  is  duty 
and  quite  faded ; the  fine  ceilings  dropping  down; 
and  many  of  the  piftures  in  the  gallery,  torn  or 
cut  through.  This  was  the  work  of  good  Gene- 
ral Hawley’s  foldiers,  (like  General,  like  men  !) 
who  after  running  away  from  the  Scots  at 
Falkirk,  revenged  themfelves  on  the  harmlefs 
canvafs ! 

Sunday  15.  At  eight  I preached  in  the  High- 
fchool-yard  ; and  I believe  not  a few  of  the 
hearers  were  cut  to  the  heart.  Between  twelve 
and  one  a far  larger  congregation  affembled  on 
the  Caftle-hill.  And  I believe  my  voice  com- 
manded them  all,  while  I opened  and  enforced 
thofe  awful  words,  Ifaw  the  dead fmall  and  great 
ftand  before  God.  In  the  evening  our  houfe  was 
fufficiently  crowded,  even  with  the  rich  and 
honourable.  Who  hath  warned  thefe  to  fee  from 
the  wrath  to  come  ? O may  they  at  length  awake 
and  arife  from  the  dead ! 

Monday  16.  I preached  in  the  evening  at 
Dunbar,  near  the  fhore,  to  an  unufually  large 
congregation.  Tuefday  17.  I looked  over  Dr. 
Shaw’s  travels : great  part  of  them  is  very  dull 
and  unentertaining  : but  fome  remarks  are  ex- 
tremely curious.  I was  a little  furprized  at  one 
of  them  : namely,  that  the  celebrated  mount  At- 
las is  not  higher  that  many  of  our  Englifh  moun- 
tains, and  nothing  near  fo  high  as  the  Alps.  But 
it  was  much  farther  from  Rome.  So  travellers 
H 6 might 


C 180  ] 

might  make  it  as  high  as  the  moon  ; and  few  in 
Italy  could  contradifi  them. 

Wedpefday  18.  I came  to  poor  dead  Berwick. 
However  I found  a few  living  fouls  even  here. 
At  feven  I preached  in  the  town-hall,  to  an  ex- 
ceeding ferious,  though  not  numerous,  congre- 
gation. The  next  evening  I preached  in  the 
market-place  at  Ainwick.  Friday  20,  I went  on 
in  reading  that  fine  book,  Bifhop  Butler’s  Ana- 
logy. But  I doubt  it  is  too  hard  for  mofi  of  thofe, 
for  whom  it  was  chiefly  intended.  Free  thinkers, 
fo  called,  are  feldom  clofe  thinkers.  They  will 
not  be  at  the  pains  of  reading  fuch  a book  as 
this.  One  that  would  profit  them,  mull  dilute 
his  fenfe,  or  they  will  neither  fwallow  nor  digefl 

it- 

Saturday  21,  About  noon  I preached  at  Mor- 
peth, and  in  the  evening  at  Newcaflle,  in  the  Old 
Cuflom-houfe,  a large  commodious  room  near  the 
Key- fide,  the  grand  refort  of  Publicans  and  Sin- 
ners. Sunday  22,  I preached  in  the  morning 
under  the  trees  in  Gatefhead,  to  a large  and  feri- 
ous multitude : and  at  two,  on  The  Fell,  to  a 
much  larger.  But  the  largefl  of  ail  attended 
at  the  Garth- heads  in  the  evening.  And  great 
part  of  them  were  not  curious  hearers,  but  well 
acquainted  with  the  things  of  the  kingdom  of 
God. 

Wednefday  25,  and  the  two  following  days, 
being  at  Sunderland,  I took  down  from  one  who 
had  feared  God  from  her  infancy,  one  of  the 

flrangefl 


[ -i»i  ] 


flrangeft  accounts  I ever  read.  And  yet  I caA 
find  no  pretence  to  difbelie ve  it.  The  well- 
known  character  of  the  perfon,  excludes  all  fuf- 
picion  of  fraud.  And  the  nature  of  the  circum- 
fiances  themfelves,  excludes  the  poflibility  of  a 
delufion. 

It  is  true  there  are  feveral  of  them,  which  I do 
not  comprehend.  But  this  is  with  me  a very  flen- 
der  objedlion.  For  what  is  it  which  I do  compre- 
hend, even  of  the  things  I fee  daily  ? Truly 
not 

“ The  fmalleft  grain  of  fandor  fpire  of  grafs.” 

I know  not  how  the  one  grows,  or  how  the  par- 
ticles of  the  other  cohere  together.  What  pre- 
tence have  I ihen  to  deny  well-attefted  fa£ls,  be- 
caufe  I cannot  comprehend  them  ? 

It  is  true  likewife  : that  the  Englifh  in  gener- 
al, and  indeed  moft  of  the  men  of  learning  in 
Europe,  have  given  up  all  accounts  of  witches 
and  apperitions,  as  mere  old  wives  fables.  I am 
forry  for  it  : and  I willingly  take  this  opportu- 
nity of  entering  my  folemn  proteff,  againlt  this 
violent  compliment,  which  fo  many  that  believe 
the  bible  pay,  to  thofe  who  do  not  believe  it.  I 
owe  them  no  fuch  fervice.  I take  knowledge,  thefe 
are  at  the  bottom  of  the  outcry  which  has  been 
raifed,  and  with  fuch  infolence  fpread  throughout 
the  nation,  in  dire£I  oppofidon  not  only  to  the 
bible,  but  to  the  fuffrage  of  the  wifeft  and  bell  of 

men 


[ i8a  } 

men  in  all  ages  and  nations.  They  welt  know, 
(whether  Chriftians  know  it,  or  not)  that  the  giv- 
ing up  witchcraft,  is  in  effefd,  giving  up  the 
bible.  And  they  know,  on  the  other  hand,  that  if 
but  one  account  of  the  intercourfe  of  men  with 
feparate  fpirits  be  admitted,  their  whole  caftle  in 
the  air,  (deifm,  atheifm,  materialifm)  falls  to  the 
ground.  I know  no  reafon  therefore,  why  we 
fhould  fuffer  even  this  weapon  to  be  wrefled  out 
of  our  hands.  Indeed  there  are  numerous  argu- 
ments befides,  which  abundantly  confute  their  vain 
imaginations.  But  we  need  not  be  hooted  out  of 
one  : neither  reafon  nor  religion  require  this. 

One  of  the  capital  objeftions  to  all  thefe  ac- 
counts, which  I have  know  urged  over,  and  over 
is  this,  “ Did  you  ever  fee  an  apparition  your- 
felf  ?”  No  : nor  did  I ever  fee  a murder.  Yet  I 
believe  there  is  fuch  a thing  : yea,  and  that  in 
one  place  or  another  murder  is  committed  every 
day.  Therefore  I cannot  as  a reafonable  man  deny 
the  fa£t ; although  I never  faw  it,  and  perhaps 
never  may.  The  teftimony  of  unexceptionable 
witnefTes  fully  convinces  me  both  of  the  one  and 
the  other. 

But  to  fet  this  afide,  it  has  been  confidently 
alledged,  That  many  of  thefe  have  feen  their 
error,  and  have  been  clearly  convinced,  that  the 
fuppofed  preternatural  operation  was  the  mere 
contrivance  of  artful  men.  The  famous  inflance 
of  this,  which  has  been  fpread  far  and  wide,  was 
the  drumming  in  Mr,  MompefTon’s  houfe  at 

Tedworth; 


Tedworth  ; who  it  was  faid  acknowledged,  “ It 
was  all  a trick,  and  that  he  had  found  out  the 
whole  contrivance.”  Not  fo.  My  eldeft  brother 
then  at  Chrift-Church,  Oxon,  enquired  of  Mr. 
Mompelfon,  his  fellow  collegian,  “ whether  Iris' 
father  had  acknowledged  this  or  not  ?”  He  an- 
fwered,  “ The  refort  of  gentlemen  to  my  father’s 
houfe,  was  fo  great,  he  could  not  bear  the  ex- 
pence. He  therefore  took  no  pains  to  confute 
the  report  that  he  had  found  out  the  cheat  : al- 
though he,  and  I,  and  all  the  family  knew,  the 
account  which  was  publilhed  to  be  punctually 
true.” 

This  premifed,  I proceed  to  as  remarkable  a 
narrative,  as  any  that  has  fallen  under  my  notice. 
The  reader  may  believe  it  if  he  pleafes : or  may 
difbelieve  it,  without  any  offence  tome.  Mean- 
time let  him  not  be  offended  if  I believe  it,  till  I 
fee  better  reafon  to  the  contrary. — I have  added 
a few  fhort  remarks  which  may  make  fome  paf- 
fages  a little  more  intelligible. 

l.  Elizabeth  Hobfon  was  born  in  Sunderland, 
in  the  year  1744.  Her  father  dying  when  fhe 
was  three  or  four  years  old,  her  uncle,  Thomas 
Rea,  a pious  man  brought  her  up  as  his  own 
daughter.  She  was  ferious  from  a child,  and  grew 
up  in  the  fear  of  God.  Yet  fhe  had  deep  and 
(harp  conviftions  of  fin,  till  fhe  was  about  fix- 
teen  years  of  age  when  fhe  found  peacejwith  God, 
and  from  that  time  the  whole  tenour  of  her  be- 
haviour was  fuitable  to  her  profeffiom 

On 


[ i84  ] 


On  Wednefday,  May  25,  1768,  and  the  three 
following  days,  I talked  with  her  at  large.  But 
it  was  with  great  difficulty  I prevailed  on  her  to 
fpeak.  The  fubftance  of  what  ffie  faid  was  as  fol- 
lows. 

2.  “ From  my  childhood,  when  any  of  our 
neighbours  died,  whether  men,  women  or  child- 
ren, I ufed  to  fee  them  either  juft  when  they  died 
or  a little  before.  And  I was  not  frightened  at  all 
it  was  fo  common.  Indeed  many  times  I did  not 
then  know  they  were  dead.  I faw  many  of  them 
by  day,  many  by  night.  Thofe  that  came  when 
it  was  dark,  brought  light  with  them.  I obferv- 
ed  all  little  children  and  many  grown  perfons 
had  a bright,  glorious  light  round  them.  But 
many  had  a gloomy,  difmal  light,  and  a dufky 
cloud  over  them. 

3.  When  I told  my  uncle  this  he  did  not 
feem  to  be  at  all  furprized  at  il+.  But  at  feveral 
times  he  faid,  “ Be  not  afraid : only  take  care 
to  fear  and  ferve  God.  As  long  as  he  is  on  your 
fide,  none  will  be  able  to  hurt  you.”  At  other 
times  he  faid,  (dropping  a word  now  and  then, 
but  feldom  anfwering  me  any  queftions  about  it) 
“ Evil  fpirits  very  feldom  appear,  but  between 
eleven  as  night  and  two  in  the  morning.  But 
after  they  have  appeared  to  aperfon  a year,  they 
frequently  come  in  the  day  time.  Whatever 

fpirits, 

+ It  appears  highly  probable,  that  he  was  himfelf  cxpeiiment- 
ally  acquainted  with  thefe  things. 


[ ] 

fpirits,  good  or  bad,  come  in  the  day,  they  come 
at  fun-rife,  at  noon,  or  atfun-fet 

4.  When  I was  between  twelve  and  thirteen, 
my  uncle  had  a lodger,  who  was  a very  wicked 
man.  One  night  I was  fitting  in  my  chamber, 
about  half  hour  after  ten,  having  by  accident  put 
out  my  candle,  when  became  in,  all  over  on  a 
flame.  I cried  out,  “ William,  why  do  you  come 
in  fo  to  fright  me  ?”  He  faid  nothing,  but  went 
away.  I went  after  him  into  his  room  : but  found 
he  was  fall  afleep  in  bed.  A day  or  two  after  he 
fell  ill,  and  within  the  week  died  in  raging  defpair. 

5.  I was  between  fourteen  and  fifteen,  when 
I went  very  early  one  morning  ,to  fetch  up  the 
kine.  I had  two  fields  to  crofs  into  a low  ground 
which  was  faid  to  be  haunted.  Many  perfons  had 
been  frighted  there  : and  I had  myfelf  often  feen 
men  and  woman,  (fo  many,  at  times,  that  they 
are  out  of  count)  go  juft  by  me  and  vanifh  away. 
This  morning,  as  I came  toward  it,  I heard  a 
confufed  noife,  as  of  many  people  quarrelling. 
But  I did  not  mind  it,  and  went  on,  till  I came 
near  the  gate.  I thenfaw  on  the  other  fide  a young 
man  dreft  in  purple,  who  faid,  “ It  is  too  early  : 
Go  back  from  whence  you  came.  The  Lord  be 
with  you  and  blefs  you.  And  prefently  he  was 
gone. 

6.  When  I was  about  fixteen,  my  uncle  fell 
ill,  and  grew  worfe  and  worfe  for  three  months. 
One  day  having  been  fent  out  on  an  errand,  I 

was 

f How  Grange  is  this  ? But  how  little  do  we  know,  concerni- 
ng the  laws  of  the  invifi’ole  world  ? 


[ i86  J 

was  coming  home  through  a lane,  when  I faw  him 
in  the  field  coming  fwiftly  toward  me.  Iran  to 
meet  him  ; but  he  was  gone.  When  I came  home 
I found  him  calling  for  me.  Asfoon  as  I came  to 
his  bed  fide,  he  clafp’d  his  arms  round  my  neck  ; 
and  burfling  into  tears  earnellly  exhorted  me,  to 
continue  in  the  ways  of  God,  kept  his  hold,  till 
he  funk  down  and  died  ; and  even  then  they 
could  hardly  unclafp  his  fingers.  I would  fain 
have  died  with  him  and  wifhed  to  be  buried  with  I; 
him,  dead  or  alive. 

7.  From  that  time  I was  crying  from  morning 
to  night,  and  praying  that  I might  fee  him.  I 
grew  weaker  and  weaker,  till  one  morning  about  ; 
one  o’clock,  as  I was  lying,  crying  as  ufual,  I 
heard  fome  noife,  and  rifing  up,  faw  him  come 
to  the  bed  fide.  He  looked  much  difpleafed,  (hook,  j 
his  head  at  me,  and  in  a minute  or  two  went  : 
away. 

8.  About  a week  after  I took  my  bed  and  grew  1 
worfeand  worfe,  till  in  fix  or  feven  days  my  life  i 
was  defpaired  of.  Then  about  eleven  at  night,  my  ■ 
nncle  came  in,  looked  well  pleafed,  and  fat 
down  on  thebedfide.  He  came  every  night  after 
at  the  fame  time,  and  (fayed  till  cock-crowing. 

I was  exceedingglad.  and  kept  my  eyes  fixt  upon 
him,  all  the  time  he  (fayed.  It  I wanted  drink  or 
anv  thing,  though  1 did  not  Ipeak  or  (fir  he 
fetched  it,  and  fet  it  on  the  chair  by  the  bed  fide. 

Indeed 

$ So  it  is  plain,  he  knew  her  thoughts  ? But  this  is  widely  dis- 
tant, from  knowing  the  hearts  of  all  men. 

' • ' ‘ ' " • ‘ j 


[ *»7  J 

Indeed  I could  not  fpeak  ||;  many  times  I ftrove, 
but  could  not  move  my  tongue.  Every  morning 
when  he  went  away  he  waved  his  hand  to  me, 
and  I heard  delightful  mufic,  as  if  many  perfons 
were  finging  together. 

9.  In  about  fix  weeks  I grew  better,  I was  then 
mufiilg  one-  night,  Whether  I did  well,  in  defir- 
ing he  might  come  ? And  I was  praying,  that 
God  would  do  his  own  will,  when  he  came  in, 
and  flood  by  the  bed  fide.  But  he  was  not  in  his 
nfual  drefs  : he  had  on  a white  robe  which  reach- 
ed down  to  his  feet.  He  looked  quite  well  pleaf- 
ed.  About  one,  there  {food  by  him  a perfon 
in  white,  taller  than  him  and  exceeding  beautiful. 
He  came  with  the  finging  as  of  many  voices,  and 
continued  till  near  cock- crowing.  Then  my  un- 
cle fmiled  and  waved  his  hand  toward  me  twice  or 
thrice.  They  went  away  with  inexpreffibly  fweet 
mufic,  and  I faw  him  no  more. 

xo.  In  a year  after  this,  a young  man  courted 
me,  and  in  fome  months  we  agreed  to  be  married. 
But  he  purpofed  to  take  another  voyage  firlf, 
and  one  evening  went  a-board  his  {hip.  About 
eleven  o’clock,  going  out  to  look  for  my  mother, 
I faw  him  handing  at  his  mother’s  door  with  his 
hands  in  his  pockets,  and  his  hat  pulled  over  his 
eyes.  I went  to  him,  and  reached  my  hand,  to 
put  up  his  hat.  But  he  went  fwiftlv  by  me,  and  I 
faw  the  wall  on  the  other  fide  of  the  lane  part  as 

he 

||  Such  an  impretlion,  even  though  (he  felt  no  fear,  did  theprS' 
ence  of  a'fuperior  natuie  make  upon  her! 


C 188  ] 

he  went  through, and  then  immediately  clofe  after 
him.  At  ten  the  next  morning  he  died. 

it.  A few  days  after,  John  Simpfon,  one  of 
our  neighbours,  a man  that  truly  feared  God,  and 
one  with  whom  I was  particularly  acquainted, 
went  to  fea,  as  ufual.  He  failed  out  on  a Tuef- 
day.  1 he  Friday  night  following,  between  eleven 
and  twleve  o’clock,  I heard  one  walking  in  my 
room,  and  every  ftep  founded,  as  if  he  was  ftep- 
ping  in  water.  He  then  came  to  the  bedfide  in  his 
fea-jacket,  all  wet,  and  ftretched  his  hand  over 
me.  Three  drops  of  water  feii  on  ray  breafti,  and 
felt  as  cold  as  ice.  I drove  to  wake  his  wife,  who 
lay  with  me  ; but  I could  not,  any  more  than  if 
fhe  was  dead.  Afterward  I heard,  he  was  caft 
away  that  night.  In  lefs  than  a minute  he  went 
away.  But  he  came  to  me  every  night,  for  fix  or 
feven  nights  following,  between  eleven  and  two. 
Before  he  came  and  when  he  went  away,  I 
always  heard  fweet  muftci.  Afterwards  he  came 
both  day  and  night  : every  night  about  twelve 
with  the  mufic  at  his  coming  and  going,  and 
every  day  at  fun-rife,  noon  and  fun-fet.  He 
came  whatever  company  I was  in  ; at  church, 
in  the  preaching-houfe,  at  my  clafs  : and  was  al- 
ways juft  before  me,  changing  his  pofture,  as  I 
changed  mine.  When  I fat  he  fat  ; when  I 
kneeled  he  kneeled  ; when  1 flood  he  flood  like- 

wife. 

+ Was  this  real  ? Or  did  he  only  raife  fuch  a fenfation  in  her  ? j 

f Was  this  a real  modu  ition  of  the  air?  Was  it  defigned  te 
fiiew  that  he  '.vas  happy,  and  to  encourage  her  to  fpeak  ? 


[ ‘Bp  ] 

wife.  I would  fain  have  fpoke  to  him,  but  I could 
not  ; when  I tried,  my  heart  funk  within  me, 
mean  time  it  affefled  me  more  and  more,  fo  that  I 
loil  both  my  ftomach,  my  colour,  and  my  flrength. 
This  continued  ten  weeks,  while  I pined 
away  not  daring  to  tell  any  one.  At  lafl  he  came 
four  or  five  nights  without  any  mufic,  and  look* 
ed  exceeding  fad.  On  the  fifth  night  he  drew 
the  curtains  of  the  bed  violently  to  and  fro  ; flill 
looking  wifhfullyat  me,  and  as  one  quite  diflref- 
fed.  This  he  did  two  nights.  On  the  third,  I lay 
down  about  eleven,  on  the  fide  of  the  bed.  1 
quickly  fawhim  walking  up  and  down  the  room. 
Being  refolved  to  fpeak  to  him,  but  unwilling 
any  fhould  hear,  I rofe  and  went  up  into  the  gar- 
ret. When  I opened  the  door,  I faw  him  walk- 
ing toward  me,  and  fhrunk  back  : on  which  he 
flopped  and  flood  at  a diflance.  I faid,  “ In  the 
nameoftheTather,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghoft,  what  is 
your bufinefs  with  me?”  He  anfwered,  “ Betfy, 
God  forgive  you,  for  keeping  me  fo  long  from 
my  reft||.  Have  you  forgot  what  you  promifed 
before  I went  to  fea  ? To  look  to  my  children, 
if  I was  drowned  ? You  mull  fland  to  your  word 
or  I cannot  reft.”  I faid,  ‘ I wilh  I was  dead,’  he 
faid,  fay  not  fo.  You  have  more  to  go  through  be- 
fore then.  And  yet,  if  you  knew  as  much  as  I do, 
you  would  not  care  how  foon  you  died. — You 
may  bring  the  children  on  in  their  learning  while 
they  live  : they  have  but  a fhort  time§.”  I laid,  ‘I 

will 

||  Who  can  account  for  this  ? 

^ By  what  means  could  he  know  this  ? 


[ »9°  ] 

will  take  all  the  care  I can.’  He  added,  “ Your 
brother  has  wrote  for  vou,  to  come  to  Jamaica: 
But  if  you  go  it  will  hurt  your  foul.  You  have 
alfo  thoughts  of  altering  your  condition  t : but  if 
you  marry  him  you  think  of,  it  well  draw  you 
from  God,  and  you  will  neither  he  happy  here 
nor  hereafter.  Keep  clofe  to  God,  and  go  on  in 
the  way  wherein  you  have  been  bi  ought  up.”  I 
afked,  ‘ How  do  you  fpend  your  time  ?’  He  an- 
fwered,  “ In  fongs  of  praife.  But  of  this  you  will 
know  more  by  and  by  : for  where  I am,  you  will 
furely  be.  I have  loft  much  happinefs  by  coming 
to  you  J:  And  I fhould  not  have  flayed  fo  long 
without  ufing  other  means  to  make  you  fpeak  “. 
but  the  Lord  would  not  fufler  me  to  fright  you. 
Have  you  any  thing  more  to  fay  ? It  draws  near 
two,  and  alter  that  I cannot  flay.  I (hall  only 
come  to  you  twice  more  before  the  death  of  my 
two  children.  God  blefs  you.”  Immediately  I 
heard  fuch  Tinging,  as  if  a thoufand  voices  joined 
together.  He  then  went  down  flairs  and  I follow- 
ed him  to  the  firft  landing.  He  fmiled,  and  I faid 
‘I  defire  your  will  come  back.’  He  flood  ftill  till 
I came  to  him,  I afked  him  one  or  two  queflions, 
which  he  immediately  anfwered  ; but  added,  “ I 
wifhyou  had  not  called  me  back  ; for  now  I muft 
take  fomething  lrom  you^.”  He  paufed  a little 
and  (aid,  “ 1 think  you  can  beft  part  with  the  hear- 

“ ing 

+ So  he  likewife  knew  her  thoughts  ? 

f I do  not  underftand  this. 

S Another  inltance  tike  this  we  that!  fee  by  and  by.  But  the 
rcafonofit  we  cannot  fo  much  as  conjecture. 


[ «>*  ] 


s<  ing  of  your  left  ear.”  He  laid  his  hand  upon 
it,  and  in  the  inftant  it  was  deaf  as  a ftone.  And 
it  was  feveral  years  before  I recovered  the  lead 
hearing  of  it.  The  cock  crowed  as  he  went  out 
of  the  door : and  then  the  mufic  ceafed.  The 
elder  of  his  children  died  at  about  three  years 
and  an  half,  the  younger,  before  he  was  five  years 
old.  He  appeared  before  the  death  of  each, 
but  without  fpeaking  ; after  that,  I faw  him  no 
more. 

12.  A little  before  Michaelmas,  1763,  my  bro- 
ther George,  who  was  a good  young  man,  went 
to  fea.  The  day  after  Michaelmas-day,  about  mid- 
night, I law  him  Handing  by  my  bedfide,  fur- 
rounded  with  a glorious  light,  and  looking  ear- 
nellly  at  me.  He  was  wet  all  over.  That  night 
the  fhip  in  which  he  failed,  fplitupon  a rock,  and 
all  the  crew  were  drowned. 

13.  On  April  9.  1767,  about  midnight,  I was 
laying  awake,  and  I law  my  brother  Johnt  Hand- 
ing by  my  bed-fide.  Juft  at  that  time  he  died  in 
Jamaica. 

14.  By  his  death  I became  intitled  to  an  houfe 
in  Sunderland,  which  was  left  us  by  my  grand- 
father, John  Hobfon,  an  exceeding  wicked  man, 
who  was  drowned  fourteen  years  ago.  I employed 
an  attorney  to  recover  it  from  my  aunts,  who 
kept  poffeffion  of  it.  But  finding  more  difficulty 
than  I expected,  in  the  beginning  of  December  I 

gave 

+ So,  a fpirit  finds  no  difficulty  in  travelling  three  or  four  thou- 
fand  miles  in  a moment  ? 


t *92  ] 


gave  it  up.  Three  or  four  nights  after,  as  I rofe 
from  prayer,  a little  before  eleven,  I faw  him 
flanding  at  a fmall  diftance.  I cried  out,  ‘ Lord 
blefs  me  ! What  brings  you  here  ?’  He  anfwer- 
ed  “ You  have  given  up  the  houfe  : Mr.  Parker 
advifed  you  fo  to  dot  : but  if  you  do  I fhall  have 
no  rell^i,  Indeed  Mr.  Dunn  whom  you  have 
hitherto  employed,  will  do  nothing  for  you.  Go 
to  Durham  : employ  an  attorney  there,  and  it 
will  be  recovered||,”  His  voice  was  loud*,  and  fo 
hollow  and  deep,  that  every  word  went  thro’ me. 
His  lips  did  not  move  at  all,  (nor  his  eyes)  but 
the  found  feemed  to  rife  out  of  the  floor.  When 
he  had  done  fpeaking,  he  turned  about,  and  walk- 
ed out  of  the  roomi. 

15.  Injanuary,  as  I was  fitting  on  the  bed- fide* 
a quarter  before  twelve  he  came  in,  flood  before 
me,  looked  earneflly  at  me,  then  walked  up  and 
down  and  hood  and  looked  again.  This  he  did 
for  half  an  hour  : and  thus  he  came  every  other 
nip-lit  + for  about  three  weeks.  All  this  time  he 
feemed  angry  §,  and  fometimes  his  look  was  quite 

„ horrid 

■r  How  often  are  fpirits  prelimt  when  we  do  not  think  of  it  ? 

+ Why  not  ? What  had  he  to  do.  with  die  citings  under  thi 
fun  ? 

^ Did  he  then  know  Mr.  Dunn’s  thoughts? 

|j  Was  he  fure  of  this  ? Or  did  lie  only  conjeflure  ? 

* What  a pi£lure  ? Tar  beyond  her  invention  ! 

+ That  he  might  not  fright  her,  by  vamthing  away. 

J Surely  God  faw,  this  w as  as  much  at  (he  could  bear. 

$ At  her  not  fpeaking.  But  why  could  not  he  (peak  firfl  ? Ts, 
this  contrary  to  a law  of  the  iuvifiblc  world 


[.  *93  3 

horrid  and  furious.  One  night  I was  fitting  up 
in  bed  crying,  when  he  came  and  began  to  pull 
off  the  cloaths.  I ftrove  to  touch  his  hand,  but 
could  not  ; on  which  he  fhrunk  back  and  fmiled.f 

1 6.  The  next  night  but  one,  about  twelve,  I 
was  again  fitting  up  and  crying,  when  he  came 
and  flood  at  the  bedfide.  As  I was  looking  for  an 
handkerchief  he  walked  to  the  table,  took  one 
up4  brought  and  dropt  it  upon  the  bed.  After 
this,  he  came  three  or  four  nights  and  pulled  the 
cloaths  off,  throwing  them  ori  the  other  fide  of 
the  bed. 

17.  Two  nights  after  he  came  as  I was  fitting 
on  the  bedfide,  and  after  walking  to  and  fro, 
fnatched  the  handkerchief  from  my  neck.  I fell 
into  a fwoon.  When  I came  to  nryfelf  he  was 
Handing  juft  before  me.  Prefently  he  came  cloffe 
to  me,  dropt  it  on  the  bed,  and  went  away. 

18.  Having  had  a long  illnefs  the  year  before, 
having  taken  much  cold  by  his  frequent  pulling 

1 off  the  cloaths,  and  being  worn  out  by  thefe 
appearances,  1 was  now  moftiy  confined  to  my 
bed.  The  next  night,  foon  after  eleven,  be  came 
again.  I afked  * In  God’s  name,  why  do  you  tor- 
ment me  thus?  You  knotv,  it  is  impoffible  for  me 
to  go  to  Durham  now.  But  I have  a fear  that  you 
ate  not  happy,  and  beg  to  know,  whether  you 
are,  or  not  ?’  He  anfwered,  after  a little  paufe, 


Vol.  XXXII. 


That 


+ Poor  Ghoft!  Bid  this  divertthee  for  a moment  from  mending 
1.3  the  worm  that  never  dieth  ? 

$ Soj  he  faw  her  thought ! But  did  he  not  pity  her  too  ? 


[ m ] 

“ That  is  a bold  queftion  for  you  to  a afk.  So  far 
as  you  knew  me  to  do  amifs  in  my  life  time,  do 
you  take  care  to  do  better.”  I faid,  ‘ It  is  a fhocking 
affair,  to  live  and  die  after  that  manner.’  He  re- 
plied, “ It  is  no  time  for  refle£lions  now:  what  is 
done  cannotbe  undone.”  1 faid,  * It  mull  be  a great 
happinefs,  to  die  in  the  Lord  ?’  He  faid,  “ Hold 
your  tongue^ ! Hold  your  tongue  ! At  your 
peril  never  mention  fuch  a word  before  me 
again  !”  I was  frighted,  and  flrove  to  lift  up  my 
heart  to  God.  He  gave  a fhriek,  and  funk  down 
at  three  times,  with  a loud  groan  at  each  time. 
Juft  as  he  difappeared,  there  was  a large  flafh  of 
fire  and  I fainted  away. 

19.  Three  days  after,  I went  to  Durham,  and 
put  the  affair  into  Mr.  Hugill  the  attorney’s  hands. 
The  next  night,  about  one,  he  came  in  ; but  on 
my  taking  up  the  bible,  went  away.  A month 
after,  he  came  about  eleven.  1 faid,  “ Lord 
blefs  me  ! What  has  brought  you  here  again  ?” 
He  faid,  “ Mr.  HugillJ)  has  done  nothing  but  writ 
one  letter  : you  mult  write  or  go  to  Durham 
again.  It  may  be  decided  in  a few  days.”  I afked 
why  do  not  you  go  to  my  aunts,  who  keep  me 
out  of  it  ? He  anfwered,  “ I have  no  power  to 
go  to  them.  And  they  cannot  bear  it.  If  I could, 

^ This  feems  to  have  been  peculiarly  intolerable  to  him,  the 
thought  of  wha  he  had  loft. 

1|  So  he  had  obferved  hiru  narrowly,  though  unfeen. 


[ *95  ] 

I would  go  to  them,  were  it  only  to  warn  themd  : 
for  I doubt,  where  I am,  I lhall  get  too  many  to 
bear  me  company,”  He  added,  “ Take  caiei : 
There  is  mifchief  laid  in  Peggy’s  ||  hands  : (he 
will  drive  to  meet  you  coming  from  your  clafs. 
I do  not  fpeak  to  hinder  you  from  going  to  it, 
but  that  you  may  be  cautious.  Letfomeonego 
with  you  and  come  back  with  you  ; tho’  whether 
you  will  efcape  or  no,  I cannot  tell.”  I faid,  ‘She 
can  do  no  more  than  God  will  let  her.’  He  an- 
fwered.  “ We  have  all  too  little  to  do  with  him. 
Mention  that  word  no  more.  As  foon  as  this  is 
decided  meet  me  at  Boyldon-hill  §,  between 
twelve  and  one  at  night.”  I faid,  ‘ That  is  a lone 
place  for  a woman  to  go  to  at  that  time  of  night. 
Iam  willing  to  meet  you  at  the  Ballad-hills,  or 
in  the  church-yard.’  He  faid,  “ That  will  not 
do.  But  what  are  you  afraid  of  ?”  I anfwered* 

‘ I am  not  afraid  of  youb,  but  of  rude  men.’  He 
faid,  “ I will  fet  you  fafe,  both  thither  and  back 
again.”  I afked,  “ May  I not  bring  a minider 
with  me  ?”  He  replied,  “ Are  you  thereabouts  ? 
I will  not  be  feen  by  any  but  you.  You  have 
plagued  me  fore  enough  already.  If  you  bring  any 
with  you,  take  what  follows.” 

1 2 20.  Prom 

f Is  not  tills  like  the  concern  of  Dives  for  his  five  brethren  ? 
Luke  xvi.  28. 

} Here  at  lead,  he  (hews  fome  remains  of  real  affeflion! 

[|  Her  aunt. 

§ About  half  a mile  from  the  town, 
t No  1 Not  though  fhc  knew  him  to.be  a damned  fpiriti 


[ 196  ] 

so.  From  this  time  he  appeared  every  night,  be- 
tween eleven  and  two.  If  I put  out  the  fire  and  can- 
dle, in  hopes  I fhould  not  fee  him,  it  did  not  avail. 
For  as  foon  as  he  came,  all  the  room  was  light,  but 
with  a difmal  light,  like  that  of  flaming  brimffone. 
But  when  ever  I took  up  the  bible,  or  kneeled 
down,  yea,  or  prayed  in  my  heart,  he  was  gone. 

21.  On  Thurfday,  Mav  12,  he  came  about 
eleven,  as  1 was  fitting  by  the  fire.  I afked,  ' In 
God’s  name,  what  do  you  want  ?’  He  faid,  “ You 
mull  either  go  or  write  to  Durham.  I cannot 
ftay  from  you  ’till  this  is  decided;*;  : And  I 
cannot  flay  where  I am.  ||”  When  he  went  away, 

I fell  into  a violent  paffion  of  crying,  feeing  no 
end  of  my  trouble.  I11  this  agony  I continued  till 
after  one  and  then  fell  into  a fit.  About  two  I 
came  to  tnyfelf,  and  faw  (landing  at  the  bed-fide, 
one  in  a white  robe,  which  reached  down  to  his 
feet.  I cried  ‘ In  the  name  of  the  Father,  Son  and 
Holy  Ghofl — ’ He  faid,  “ The  Lord  is  with  you, 
I am  come  to  comfort  you.  What  caufehave  you 
to  complain  and  murmur  thus  ? Why  do  you 
mourn  thus  for  your  friends  P Prav  for  them,  and 
leave  them  to  God.  Arife  and  pray.”  I faid,  ‘ I can 
pr  y none.’  He  faid,  “ But  God  will  help  you  : 
only  keep  clofe  to  God  ; yon  are  backward  like- 
wife  in  praying  with  others,  and  afraid  to  re- 
ceive the  Lord’s  Supper.  Break  through  that  back- 

wardnef* 

^ Why  ot  ? Who  can  tell  ? 

|j  And  where  canft  thou  ftay  with  any  comfort?  Doll  not  thou 
carry  with  thee  thy  own  hell  ? 


C *97  j 

wardnefs  and  that  fear.  The  Lord  blefs  you  and 
be  ever  with  you  !”  As  he  went  away,  I heard 
many  voices  Tinging  Hallelujah,  with  fuch  me- 
lody as  I never  heard  before.  All  my  trouble  was 
gone,  and.  I wanted  nothing  but  to  fly  away  with 
them. 

22.  Sat.  28.  About  twelve,  my  grandfather 
flood  at  the  bedfide.  I faid,  “ In  God’s  name, 
what  do  you  want  ?’  He  faid,  “ You  do  not  make 
aneudofthis  thing:  get  it  decided  as  foon  as 
pofiible.  My  coming  is  as  uneafy  to  myfelf,  as  it 
can  be  to  you.”  Before  he  eame  there  was  a 
flrong  fmell  of  bu'rning,  and  the  room  was  full  of 
fmoke,  which  got  into  my  eyes,  and  almoft  blind- 
ed me  for  forne  time  after. 

23.  Wednefday,  June  21.  About  funfet,  I 
was  coming  up-ftairs  at  Mrs.  Knot’s,  and  I faw 
him  coming  toward  me  out  of  the  oppofite  room. 
He  went  clofe  by  me  on  the  flair-head.  Before 
I faw  him  I fmelt  a flrong  fmell  of  burning  : and 
fo  did  Mifs  Hofmer.  It  got  into  my  throat  and  al- 
moft flifled  me.  I fat  down,  and  fainted  away. 

24.  On  Friday,  July  3.  I was  fitting  atdinner, 
when  I thought  I heard  one  come  along  the  paf- 
fage,  I looked  about,  and  faw  my  aunt,  Margaret 
Scot  ofNewcaflle,  {landing  at  my  back.  On  Satur- 
day I had  a letter  informing  me,  that  fhe  died  on 
that  day.”  Thus  far  Elizabeth  Hobfon. 

On  Sunday,  July  xo.  I received  the  following 
I 3 letter 


C 198  ] 

letter  from  a friend  to  whom  I had  recommended 
her. 

“ Sunderland,  6 July  1768. 

“ I wrote  you  word  before,  that  Elizabeth  Hob- 
fon,  was  put  into  poffefhon  of  the  houfe.  The 
fame  night  her  old  vifitant,  who  had  not  troubled 
her  for  fome  time  came  again  and  faid.  “ You 
muff  meet  me  at  Boyldon-hill,  on  Thurfday 
night,  a little  before  twelve.  You  will  fee  many 
appearances  +,  who  will  call  you  to  come  to 
them  : But  do  not  ftir,  neither  give  them  any 
anfwer.  A quarter  after  twelve,  I (hall  come  and 
call  you  : but  (fill  do  not  anfwer  nor  ftir.  She  faid 
‘ It  is  an  hardfhip  upon  me  for  you  to  defire  me 
to  meet  you  there.  Why  cannot  you  take  your 
leave  now  P He  anfwered,  “ It  is  for  your  good 
that  I defire  it.  I can  take  my  leave  of  you  now. 
But  if  I do,  I muft  take  fomething  from  you, 
which  you  would  notlike  to  part  with.”  She  faid, 
* May  not  a few  friends  come  with  me  ?’  He  faid, 
“ They  may  ; but  they  mufl  not  be  prefent 
when  I come.” 

That  night,  twelve  of  us  met  at  Mr.  Davifon’sJ 
and  fpent  fome  time  in  prayer.  God  was  with  us 
of  a truth.  Then  fix  of  us  went  with  her  to  the 
place,  leaving  the  reft  to  pray  for  us.  We  came 
thither  a little  before  twelve,  and  then  flood  at  a 
fmall  diflance  from  her.  It  being  a fine  night, 
we  kept  her  in  our  fight,  and  fpent  the  time  in 

prayer. 

+ How  ftrange  is  this  ? Who  can  account  for  it  ? 

£ About  a quarter  of  a mile  from  the  hill. 


[ l99  ] 


prayer.  She  flood  there  ’till  a few  minutes  after 
one.  When  wq  faw  her  move,  we  went  to  meet 
her.  She  faid,  ‘ Thank  God,  it  is  all  over  and  done. 
I found  every  thing  as  he  told  me.  I faw  many 
•appearances,  who  called  me  to  them  ; but  I did 
not  anfwer  or  ftir.  Then  he  came  and  called  me 
atadiftance;  but  I took  no  notice.  Soon  after 
he  came  up  to  me  and  faid,  “ You  are  come  well 
fortified.’’  He  then  gave  her  the  reafons,  why  he 
required  her  to  meet  him  at  that  place  : and  why 
he  could  take  his  leave  there,  and  not  in  the 
houfe,  without  taking  fomething  from  her.  But 
withal  he  charged  her  to  tell  this  to  no  one  ; 
adding,  “ If  you  difclofe  this  to  any  creature,  I 
fhall  be  under  a neceflity,  of  troublingyou  as  long 
as  you  live.  If  you  do  not,  I lhali  never  trouble 
you,  nor  fee  you  any  more,  either  in  time  or  eter- 
nity.” He  then  bid  her  farewell,  waved  his  hand, 
and  difappeared. 

Tuefday  31.  I made  a little  excurfion  into 
Wardale,  and  found  a people  ready  prepared  for 
the  Lord.  I had  defigned  to  preach  abroad,  but  had 
fcarce  done  finging,  when  a ftorm  of  rain  drove 
us  into  the  houfe.  We  had  a blelfed  opportunity 
there  ; particularly  for  healing  the  backfliders. 

Wednefday,  June  1.  I preached  in  Teefdale. 
The  fun  was  fcorching  hot  when  I began,  but 
was  foon  covered  with  clouds.  Many  of  the  mili- 
tia were  prefent  at  Barnard  caftle,  in  the  even- 
ing, and  behaved  with  decency.  I was  well  pleaf- 

I 4 ed 


[ 200  ] 

ed  to  lodge  at  a gentleman’s,  an  old  fchooj-feilow 
Haifa  mile  from  the  town.  What  a dream  are  the 
nfty  or  fixty  years  that  have  flipt  away,  dnce  we 
were  at  the  charter-houfe  ! 

Thunday  2.  I preached  at  noon  at  a farmer’s 
houfe,  near  Brough  in  Weftmoreland.  The  fun 
was  hot  enough  ; but  fome  fhady  trees  covered 
both  me  and  moil  of  the  congregation.  A little 
bird  perched  on  one  of  them,  and  Tung  without 
intermiftion,  from  the  beginning  of  the  fervice 
unto  the  end.  Many  of  the  people  came  from 
far  : but  I believe  none  of  them  regretted  their 
labour. 

The  evening  congregation  in  Sivaledale  was  far 
larger,  and  equally  attentive.  And  the  fociety 
was  one  of  the  meft  lively,  which  I have  met 
with  in  England.  Many  of  them  do  rejoice  in  the 
pure  love  of  God,  and  many  more  are  earneftly 
feeking  it. 

Friday  g.  I rode  to  Richmond,  intending  to 
preach  near  the  houfe  of  one  of  our  friends.  But 
fome  of  the  chief  of  the  town  fent  to  defre  me  to 
preach  in  the  market-place.  The  Yorkfliire  militia 
were  all  there,  juft  returned  from  their  exercife. 
And  a more  rude  rabble-rout  I never  faw  ; with- 
out fenfe,  decency,  or  good  manners. 

In  running  down  one  of  the  mountains  yefter- 
day  I had  got  a fprain  in  my  thigh  : it  was  rather 
worfe  to-day;  but  as  I rode  to  Barnard-Caftle, 
the  fun  fhone  fo  hot  upon  it,  that  before  I came 
to  the  town,  it  was  quite  well.  In  the  evening  the 

commanding- 


[ 201  ] 

commanding-officer  gave  orders  there  ffiould  be 
no  exercife,  that  all  the  Durham-militia,  (What  a 
contrail!)  might  be  atliberty  to  attend  the  preach* 
ing.  Accordingly  we  had  a little  army  of  officers 
as  well  as  foldiers : and  all  behaved  well.  A 
large  number  of  them  were  prefent  at  five  in  the 

morning. 1 have  not  found  fo  deep  and  lively 

a work,  in  any  other  part  of  the  kingdom,  as  runs 
thro’  the  whole  circuit  : particularly  in  the  vales 
that  wind  between  thefe  horrid  mountains.  I re- 
turned to  Newcaftle  in  the  evening. 

Sund.  5.  I preached  in  the  morning  at  Placey 
to  fome  of  the  moll  lively  colliers  in  England  : 
and  about  two  at  Hartley,  to  a flill  larger  congre- 
gation ; but  to  the  largeft  of  all,  in  the  Caftle- 
garth,  at  Newcaftle. 

Tuefday  7.  I went  down  by  water  to  South- 
Shields,  and  preached  at  noon  to  far  more  than 
could  hear.  We  went  after  dinner  to  Tinmouth 
Caftle,  a magnificent  heap  of  ruins.  Within  the 
walls  are  the  remains  of  a very  large  church, 
which  feems  to  have  been  of  exquifite  workman- 
fhip.  And  the  ftones  are  joined  by  fo  ftrong  a 
cement,  as  but  for  Cromwell’s  cannon  they  might 
have  flood  a thoufand  years. 

Monday  13.  I left  Newcaftle,  and  in  the  re- 
fidue  of  the  month,  vifited  moll  of  the  focieties 
in  Yorklhire.  Thurfday,  July  14,  I crofted  over 
into  Lincolnfhire,  and  after  fpending  about  ten 
days  there,  returned  by  Doncafter,  Rotherham 
1 5 and 


[ 202  ] 

and  Sheffield,  and  thence  croffed  over  to  Madely. 
On  Tuefday,  19.  I wrote  the  following  letter  : 

Rev.  and  Dear  Sir,  Swinfleet, 

July  19,  ly  68. 

One  of  Wintringham  informed  me  yefterday 
that  you  faid,  “ No  fenfible  and  well  meaning 
man  could  hear,  and  much  lefsjoin  the  Metho- 
dills,  becaufe  they  all  aBed  under  a lie , profeffing 
themfelves  members  of  the  church  of  England, 
while  they  licenfed  themfelves  as  diirenters.” 
You  are  a little  mifinformed.  The  greater  part  of 
the  Methodift  preachers,  are  not  licenfed  at  all. 
And  feveral  that  are,  are  not  licenfed  as  Diffen- 
ters  : I inllance  particularly  in  Thomas  Adams  and 
Thomas  Brifco.  When  Thomas  Adams  defired 
a licence,  one  of  the  juflices  faid,  “ Mr.  Adams 
are  not  you  of  the  church  of  England  ? Why 
then  do  you  defire  a licence  ?”  He  anfwered, 
“ Sir,  I am  of  th  e church  of  England  : yet  I de- 
fire a licence,  that  I may  legally  defend  myfelf 
from  the  illegal  violence  of  oppreffive  men.”  T. 
Brifco  being  afkedthe  fame  queflion  in  London, 
and  the  juflice  adding,  “ We  will  not  grant  you 
a licence,”  his  lawyer  replied,  “ Gentlemen,  you 
cannot  refuie  it.  The  aft  is  a mandatory  aft.  You 
have  no  choice.”  One  alked  the  chairman,  Is 
this  true  ? He  fhook  his  head,  and  faid,  “ He  is 
in  the  right.”  The  objeftion  therefore  does  not 
lie  at  all  againftthe  greater  part  of  the  methodift 

preachers 


[ 203  j 

preachers ; becaufe  they  are  either  licenfed  in 
this  form,  or  not  licenfed  at  all. 

When  others  applied  for  a licence,  the  Clerk 
or  Jullice  faid,  “ I will  not  licenfe  you,  but  as 
Protedant  dilfenters.”  They  replied,  “ We  are 
of  the  church.  We  are  not  dilfenters.  But  if 
you  will  call  us  fo  we  cannot  help  it.”  They  did 
call  them  fo  in  their  certificates.  But  this  did  not 
make  them  fo.  They  ftill  call themjelves  members 
of  the  church  of  England:  and  they  believe 
themfelvej*  fo  to  be.  Therefore  neither  do  thefe 
a£l  under  a lie.  They  fpeak  no  more  than  they 
verilybelieve.  Surely  then  unlefs  there  are  ftrong- 
er  objeflions  than  this,  both  well-meaning  and 
fenfible  men,  may  in  perfeft  confidence  with 
their  fenfe  and  fincerity,  not  only  hear,  but  join 
the  Methodills. 

We  are  in  truth  fo  far  from  being  ene- 
mies to  the  church,  that  we  are  rather  bi- 
gots to  it.  I dare  not,  like  Mr.  Venn,  leave- 
the  parilh  church  where  I am  to  go  to  an 
independent  meeting.  I dare  not  advife  others,, 
to  go  thither,  rather  than  to  church.  I ad- 
vife all,  over  whom  I have  any  influence,,  fiea- 
dily  to  keep  to  the  church.  Meantime,  I advife- 
them,  to  fee  that  the  kingdom  of  God  is  within, 
them  : that  their  hearts  be  full  of  love  to  God; 
and  man  : and  to  look  upon  all,  of  whatever  opi- 
nion, who  are  like  minded,  as  their  brothe>  >/ind 
JiJlcryand  mother - — O Sir,  what  art  of  men  or 
1 6 devii% 


[ 2°-'  ] 

devils  is  this,  which  makes  you  fo  ftudioufly  {land 
aloof  from  thofe  who  are  thus  minded?  I cannot 
but  fay  to  you,  as  I did  to  Mr.  Walker,  (and  I 
fay  it  the  more  freely,  becaufe  Quid  mea  refert  ? 

1 am  neither  better  nor  worfe  whether  you  hear 
^or  forbear]  “ The  methodifts  do  not  want  you  : 
but  you  want  them.”  You  want  the  life,  the 
fpirit,  the  power  which  they  have  : not  of  them- 
felves : but  by  the  free  grace  of  God.  Elfe  how 
could  it  be,  (Let  me  fpeak  without  referve)  that 
fo  good  a man  and  fo  good  a preacher,  fhould 
have  fo  little  fruit  of  his  labour,  his  unwearied 
labour,  for  fo  many  years  ? Have  your  pariflr- 
ioners  the  life  of  religion  in  their  fouls  ? Have 
they  fo  much  as  the  form  of  it  ? Are  the  peo- 
ple of  Wintrir.gham  in  general  any  better  than 
thofe  of  Winterton,  or  Horton  ? Alas  ! Sir,  what 
is  it  that  hinders  your  reaping  the  fruit  of  fo  much 
pains  and  fo  many  prayers  ? 

Is  it  not  poflible  this  may  be  the  very  thing, 
vour  Letting  yourfelf  again!!  thofe  whom  God 
owns,  by  the  continual  convifdion  and  conver- 
!ion  of  Tinners  ? 

I fear,  as  long  as  you  in  any  wife  oppofe  thefe, 
your  rod  will  not  blofTom,  neither  will  you  fee 
the  def  re  of  your  foul,  in  the  profperity  of  the 
fouls  committed  to  your  charge. 

I pray  God  to  give  you  a right  judgment  in  all 
things,  and  am,  Dear  Sir, 

Your  affe&ionate  Brother, 

John  Wesley. 

Sunday 


[ 20,5  ] 

Sunday,  31.  I preached  for  Mr.  Fletcher  in 
the  morning,  and  in  the  evening  at  Shrewfbury. 

Monday,  Auguft  1.  I lodged  at  the  Abbey  in 
Cardiganfhire : and  on  W ednefday  morning 
reached  Haverfordweft.  Here  abundance  of  peo- 
ple flocked  together  and  willingly  fujfered  the 
word  of  exhortation.  Indeed  a more  quiet,  hu- 
mane, courteous  people  I have  fcarce  ever  feen. 
But  I fear,  they  were  forfeited  with  preaching 
before  we  fet  foot  in  the  town. 

Saturday  6.  I went  to  Pembroke.  We  were 
here  feveral  times  before  we  had  any  place  in 
Haverford-Wett.  But  we  have  reafon  to  fear  left 
the  firft  become  laft.  Sunday  7,1  took  a good 
deal  of  pains  to  compofe  the  little  mifunderftand- 
ings  which  have  much  obftrufted  the  work  of 
God.  At  ten,  I read'prayers,  preached  and  ad- 
miniftered  the  facrament  to  a ferious  congregation 
at  St.  Daniel’s  : and  the  next  morning  left  the 
people  full  of  good  defires,  and  in  tolerable  good 
humour  with  each  other. 

Monday,  8.1  rode  to  Lanelly,  and  preached 
to  a fmall  earneft  company,  onYc  urcjaved  through 
faitk : Thence  we  found  a kind  of  a way  to 
Oxwych,  where  I prefled  the  one  thing  needful, 
on  a plain  Ample  people,  right  willing  to  hear 
with  great  enlargement  of  heart. 

Tuefday,  Auguft  9.  I took  a full  view  of  the 
caftle,  Atuate  on  the  top  ofafteep  hill,  and  com- 
manding a various  and  extenftveprofpefr,  both 
by  fea  and  land.  The  building  itfelfis  far  the  Jofti- 

eft 


[ 20  6 J 

eft  which  I have  feen  in  Wales.  What  a tafte 
had  they,  who  removed  from  hence,  ro  bury 
themfelves  in  the  hole  at  Margum  ! 

When  we  came  to  Neath,  I was  a little  fur- 
prized,  to  hear  I was  to  preach  in  the  church  : 
of  which  the  church-wardens  had  the  difpofal, 
the  minifter  being  juft  dead.  I began  reading 
prayers  at  fix,  but  was  greatly  difgufted  at  the 
manner  of  finging,  1.  twelve  or  fourteen  perfons 
kept  it  to  themfelves,  and  quite  fhut  out  the  con- 
gregation : 2.  Thefe  repeated  the  fame  words, 
contrary  to  all  fenfe  and  reafon,  fix  eight  or  ten 
times  over  : 3.  According  to  the  {hocking  cuftom 
of  modern  mufic,  different  perfons  fung  different 
words  at  one  and  the  fame  moment  : an  intoler- 
able infult  on  common  fenfe,  and  utterly  incom- 
partible  with  any  devotion. 

Wednefday  10.  At  five  I had  the  pleafure  of 
bearing  the  whole  congregation  at  the  roo raffing 
with  the  fpirit  and  with  the  underjlanding  a'fo  : 
And  again,  at  one  in  the  afternoon  at  Cowbridge, 
where  I found  uncommon  liberty  of  fpeech, 
while  I was  explaining  to  many  of  the  rich 
and  gay,  as  well  as  to  the  poor  The  kingdom  of 
God  is  within  you. 

I did  not  reach  Cardiff  till  after  feven  : where 
finding  the  congregation  waiting,  I began  immedi- 
ately in  the  town-ball,  ftrongly  exhorting  them* 
Not  to  receive  the  grace  of  God  in  vain. 

Friday  12.  I preached  at  that  lovely  place, 
Llanbraddock : Saturday,  13.  about  noon  at 
Chepftow.  Thence  I haftened  to  the  paffage. 


[ 2 °7  ] 

though  every  one  told  me,  I had  time  enough 
and  to  fpare.  I had  fo : for  I waited  fix  hours, 
the  boat  being  juft  gone  when  we  came.  About 
nine  we  got  over,  and  reached  Briftol  between 
eleven  and  twelve. 

Sunday  14.  Hearing  my  wife  was  dangeroufly 
ill,  I took  chaife  immediately,  and  reached  the 
Foundery  before  one  in  the  morning.  Finding 
the  fever  was  turned,  and  the  danger  over,  about 
two  I fet  out  again,  and  in  the  afternoon  came 
(not  at  all  tired)  to  Briftol. 

Our  conerfence  began  on  Tuefday  the  16th, 
and  ended  on  Friday  the  19th.  O what  can  we 
do  for  more  labourers?  We  can  only  cry  to  the 
Lord  of  the  harvejl. 

Sunday  21.  Thoufands  of  hearers,  rich  and 
poor,  received  the  word  near  the  new  fquare, 
with  the  deepeft  attention.  This  is  the  way  to 
{hake  the  trembling  gates  of  hell.  Still  I fee, 
nothing  can  do  this  fo  effeciually  as  field-preach- 
ing. 

Monday  22.  I rode  through  impetuous  rain  to 
Wefton,  a village  near  Bridgwater.  A while  ago 
the  people  here  were  lions : but  now  they  are  be- 
come lambs.  Tuefday  23,  I faw  a ferious  con- 
gregation at  Taunton  ! And  fhall  we  have  fruit 
here  alfo  ? In  the  evening  I preached  to  the 
poor  backfliders  at  Collumpton,  on  Will  the  Lord 
be  no  more  intreated  ? 

Wednefday  24.  I rode  to  Launcefton,  where 

both 


[ zo8  ] 

both  the  ferioufnefs  and  largenefs  of  the  congre- 
gation, evening  and  morning,  gave  us  reafon  to 
hope,  that  all  our  labour  here  will  not  be  in 
vain. 

Friday  26. 1 came  to  Camelford,  where  the  fo- 
ciety  is  once  more  fhrunk  from  feventy  to  four- 
teen. I preached  in  the  market-place,  on  0 that 
thou  hadjl  known,  at  leajl  in  this  lay  day,  the  things 
that  make  for  thy  peace  ! Many  were  moved  for 
the  prefent : as  they  were  the  next  day,  while 
I was  applying  thofe  awful  words,  The  harveft 
is  paf,  the  fummer  is  ended,  and  we  are  not 
faved  ! 

Saturday  27.  I wrent  on  to  Port-lfaac,  now  the 
livelieft  place  in  the  circuit.  I preached  from  a 
balcony  in  the  middle  of  the  town  ; a circum- 
flancel  could  not  but  obferve.  Before  I came  to 
Port-lfaac  the  firfttime,  oneRichard  Scantleburv, 
invited  me  to  lodge  at  his  houfe  : but  when  I 
came,  feeing  a large  mob  at  my  heels,  he  fairly 
fhut  the  door  upon  me.  Yet  in  the  very  houfe  I 
now  lodged  : Richard  Scantlebury,  being  gone  to 
his  father’s,  and  the  prefent  proprietor,  Richard 
Wood,  counting  it  all  joy  to  receive  the  fervants 
of  God.  About  this  time  I wrote  to  a friend 
as  follows : 

Dear  Lawrence, 

By  a various  tram  of  providences  you  have 
been  led  to  the  very'  place  where  God  intended 

you 


C 2o9  ] 

you  fhould  be.  And  you  have  reafon  to  praife 
him,  that  he  has  not  buffered  your  labour  there 
to  be  in  vain.  In  a fhort  time,  hew  little  will  it 
fignify,  whether  we  had  lived  in  the  Jammer 
f lands , or  beneath 

“ The  rage  of  Ardos  and  eternal  frofr 

How  boon  will  this  dream  of  life  be  at  an  end  ! 
And  when  we  are  once  landed  in  eternity,  it 
will  be  all  one,  whether  we  fpent  our  time  on 
earth  in  a palace,  or  had  not  where  to  lay  our 
head. 

You  never  learned  either  from  my  converfa- 
tion,  or  preaching,  or  writings,  that  “ Holinefs 
confifted  in  a flow  of  joy.”  I conftantly  told 
you  quite  the  contrary  : I told  you,  it  was  love: 
the  love  of  God  and  our  neighbour : the  image 
of  God  damped  on  the  heart:  the  life  of  God  in 
the  foul  of  man  : the  mind  that  was  in  Chrift, 
enabling  us  to  walk  as  Chrift  alfo  walked.  If 
Mr.  Maxfield,  or  you  took  it  to  be  any  thing 
elfe,  it  was  your  own  fault  not  mine.  And 
whenever  you  waked  out  of  that  dream,  you 
ought  not  to  have  laid  the  blame  of  it  upon  me. 
It  is  true  that  joy  is  one  part  of  the  fruit  of  the 
Spirit,  of  the  kingdom  of  God  within  us.  But 
this  is  firft  righteoufnefs,  then  peace  and  joy  in  the 
Holy  Ghojl.  It  is  true  farther,  that  if  you  love 
God  with  all  your  hearty  you  may  rejoice  ever- 


more. 


[ 210  ] 

more.  Nay,  it  is  true  ftill  farther,  that  many  feri- 
ous,  humble,  fober-minded  believers,  who  do 
feel  the  love  of  God  fometimes,  and  do  then  re- 
joice in  God  their  Saviour,  cannot  be  content 
with  this,  but  pray  continually,  that  he  would 
enable  them  to  love  and  rejoice  in  the  Lord  al- 
ways. And  no  faff  under  heaven  is  more  unde- 
niable, than  that  God  does  anfwer  this  prayer ; 
that  he  does  for  the  fake  of  his  Son,  and  through 
the  power  of  his  Spirit,  enable  another  and  ano- 
ther fo  to  do.  It  is  alfo  a plain  faff,  that  this 
power  does  commonly  over-fhadow  them  in  an 
injlant : and  that  from  that  time  they  enjoy  that 
inward  and  outward  holinefs,  to  which  they 
were  utter  Grangers  before.  Pcffibly  you  might 
be  miftaken  in  this : perhaps  you  thought  you 
had  received  what  you  had  not.  But  pray  do  not 
meafure  all  men  by  yourfelf:  do  not  imagine, 
you  are  the  univeifal  flandard.  If  you  deceived 
yourfelf,  (which  yet  I do  not  affirm)  you  ffiould 
not  infer,  that  all  others  do.  Many  think  they 
are  juftified,  and  are  not : but  we  can’t  infer,  that 
none  are  juftified.  So  neither,  if  many  think 
they  are  pefeEled  in  love  and  are  not,  will  it  fol- 
low, that  none  are  fo?  Bleffed  be  God,  though 
we  fet  an  hundred  enthuftafts  afide,  we  are  ftill 
encompajfed  with  a cloud  of  witnejfes,  who  have 
teftified  and  do  teftify  in  life  and  in  death,  that 
perfeElion , which  I have  taught  thefe forty  years! 
Thisperfeffion  cannotbeadelufion.unlefs  thebi- 
ble  be  a delufion  too : I mean,  “ LovingGod  with 

all 


C ***  1 

all  our  heart,  and  our  neighbour  as  ourfelves.”  I 
pin  down  all  its  oppofers  to  this  definition  of  it. 
No  evafion  ! No  fluffing  the  queftion  f Where 
is  the  delufion  of  this  ? Either  you  received  this 
love  or  you  did  not : if  you  did,  dare  you  call  it  a 
delufion  ? You  will  not  call  it  fo,  for  all  the 
world.  If  you  received  any  thing  elfe,  it  does 
not  at  all  affe£t  the  queftion.  Be  it  as  much  a de- 
lufion as  you  pleafe,  it  is  nothing  to  them  who 
have  received  quite  another  thing,  namely,  That 
deep  communion  with  the  Father  and  the  Son, 
whereby  they  are  enabled  to  give  him  their 
whole  heart;  to  love  every  man  as  their  own 
foul,  and  to  walk  as  Chrift  alfo  walked. 

O Lawrence,  if  After  Coughlan  and  you,  ever 
did  enjoy  this,  humble  yourfelves  before  God, 
for  calling  it  away  : if  you  did  not,  God  grant 
you  may ! 

Monday  29.  I rode  to  St.  Columb,  intending 
to  preach  there,  but  finding  no  place  that  was 
tolerably  convenient,  I was  going  to  take  horfe, 
when  one  offered  me  the  ufe  of  his  meadow, 
clofe  to  the  town.  A large  congregation  quickly 
affembled,  to  whom  I explained  the  nature  and 
pleafantnefs  of  religion.  I have  feldom  feen  a peo- 
ple behave  fo  well  the  firft  time  I have  preached 
to  them. 

Tuefday  30.  Calling  at  St.  Agnes,  I found  a 
large  congregation  waiting,  fo  I preached  with- 


out 


[ 212  ] 

out  delay.  At  Redruth  likewlfe  I found  the  peo- 
ple gathered  from  all  parts : and  God  gave  a 
loud  call  to  the  backfliders.  Indeed  there  was 
need:  for  T.  Rankin  left  between  three  and  four 
hundred  members  in  the  fociety,  and  I found  an 
hundred  and  ten  ! 

In  the  evening  I preached  in  the  meadow  at 
St.  Ives,  to  a very  numerous  and  deeply  ferious 
congregation.  Wednefday  31,  I met  the  chil- 
dren, a u'ork  which  will  exercife  the  talents  of 
the  mofl  able  preachers  in  England.  1 hut  fday. 
Sept.  1.  The  grafs  being  wet  we  could  not  iland 
in  the  meadow,  but  we  found  an  open  fpace, 
where  I called  a liltning  multitude  to  return  to 
him,  who  hath  no X.  forgotten  to  be  gracious. 

Friday  2.  I preached  at  noon  to  an  earned 
company  at  Zennor,  and  in  the  evening  to  a far 
larger  at  St.  Jud.  Here  being  informed  that  one 
of  our  fiders  in  the  next  parith,-  Morva,  who 
entertained  the  preachers  formerly,  was  now 
decriped,  and  had  not  heard  a fermon  for  many 
years,  I -went  on  Saturday  g,  at  noon  to  Alice 
Daniel’s,  and  preached  near  the  houfe,  on,  They 
who  Jhall  be  accounted  worthy  to  obtain  that  u orldt 
and  the  refurrrBion  from  the  dead — are  equal  unto 
the  angels , and  are  the  children  cf  God , being  the 
children  of  the  refurreBion.  I have  always  thought 
there  is  fornething  venerable  in  perfons  w'orn 
out  with  age : efpecially  when  they  retain 
their  underftanding,  and  walk  in  the  ways  of 
God. 


Sunday' 


t 213  1 

Sunday  4.  I when  to  St.  Creet  church,  where 
I heard  an  excellent  fermon.  Between  one  and 
two  I confirmed  it,  by  explaining  that  haopy  re- 
ligion,  which  our  Lord  defcribes  in  the  eight 
beatitudes.  About  five  in  the  evening  I preached 
at  Newlin  ; about  nine  the  next  morning  at  Pen- 
zance. Surely  God  will  have  a people  even  in 
this  place,  where  we  have  fo  long  feemed  only 
to  beat  the  air.  At  noon  I preached  in  St.  Hila- 
ry’s, and  at  St.  John’s,  this  and  the  next  evening, 

I believe  the  moll  fenfelefs  then  felt  the  word  of 
God,  fharp  as  a two-edged  fword. 

Wed.  7.  After  the  early  preaching  the  felefl 
fociety  met ; fuch  a company  of  lively  believers, 
lull  of  faith  and  love,  as  I never  found  in  this 
county  before.  This  and  the  three  following 
days,  I preached  at  as  many  places  as  I could, 
though  I was  at  firfi:  in  doubt,  whether  I could 
preach  eight  days  together,  mofily  in  the  open 
air,  three  or  four  times  a day.  But  my  ftrength 
was  as  my  work ; I hardly  felt  any  wearinefs, 
firft  or  laft. 

Sunday  11.  About  nine  I preached  at  St.  Ag- 
nes, and  again  between  one  and  two.  At  five  I 
took  my  old  Hand  at  Gwenap,  in  the  natural 
amphitheatre.  I fuppofe  no  human  voice  could 
have  commanded  fuch  an  audience  on  plain 
ground.  But  the  ground  rifing  all  round  gave  me 
fuch  an  advantage,  that  I believe  all  could  hear 
diflinftly. 

Monday  12.  I preached  about  noon  at  Calle- 

ftick. 


[ 214  ] 

flick,  and  in  the  evening  at  Kerley.  It  rained 
all  the  time ; but  that  did  not  divert  the  atten- 
tion of  a large  congregation.  At  noon,  Tuefday 
13,  I preached  in  Truro,  and  in  the  evening,  at 
Mevagizzy.  It  was  a feafon  of  folemn  joy ; I 
have  not  often  lound  the  like.  Surely  God’s 
thoughts  are  not  as  our  thoughts  ! Can  any  good 
be  done  at  Mevagizzy  ? 

Wednefday  14.  After  preaching  at  St.  Awftle 
and  Medros,  I rode  over  to  St.  Roach,  and  lpent 
a comfortable  evening  with  my  old  acquaintance 
Mr.  Furlv. 

Thurfday  15.  We  had  our  quarterly  meeting 
at  Medros.  But  it  was  not  now  as  thelafl  time  I 
was  here,  when  the  whole  fociety  was  in  a flame : 
The  love  of  many  is  now  waxed  cold.  Friday  16. 
1 rode  through  heavy  rain  to  Paulpenow.  Here 
the  room  over  which  we  were  to  lodge,  being 
filled  with  pilchards  and  conger-eels,  the  per- 
fume was  too  potent  for  me  : fo  that  I was  not 
forry,  when  one  of  our  friends  invited  me  to 
lodge  at  her  houfe.  Soon  after  I began  to  preach 
heavy  rain  began  : yet  none  went  away  till  the 
whole  fervice  was  ended. 

Saturday  17.  When  we  came  to  Crimble- 
paffage,  wre  were  at  a full  flop.  The  boatmen 
told  us,  the  ftorm  was  fo  high,  that  it  was  not 
poffible  to  pafs.  However  at  length  we  perfuaded 
them  to  venture  out  : and  we  did  not  fhip  one 
fea,  till  we  got  over, 

Sunday  18.  Our  room  at  the  The  Dock  con- 
tained 


[ Z15  ] 

tainedthe  morning  congregation  tolerably  well. 
Between  one  and  two  I began  preaching  on  the 
Key  in  Plymouth.  Notwithflanding  the  rain, 
abundance  of  people  flood  to  hear.  But  one  filly 
man  talked  without  ceafing,  till  I defired  the 
people  to  open  to  the  right  and  left,  and  let  me 
look  him  in  the  face.  They  did  fo.  He  pulled 
off  his  hat,  and  quietly  went  away. 

At  five  I preached  in  the  fquare  at  The  Dock, 
to  an  exceeding  large  congregation.  And  the 
rain,  though  it  prevented  fomefrom  coming,  did 
not  caufe  any  to  go  away.  Monday  19.  in  the 
evening,  I preached  in  what  is  vulgarly  called 
Mr.  Whitefield’s  room.  Afterwards  I met  the 
fociety  at  our  own,  and  exhorted  them  to  Jiand 
Jaft  in  one  mind  and  one  judgment.  I fet  out  early 
in  the  morning  ; and  in  the  evening  preached  at 
Tiverton. 

Thurfday  22.  I rode  to  Axminfler.  The  rain 
prevented  my  preaching  abroad,  though  the 
room  would  ill  contain  the  congregation.  Ob- 
ferving  many  there  who  feemed  quite  unawa- 
kened, I opened  and  ftrongly  applied,  Ezekiel’s 
vifion  of  the  dry  bones.  Lord,  breathe  upon  the/e 
Jlain,  that  they  may  live. 

Friday  23.  I rode  acrofs  the  country  to  Charl- 
ton, and  found  the  congregation  waiting  : in  the 
afternoon  we  went  on  to  Lympfham  ; but  not 
without  fome  difficulty.  The  waters  were  out, 
fo  that  it  was  no  eafy  matter  either  to  ride  or 

walk. 


[ 216  ] 

walk.  My  horfe  got  into  a ditch  over  his  back  in 
water.  Nor  could  I get  to  my  lodgings  the  foot 
way,  till  an  honeft  man  took  me  on  his  fnoulders, 
and  fo  waded  through. 

Saturday  24. 1 returned  to  Briftol.  Tuefday  27. 

I preached  in  Pensford  at  eight,  in  Shepton* 
Mallet  at  one,  and  at  Wincaunton  in  the  even- 
ing, with  far  greater  freedom  than  I ufed  to  find 
among  that  dead  people.  About  one,  Wednef- 
day  28,  I preached  at  Stallbridge,  to  a large  and 
ferioufly  attentive  congregation.  Hence  I went 
on  to  cold,  uncomfortable  Shaftfburv,  and  fpoke 
exceeding  ftrong  words.  All  fetioufly  attended: 
fome  feemed  to  underhand,  and  a few  feel  what 
was  fpoken. 

Thurfday  29.  I rode  to  Frome.  The  people 
here  fe-m  more  alive,  than  mod  I have  feen  in 
the  circuit.  And  this  is  the  more  flrange,  becaufe 
in  this  town  only,  there  is  fuch  a mixture  of  men 
of  all  opinions,  Anabaptifts,  Quakers,  Prefbyteri- 
ans,  Arians,  Antinomians,  Moravians,  and 
what  not  ? If  any  hold  to  the  truth,  in  the 
midfl  of  all  thefe,  furelv  the  power  muft  be  of 
God. 

Friday  30.  We  obferved  as  a day  of  faffing  and 
prayer.  And  it  was  a good  day  for  many,  who 
no  fooner  called,  than  God  anfwered  them  in  the 
joy  of  their  heart. 

Sunday,  Odlober  2.  I preached  at  Kingfwood, 
upon  Quench  not  the  Jpirit.  PofTibly  this  people 
may  now  have  ears  to  hear,  and  may  defpifc  pro- 

phejyings 


[ a»;  ] 

phefyings  no  more.  Hereby  they  have  frequently 
quenched  the  fpirit,  and  deftroyed  his  work  in 
their  hearts. 

Wednefday  g.  I rode  over  to  Maiden  Bradley, 
and  preached  at  a little  didance  from  the  town, 
to  as  ferious  a congregation  as  I ever  faw,  many 
of  whom  were  in  tears.  It  is  a wonder,  there 
fhould  be  room  for  the  gofpel  here,  among  fo 
many  lords  and  gentlemen  ! But  indeed  they 
neither  meddle  nor  make.  And  this  is  all  we  de« 
fire  of  them. 

Fridav  7.  I fpent  an  hour,  much  to  my  fatis- 
faflion,  with  the  children  at  Kingfwood.  There 
is  reafon  to  hope,  that  the  grace  of  God  is  dill 
working  among  them.  Some  are  dill  alive  to 
God  : and  all  behave  in  fuch  a manner,  that  I 
have  feen  no  other  fchool-boys  like  them. 

Sunday  9.  I began  examining  the  fociety  in 
Kingfwood,  much  increafed  both  in  grace  and 
number,  chiefly  by  means  of  thofe  meetings  for 
prayer,  which  God  dill  blelTes  greatly.  On  Mon- 
day and  Tuefday  I examined  the  fociety  at  Brif- 
tol,  and  found  caufe  to  rejoice  over  thefe  alfo: 
although  there  is  dill  an  heavinefs  of  fpirit  upon 
many,  indeed  on  all  who  are  not  going  on  to  per- 
feBion. 

Wednefday  12.  In  the  evening  I preached  at 
Kingfwood.  I have  not  feen  fuch  a congregation 
there  on  a week  day,  for  above  thefe  twenty 
years.  Nor  have  I feen  fuch  a congregation  at 
Pill  for  many  years,  as  was  prefent  on  Thurfday 
Vol.  XXXII.  K in 


[ *i8  ] 

in  the  afternoon.  It  is  poflible,  even  on  this 
barren  foil,  we  may  fee  a little  fruit  of  much  la- 
bour. 

Friday  14.  I dined  with  Dr.  Wrangel,  one  of 
the  King  of  Sweden’s  chaplains,  who  has  fperi^ 
feveral  years  in  Penfylvania.  His  heart  feemed 
to  be  greatly  united  to  the  American  Chriflians: 
and  he  ftrongly  pleaded  for  our  fending  fome  of 
our  preachers  to  help  them,  multitudes  of  whom 
are  as  fheep  without  a fbepherd.  Tuefday  18. 
He  preached  at  the  new  room,  to  a crowded  au- 
dience, and  gave  general  fatisfa&ion  by  the  fim- 
plicity  and  life  which  accompanied  his  found 
do£lrine. 

Saturday  22.  I was  much  furprized  in  reading 
an  if] ay  on  mufic,  wrote  by  one  who  is  a thorough 
mafler  of  the  fubje£l  ; to  find  that  the  mufic  of 
the  antients,  was  as  fimple  as  that  of  the  Metho- 
diils  : that  their  mufic  wholly  confifted  of  melody , 
or  the  arrangement  of  fingle  notes : that  what  is 
now  called  ha rmony,  finging  in  parts,  the  whole 
of  counterpoint  and  fugues , is  quite  novel,  being 
never  known  in  the  world,  till  the  popedom  of 
Leo  the  tenth.  He  farther  obferves,  that  as  the 
finging  different  words  by  different  perfons  at  the 
very  fame  time,  neceflarilv  prevents  attention  to 
the  fenfe,  fo  it  frequently  deflroys  melody 
for  the  fake  of  harmony;  meantime  it  deflroys 
the  very  end  of  mufic,  which  is  to  affefl  the  paf- 
fions. 

Monday  24.IleftBriflol,and  went  by  Bath  and 

Bradford, 


i. 


[ 2ig  ] 

Bradford,  to  Salifbury.  Wednefday  26.  At  one 
I preached  in  Rumfey,  to  a very  quiet,  un- 
affected audience  : and  in  the  evening  at  Win- 
chefter,  to  a company  of  as  poor  people  as  I have 
feen  for  many  years.  Thurfday  27.  The  fcene 
was  changed : at  Portfmouth  rich  and  poor 
flocked  together  from  all  parts.  Abundance  of 
them  came  again  at  five  in  the  morning.  In  the 
evening  the  boufe  ill  contained  them.  And 
never  did  I fee  any  receive  the  woid  with 
greater  earneftnefs.  The  next  day  I returned  to 
London. 

Monday  31.  I took  horfe  at  five,  and  juft  then 
found  that  my  horfe  had  fcarce  a fhoe  on  his  feet. 
However  I was  obliged  (not  having  a minute  to 
fpare  (to  ride  as  far  as  Colney.  There  I pro- 
cured one  to  fhoe  my  horfe  all  round,  and  lame 
him  on  both  his  fore- feet.  However  he  halted  on 
to  Hockley  ; where  an  honeft  and  fkilful  fmith, 
fo  altered  and  removed  the  fhoes,  that  he  did 
not  halt  any  more.  But  by  this  means  we  had 
loft  fo  much  time  that  the  fun  fet  before  we 
reached  Whittlebury-foreft.  We  had  then  won- 
derful road  ; fome  of  the  ridings  (fo  called]  being 
belly  deep.  However  between  fix  and  feven  we 
came  fafe  to  Whittlebury. 

James  Glafbrook  was  fo  wearied  out,  that  he 
could  fcarce  ftir  hand  or  foot.  So  I defired 
him  to  go  to  reft.  I was  wrnary  enough  myfelf, 
till  I began  to  fpeak.  But  wearinefs  then  va» 
K 2 nifhed 


[ 220  J 

nifhed  away,  and  we  all  praifed  God  with  joyful 
lips. 

Tuefday,  November  1. 1 preached  at  Weedon, 
and  at  five  in  the  morning : about  eleven  at 
Towcefter,  and  in  the  evening,  to  many  more 
than  the  houfe  would  hold  at  Northampton. 
Friday  4.  James  Glafbrook,  (who  had  a fit  of  an 
ague  at  Whittlebury)  undertook  to  conduct  me 
to  Bedford.  But  he  was  taken  ill  on  the  road  : I 
preached  there  at  feven,  on,  Azoake  lliou  that 
fleepejl.  And  never  was  more  need  : for  a more 
fleepy  audience  I have  not  often  feen. 

Saturday  5.  About  noon  I preached  at  Hert- 
ford in  the  new  room  to  a large  and  ferious  con- 
gregation. The  mayor’s  ufage  of  Mr.  Colley  for 
preaching  in  the  market-place,  with  Mr.  Colley’s 
firm  and  calm  behaviour,  was  the  means  of  con- 
vincing Mr.  Andrews,  who  built  this  room  at 
his  own  expence. 

Monday  7. 1 fet  out  for  Oxfordfhire:  preached 
at  Wycombe  in  the  evening,  and  on  Tuefdav 
and  Wednefday  at  Witney.  On  Thurfday  in  my 
return,  I was  defiled  to  preach  at  Oxford.  The 
room  was  throughly  filled,  and  not  with  curi- 
ous but  deeply  ferious  hearers.  Many  of  thefe 
defired,  that  our  travelling  preachers  would  take 
them  in  their  turn  ; with  which  I willingly  com- 
plied. 

In  the  evening  I preached  in  the  chapel  at 
Henley,  toaconfiderablenumber  of  ferious  peo- 
ple. 


[ -2S1  ] 

pie.  One  o.r  two  of  the  bafer  fort  made  fome 
noife  : but  I reproved  them,  and  for  once,  they 
were  afhamed. 

Friday  1 1.  I returned  to  London.  The  next 
week  I vifited  the  cialfes,  and  at  intervals  read  Mr. 
Bofw ell’s  account  of  Corfica,  But  what  a fcene 
is  opened  therein  ! How  little  did  we  know  of 
that  brave  people  ? How  much  lefs  were  we  ac- 
quainted with  the  ch.arafler  of  their  general  Paf- 
chal  Paoli  ? As  great  a lover  of  his  country  as 
Epaminondas,  and  as  great  a general  as  Hannibal 

Saturday  19.  I read  Dr.  Nowell’s  anfwer  to 
Mr.  Hill,  concerning  the  expullion  of  the  ftix- 
dentsat  Oxford.  He  has  faid  all  that  could  be  faid, 
for  that  firetch  of  power,  that  inftance  oi/ummum 
Jus-,  and  he  fays  quite  enough,  to  clear  the 
church  of  England  from  the  charge  of  predeftina- 
tion  : a doftrine  which  he  proves  to  be  utterly 
inconfiftent,  with  the  common  prayer,  the  com- 
munion fervice,  the  office  of  baptifm,  the  arti- 
cles, the  homiles,  and  the  other  writings  of  thofe 
that  compiled  them, 

Monday  28.  In  the  evening,  I preached  in  the 
Barracks  at  Chatham.  I fpoke  louder  than  I have 
done  for  years  : yet  the  fkirts  of  the  congregation 
could  not  hear.  Few  of  thofe  that  did  hear,  heard 
in  vain ; for  God  was  in  the  midft  of  them. 
Tuefday  29.  at  noon,  I preached  at  Sittenburn, 
to  a deeply-attentive  audience:  and  in  the  even- 
ing, at  Canterbury,  in  an  houfe  half  filled:  a 
fight  I do  not  often  fee. 

Kg 


Wednefday 


[ 222  ] 

Wednefday  go.  I rode  to  Dover,  and  came 
in  juft  before  a violent  ftorm  began.  It  did  not 
hinder  the  people  : many  were  obliged  to  go 
away,  aftfer  the  houfe  was  filled.  What  a defire  to 
hear,  runs  through  all  the  fea-port  towns  wher- 
ever we  come  ! Surely  God  is  befieging  this  na- 
tion, and  attacking  it  at  all  the  entrances ! 

Thurfday,  December  1.  The  ftorm  was  ready 
to  bear  away  both  man  and  beaty.  But  it  abated 
about  noon  : fo  that  after  preaching  at  Margate, 
1 had  a pleafant  ride  to  Canterbury. 

I made  an  odd  obfervation  here,  which  I re- 
commend to  all  our  preachers.  The  people  of 
Canterbury  have  been  fo  often  reproved,  (and 
frequently  without  a caufe,)  for  being  dead  and 
cold,  that  it  has  utterly  difcouraged  them,  and 
made  them  cold  as  ftones.  How  delicate  a thi  ng  is 
it,  to  reprove  ? To  do  it  well,  requires  more  than 
human  wifdom. 

Frid.  2.  Thofe  who  are  called  Mr.  Whitefield’s 
fociety,  at  Chatham,  offered  me  the  ufe  of  their 
preaching-houfe,  which  I fuppofe,  is  nearly  four 
times  as  large  as  that  at  the  Barracks,  In  the  morn- 
ing I walked  on,  ordering  my  fervant  to  over- 
take me  with  my  carriage.  And  he  did  fo  ; but 
not  till  I had  walked  feven  or  eight  miles. 

Tuefday  lg.  Having  heard  an  heavy  charge 
brought  again  ft  W — G — , a member  of  our  fo- 
ciety, I defired  the  parties  concerned  to  meet  me 
together.  But  this  afternoon  we  could  not  get  half 
through.  At  the  fecond  hearing  I was  convinced, 

l.  That 


[ 223  ] 

j.  That  he  hadfpoken  unkindly  and  unjuftiy  : 2 
That  he  had  done  wrong, in  leaving  Mr.  D.  atfo 
fhort  a warning.  But  1 was  equally  convinced,  3. 
That  there  had  been  no  difhonefty  on  either 
fide. 

Wednefday  14.  I faw  the  Weftminfter  fcho- 
lars  aft  the  Adelphi  of  Terence  : an  entertainment 
not  unworthy  of  a Chriftian  ! O how  do  thefe 
Heathens  fhame  us  ? Their  very  comedies  con- 
tain both  excellent  fenfe,  the  livelieft  piftitres  of 
men  and  manners,  and  fo  fine  ftrokes  of  genuine 
morality,  as  are  feldom  found  in  the  writings  of 
Chriilians. 

Monday  19.  I fpent  an  hour  with  B — a I — n. 
If  the  account  {he  gives  is  true,  what  bleffed  crea- 
tures  are  both  thofe  gentlemen  and  their  wives  j 
That  would  ufe  the  mod  fcurrilous  language,  yea 
ftrike  and  drive  out  of  their  houfe,  and  that  in  a 
rainy  night,  a youi  g gentlewomen,  a (franger,  far 
from  home,  for  “ joining  with  the  Methodifls  !” 
Do  thefe  call  themfelves  Chriftians  ? Nay,  and 
Proteftants  ? Call  then  Turks.  Papifl  is  too  good 
name  ! 

Tuefday  20. 1 went  to  Shoreham.  Here  I resd 
Mr.  Archdeacon  Blackbtun’s  “ Confiderations 
on  the  penal  laws  againft  papifts.”  In  the  appen- 
dix, p.  198.10  my  no  fmall  furprize, I read  thefe 
words,  faid  to  be  wrote  by  a gentleman  at  Paris. 

“ The  Popifh  party  boaft  much  of  the  increafe 
of  the  Methodifls,  and  talk  of  that  feft  with  rap- 
ture, how  far  the  Methodifls  and  Papifts  ftand 
K 4 connefted 


f 224  ] 

«onne£led  in  principles  I know  not  : but  I be- 
lieve, it  is  beyond  a doubt,  that  they  are  in  con- 
ftant  correfpondence  with  each  other.” 

It  feems,  this  letter  was  publifhed  in  the  St. 
James’s  Chronicle.  But  I never  faw  or  heard  of 
it,  till  thefe  words  were  printed  in  the  Canter- 
bury Journal,  as  Mr.  Blackburn’s  own. 

And  he  has  nearly  made  them  his  own  by  his 
faint  note  upon  them,  “ I would  willingly  hope,  fomt 
doubt  may  be  made  of  this.”Indeed  he  adds,  “ Mr. 
W lift e field  took  timely  care,  to  preclude  all  fufpi- 
cions  of  his  having  any  connexions  with  popery.” 
Yea,  and  Mr.Wefley  much  more:  even  as  early  as 
-A.ug.31,  1738.  Again  in  myjournal, Aug.  27,  1739 
I publifhed  the  only  letter  which  I ever  wrote 
to  a popifli  Pried.  And  it  is  in  proof  of  this  propo- 
rtion, (an  extraordinary  proof  of  my  connexions 
with  pof  ?ry!)  “ No  romanift,  as  fuch,  can  expe& 
to  be  faved,  according  to  the  terms  of  the  Chrif- 
tian  covenant.” 

Many  things  to  the  famepurpofe  occur  in  the 
journals,  and  the  appeals  to  men  of  reafon  and 
religion  : over  and  above  thofe  whole  treatifes 
which  I have  publifhed  entirely  upon  the  fubjeft. 
A word  to  a protellant,”  a “ Roman  Catechifm.” 
and  “ The  advantages  of  the  members  of  the 
“ church  of  England,  over  the  members  of  the 
“ church  of  Rome.” 

What  amazing  ignorance  then,  not  to  fay  im- 
pudence, does  it  imply,  for  any  one  at  this  time 

of 


[ 225  J 

of  day  to  “ tax  me  with  having  any  connexions 
with  popery  !” 

In  the  latter  end  of  the  month  I took  fome  pains 
in  reading  over  Dr.  Young’s  Night  thoughts  leav- 
ing out  the  indifferent  lines,  correbting  many  of 
of  the  reft,  and  explaining  the  hard  words  ; in 
order  to  make  that  noble  work  more  ufeful  to  all 
and  more  intelligible  to  ordinary  readers. 

Sunday,  January  i,  1769,  we  met,  as  ufual,  at 
Spital-fields  chapel,  to  renew  our  covenant  with 
God.  And  we  never  do  this  without  a bleffing. 
Many  were  comforted,  and  many  ftrengthened. 

Monday  g.  I fpent  a comfortable  and  profit- 
able hour  with  Mr.Whitefield,  in  calling  to  mind 
the  former  times,  and  the  manner  wherein  God 
prepared  us  for  a work,  which  it  had  not  then 
entered  into  our  hearts  to  conceive. 

Tuefday  17.  I rode  to  Chelham.  )ur  own 
room  being  neither  fo  large,  not  fo  convenient, 
Mr.  Spooner  the  diflenting  minifter,  gave  me  the 
ufe  of  his  meeting.  There  was  a great  number  of 
hearers.  They  were  very  attentive  ; and  I doubt 
that  was  all. 

Tuefday  24.  I went  (by  land,  and  water)  to 
Sheernefs.  Our  place  here  would  by  no  means 
contain  the  congregation.  A large  number  of  them- 
attended  in  the  morning,  and  feemed  juft  ripe 
for  the  bleffing.  It  is  an  advantage  to  the  people 
here  that  they,  are  in  a little  corner  of  the  land, 
(hut  up,  as  it  were  from  all  the  world  j but  not 
from  the  gofpel  or  Spirit  of  Chrift.  Thurfday  2 6. 

• K 5 Ire- 


[ 226  ] 

I returned  to  Chatham  and  preached  in  the  great 
meeting  on,  God forbid  that  IJhould  g'ory,  fave  in 
the  crofs  of  our  Lord  Jfus  Chrifl.  Friday  27.  I 
returned  to  London.  The  fame  day  Elizaheth 
Vandome  went  to  reft.  A mouth  or  two  ago.  when 
fhe  was  firft  taken  ill,  ftie  di&aled  the  following 
letter. 


“ Dear  and  Rev.  Sir, 

When  I firft  heard  thegofpel  from  you,  I was 
convinced  of  fin,  and  nothing  could  fatisfy  me, 
but  a fenfe  of  pardoning  love.  For  a month  the 
garment  of  weeping  was  put  upon  me  night  and 
day  : till  one  day,  as  I was  repeating  thofe  words, 

I truft  in  him  that  ftands  between 
The  Father's  wrath  and  me  ; 

Jefus,  thou  great,  eternal  mean, 

I lopk  for  all  from  thee  : 

I was  ftruck  down  to  the  ground,  and  felt  the 
arm  of  the  Lord  revealed  in  me,  I knew  that  God 
was  reconciled,  I felt  fanfrification  begun.  The 
fight  of  faith  enfned,  and  for  three  quarters  of  a 
year,  I was  ftruggling  with  my  own  will.  Some- 
times I was  in  an  agony  : I was  ready  to  weep 
my  life  away,  fearing  the  fins  I felt  in  my  heart, 
would  never  be  done  away.  Yet  I believed  there 
was  a reft  for  the  people  of  God,  a reft  from  all 
fin.  One  day  converfing  withone  about  the  things 
of  God,  he  faid,  “ You  would  have  all  things  be- 
come 


[ 227  ] 

come  new,  before  you  believe.  But  that  is  not 
the  way.  You  muft  believe  firft.”  When  he 
went  away,  the  fpirit  of  prayer  and  fupplication 
retied  upon  me.  Yet  I felt  “ bound  down  with 
twice  ten  thoufand  ties.’*  However  I wreftled  on, 
till  the  Lord  broke  in  upon  my  foul,  like  the  fun 
in  his  glory.  He  loo  fed  me  at  once  from  all  my 
bonds,  and  I knew- 1 loved  him  with  all  my  heart. 
Jefus  appeared  with  hair  as  white  as  wool,  and 
garments  down  to  his  feet,  and  gave  me  to  fit 
with  him  in  heavenly  places.  And  from  that 
time  (which  is  feven  or  eight  and  twenty  years 
ago)  I have  felt  no  temper  contrary  to  love.  I 
have  no  defire  contrary  to  the  will  of  God.  On 
this  bed  of  ficknefs,  I have  communion  with  the 
church  triumphant.  I know  that 

“ Jefus  is  my  brother  now, 

“ And  God  is  all  my  own.” 

When  the  tempter  comes,  my  foul  cleaves  to 
Jefus,  and  I am  kept  in  perfeft  peace. 

I thought  it  my  duty,  to  leave  this  fliort  ac- 
count of  the  gracious  dealings  of  God  with  my 
foul  : as  you  was  the  inftrument  he  was  pleafed 
to  makeufeof,  for  the  beginning  and  furthering 
of  his  work.  O may  the  Lord  ftrengthen  you  and 
your  brother,  and  increafe  in  you  every  fruit  of 
his  fpirit.  And  when  you  fail  on  earth,  may  we 
meet  in  heaven  and  praife  the  great  Three-one  to 
all  eternity  ! 


K 6 


“The 


[ 228  J 

“ This  account  was  written  fome  time  paft, 
when  jhe  was  Tick  jn  bed.  But  fince  then  God 
raifed  her  up,  and  enabled  her  ftill  to  be  ufeful  to 
others,  though  in  great  weaknefs  of  body.  When 
fhe  took  to  her  bed  again  about  three  weeks  ago, 
(he  had  a remarkable  dream.  She  thought  fhefaw 
Mr.  W.  labouring  with  his  might,  to  keep  the 
people  from  falling  into  a deep  pit,  which  very, 
few  of  them  perceived.  The  concern  fhe 
was  in  awaked  her  in  great  emotion.  On  Tuef- 
day  evening  laft,  file  defired  us  to  fet  her  up  in 
bed,  to  meet  her  clafs.  Her  voice  faultered  much. 
She  earneflly  exhorted  them  all,  to  live  near  to 
God,  and  to  keep  clofe  together  : adding  “ I 
fhall  foon  join  the  church  above.”  She  fpoke  no 
more  ; all  was  filent  rapture  ; till  on  Friday  morn- 
ing : without  figh  or  groan,  fhe  reftgned  her 
fpirit  to  God.” 

Lydia  Vandome. 

Such  a living  and  dying  witnefs  of  the  perfeft 
love  of  God,  which  fire  enjoyed  for  eight  and 
twenty  years,  one  would  think  fufficient  to  filence 
all  the  doubts  and  obje&ions  ofreafonable  and 
candid  men. 

Saturday,  January  28.  I began  viftting  the 
clafles.  In  the  intervals  I looked  over  the  tranfac- 
tions  of  the  royal  fociety.  Is  not  that  a little  to* 
fevere, 


" Turpe  tjl  diffiales  habere  nugas  ?’* 


* 


If 


[ 229  ] 


If  this  be  true,  and  if  it  had  been  well  confidered 
would  half  of  thefe  tranfaftions  have  had  a being? 
nay,  were  men  convinced  of  this,  what  would  be 
come  of  the  greater  part  of  all  the  philofophical 
experiments  in  Europe  ? 

Monday  Feb.  6.  I fpent  an  hour  with  a vener- 
able woman,  near  ninety  years  of  age,  who  retain 
her  health,  her  fenfes,  her  underffanding,  and 
even  her  memory  to  a good  degree.  In  the  laft 
century  fhe  belonged  to  my  Grand  father  Annef- 
ley’s  congregation  atwhofe  houfe  her  father  and 
fhe  ufed  to  dine  every  Thurfday,  and  whom  fhe 
remembers  to  have  frequently  feen  in  his  fludy, 
at  the  top  of  the  houfe  with  his  window  open, 
and  without  any  fire,  winter  or  fumrner.  He  lived 
feventy-feven  years,  and  would  probably  have 
lived  longer,  had  he  not  began  water.drinking  at 
feventy. 

Friday  10.  I went  to  Deptford  on  purpofe 
to  fee  honeft  William  Brown,  worn  out  with  age 
and  pain,  and  long  confined  to  his  bed,  without 
the  ufe  of  either  hand  or  foot.  But  he  has  the 
ufe  of  his  underffanding  and  his  tongue,  and  tefti- 
fies,  that  God  does  all  things  well.  That  he  has  no 
doubt  or  fear,  but  is  chearfullv  waiting  till  !his 
change  fhall  come. 

Monday  13.  jl  rode  to  Colchefler,  and  had  the 
fatisfa&ion  of  feeing  fuch  a congregation,  both 
this  evening  and  the  following  as  I never  faw  in 
that  houle  before.  Wednefday  jj.  I roge  to 
Bury,  and  found  not  only  an  attentive  audience, 

but 


[ 23°  ] 

but  a little  fociety  athirft  for  God.  Thurfday  16. 
Suppofingwe  had  but  five  and  forty  miles  to  Yar- 
mouth, I did  not  fet  out  till  near  feven,  but 
proved  three-fcore;  likewife  it  rained  all  day  and 
part  of  the  road  was  very  bad.  However  God 
ftrengthened  both  man  and  beaft  ; fo  we  reached 
it  before  fix  in  the  evening. 

As  we  were  both  throughly  wet,  I was  a little 
afraid  for  my  companion,  who  was  much  older 
than  me  ; though  he  had  not  lived  fo  many  years. 
But  neither  of  us  was  any  worfe.  The  congre- 
gation was  the  Iargeft  I ever  faw  at  Yarmouth. 
And  I fpoke  far  more  plainly  (if  not  roughlv) 
than  ever  I did  before.  But  I doubt,  if  after  all 
the  flumbling-blocks  laid  in  their  way,  any  thing 
will  fink  into  their  hearts. 

Friday  17  I abridged  Dr.  Watts’s  pretty  trea- 
tife  on  the  pafiions.  His  177  Pages  will  make  an 
ufeful  traft  of  four  and  twenty.  Why  do  perfons 
who  treat  the  fame  fubjefts  with  me  write  fo 
much  larger  books  ? Of  many  reafons,  is  not 
this  the  chief  ? We  do  not  write  with  the  fame 
view  : their  principal  end  is  to  get  money  : my 
only  one,  to  do  good. 

Saturday  18.  We  rode  to  Norwich  : Sunday 
19.  at  feven,  I adminifiered  the  Lord’s  Supper 
to  about  170  ferious  communicants.  One  perfon 
then  found  peace  with  God,  and  many  were 
comforted.  In  the  evening  finding  the  houfe 
would  not  contain  one  third  of  the  congregation 
I was  obliged  to  Hand  in  the  open  air,  a fight  which 

has 


t 23*  ] 

has  not  been  feen  at  Norwich  for  many  years. 
Yet  all  the  people  were  dill,  and  deeply  at- 
tentive, two  or  three  wild  antinomians  excepted. 

I preached  on  the  gofpel  for  the  day,  the  woman 
of  Canaan.  I believe  God  fpake  to  many  hearts. 
But  who  will  obey  his  voice? 

Wednefday  22.  I rode  to  Lakenheath,  and 
had  more  hearers  there,  than  I had  had  for  fe- 
veral  years.  I fpoke  exceeding  plain  in  the  even- 
ing. One  fruit  of  which  was,  that  the  houfe  was 
filled  at  five  in  the  morning.  Thence  I returned 
to  Bury,  and  found  the  fame  little  lively  compa- 
ny, whofe  fpirit  feemed  to  reach  the  whole  con- 
gregation. I know  not  when  I have  obferved 
fuch  a containing  power,  as  while  I was  en- 
forcing, Seek  ye  the  Lord  while  he  may  he  found  ; 
call  upon  him  while  he  is  near.  - . 

Friday  24.  I rode  to  Braintree.  The  (harp 
froft  did  not  hinder  many  Irom  attending  : and 
all  were  ferious  and  well-behaved.  Saturday  25. 
I went  on  to  London. 

Monday  27.  I had  one  more  agreeable  con- 
verfation  with  my  old  friend  and  fellow-labourer, 
George  Whitefield.  His  foul  appeared  to  be 
vigorous  Hill ; but  his  body  was  finking  apace. 
And  unlefs  God  interpofes  with  his  mighty 
hand,  he  mull:  foon  finifh  his  labours. 

Thurfday,  March  2.  I buried  the  remains  of 
Michael  Hayes,  a good  old  foldier  of  Jefus 
Chrift.  He  had  lived  above  an  hundred  and 
four  years,  and  moftly  in  vigorous  health.  His 

fpeech 


[ 232  ] 

fpeech  and  underftanding  continued  to  the  la II, 
and  as  he  lived,  fo  he  died,  prailing  God. 

Sunday  5.  After  preaching  at  Spital-fields  in 
the  morning,  and  at  Weff-ftreet,  in  the  after- 
noon I went  to  Brentford  ; on  Monday  to  Hun- 
gerford,  and  the  next  day  to  Bath.  On  the  road 
I read  over  Dr.  Campbell’s  excellent  anfwer  to 
David  Hume’s  infolent  book  againft  Miracles  : 
and  Dr.  Brown’s  keen  animadverfions  on  the 
Charabieriftics  of  Lord  Shaftfbury,  another  lively 
half-thinking  writer. 

In  the  evening  my  brother  read  prayers,  and  I 
preached  in  the  Countefs  of  Huntingdon's  chapel. 
The  congregation  was  very  large,  and  very  atten- 
tive. Let  us  defpair  of  nothing  ! 

Wednefday  8.  I preached  at  Bridal.  and  met 
the  fociety.  The  next  three  days,  I examined 
them  as  ufual  one  by  one,  and  found  fome  in- 
creafe  in  number,  with  much  increafe  in  peace 
and  love. 

Monday  13.  I fet  out  northward.  We  had  fine 
weather  for  a while  : then  the  wind  rofe.andthe 
rain  came  down  amain.  We  were  thoroughly 
wet  before  we  came  to  Stroud,  but  took  no  cold 
at  all.  At  fix,  the  houfe  was  as  ufual,  quite  filled, 
though  the  wind  and  rain  kept  many  Grangers 
away.  The  people  appeared  to  be  all  alive,  and 
ready  to  devour  the  word.  Afterwards  we  had  a 
love-feaft,  at  which  many,  both  men  and  women, 
fpoke  with  all  fimplicity  what  God  had  done  for 
their  fouls. 


Tuefday 


[ 233  J 

Tuefday  14.  After  preaching  to  a large  con- 
gregation at  five,  we  rode'  toward  Tewklbury  : 
notice  having  been  given  of  mv  preaching  about 
noon  at  an  houfe  a mile  from  the  town.  But  we 
could  not  get  to  it ; the  floods  were  fo  high  : fo 
I intended  to  go  flrait  to  Worcefter.  But  one 
informing  me,  a congregation  from  all  parts  was 
waiting,  we  fet  out  another  wav,  and  waded 
through  the  water.  This  congregation  too  feemed 
quite  earnefl  ; fo  that  I did  not  regret  my  labour. 
But  the  going  and  coming  was  hard  work,  fo 
that  I was  a little  tired,  before  we  came  to  Wor- 
cefter. 

I began  preaching  about  fix  in  the  riding- 
houfe.  Abundance  of  people  were  deeply  at- 
tentive. But  toward  the  clofe,  a large  number  of 
boys  made  a great  noife.  When  we  came  out, 
men  and  boys  joined  together,  in  (homing  and 
puftnng  to  and  fro.  Many  were  frighted,  but 
none  hurt.  Hitherto  could  Satan  come,  but  no 
farther. 

Wednefdav  1 5.  My  horfe  being  lame,  and  part 
of  the  road  very  bad,  I did  not  reach  Mr.  Lee’s 
of  Cotery  till  noon.  The  houfe  is  delightfully 
fituated  in  his  park,  at  the  top  of  a fruitful  hill. 
His  chaplain  had  juft  begun  reading  prayers. 
Afterwards  he  defired  me  to  give  an  exhortation. 
So  I could  not  take  horfe  till  half  hour  after  one, 
when  I had  eight  and  twenty  miles  to  ride  on  a 
lame  horfe.  I came  however  to  Shrewfbury  be- 
tween 


[ 234  ] 

tween  five  and  fix,  and  preached  to  a large  artd 
quiet  congregation.  As  we  returned,  the  rabble 
was  noify  enough : but  they  ufed  only  their 
tongues.  So  all  was  well. 

Thurfday  16.  We  rode  with  a furious  wind/ 
full  in  our  face,  to  Chefter.  Friday  17,  and  the 
next  days  we  had  a refrefhing  feafon,  with  a lov- 
ing people,  and  in  a loving  family.  The  con- 
gregations were  not  fmall  in  the  mornings  ; in 
the  evenings  exceeding  large.  And  all  who  at- 
tended behaved,  as  if  they  not  only  underftood, 
but  relifhedthe  good  word. 

Sunday  19.  Elizabeth  Oldham  called  upon  me. 
She  told  me,  “ Some  time  fmce  my  mother  faid,” 
* Call  my  fon  to  fee  me  die.’  He  afked,  ‘ Have 
you  any  fear  of  death  ?’  She  faid,  ‘ O no.  That 
is  gone  long  fince.  Perfect  love  caffs  out  fear. 
Do  not  you  fee  him  ? There  he  is,  waiting  to 
receive  my  foul.’  She  then  fang  with  a clear 
voice, 

Praife  God  from  whom  all  bleffings  flow  : 

And  ended  her  fong  and  her  life  together. 

Every  round  my  hufband  took  lately,  being 
doubtful  when  he  took  horfe,  whether  he  fhould 
not  drop  by  the  wray  ; he  carried  a paper  in  his 
pocket,  telling  who  he  was,  and  whether  he  was 
going.  This  day  five  weeks,  being  exceeding 
weak,  he  feared  he  fhould  not  be  able  to  preach. 

But 


C 235  ] 


But  I faid,  ‘ My  dear,  go  into  the  pulpit,  and  the 
Lord  will  ftrengthen  thee.’  And  after  he  had 
fpoke  a few  words,  the  Lord  did  ftrengthen  him. 
Neither  did  he  fpeakin  vain:  many  were  com- 
forted : feveral  juflified.  One  of  thefe  faid,  “He 
is  going  to  reft  foon,  and  I (hall  go  with  him.” 
He  died  in  full  triumph  the  next  Lord’s  day  ; and 
fhe  two  hours  after.” 

“ But  a day  or  two  before  he  died,  I felt  a kind 
of  unwillingnefs  to  give  him  up.  I was  mourn- 
ing before  the  Lord  concerning  this,  when  he 
faid  to  my  inmoft  foul,  ‘ Wilt  thou  not  give  him 
back  tome,  whom  I have  fitted  for  myfelf?’  I 
faid,  ‘ Lord,  Ido,  I do  give  him  up.’  And  imme- 
diately he  changed  for  death. 

“ On  the  Sunday  following,  I was  faying  to 
my  little  maid,  (always  a ferious  and  dutiful  child, 
three  years  and  an  half  old.)  ‘ Hannah,  doft 
thou  love  God?’  She  eagerly  anfwered,  “Yes, 
mammy,  I do.”  She  added,  “ I will  go  to 
God,  I will  go  to  God leaned  down  and 
died.” 

Tuefday  21.  I went  to  Park-gate,  and  about 
eleven,  embarked  on  board  the  King  George. 
We  had  mild  weather  and  fmooth  water  all  day. 
The  next  day,  the  weft  wind  blew  frefh.  Yet 
about  five  we  were  in  Dublin-bay,  where  we 
procured  a fifhing-boat,  which  brought  us  to  Dun- 

lary. 


[ 236  ] 

lary.  Here  we  took  a cbaife,  and  got  to  Dublin 
about  eight  o’clock. 

On  Thurfday,  Friday  and  Saturday,  I laboured 
to  allay  the  ferment  which  bill  remained  in  the 
fociety.  I heard  the  preachers  face  to  face  once 
and  again,  and  endeavoured  to  remove  their  lit- 
tle mifunderftandings.  And  they  did  come  a lit- 
tle nearer  to  each  other  : but  ftill  a jealoufy  was 
left,  without  an  entire  removal  of  which,  there 
can  be  no  cordial  agreement. 

March  26.  Eafter-day.  Many  felt  the  power 
of  the  Spirit,  which  raifed  Jefus  from  the  dead. 
On  Monday  andTuefday  I vifited  theclafies,  and 
the  refult  of  my  clofeft  obfervation  xvas,  x.  That 
out  of  five  hundred  members  whom  I left  here, 
oniv  four  hundred  and  fifty  temained  : 2.  That 
near  half  of  the  believers  had  fuffered  lofs,  and 
many  quite  given  up  their  faith  : 3.  That  the 
reft  were  mote  eftablifhed  than  ever,  and  foine 
fwiftly  growing  in  grace.  So  that  confideiing 
the  heavy  ftorms  they  had  gone  through,  if  there 
was  caufe  of  humiliation  on  the  one  hand',  there 
was  on  the  other,  more  abundant  caufe  of  thank- 
fulnefs,  to  him  who  had  faved  fo  many  when  all 
the  waves  went  over  them. 

Thurfday  30.  I was  fummoned  to  the  court  of 
confcience  b\  a poor  creature  who  fed  my  horfes 
three  or  four  times  while  I v as  on  board.  For 
this  fervice  he  demanded  ten  {hillings.  I gave 
him  half  a crown.  When  I informed  the  court 

of 


[ 237  3 

of  this,  he  was  fharply  reproved:  let  all  beware 

of  thefe  land- (harks  on  our  fea-coafts  ! My 

fcraps  of  time  this  week  I employed  in  reading 
the  account  of  Commodore  Byron.  I never  be- 
fore read  of  any  who  endured  fuch  hardfhips,  and 
furvived  them.  Sure  no  novel  in  the  world  caa 
be  more  affefting,  or  more  furprizing  than  this 
hiftory. 

Monday,  April  3.  I took  horfe  at  four ; and 
notwithflanding  the  north-eaft  wind,  came  to 
Newry  before  five  in  the  evening.  It  was  fo  ex- 
tremely cold,  that  the  congregation  in  the  mar- 
ket-houfe  was  but  fmall.  The  next  evening  it 
was  confiderably  increafed.  Wednefday  5.  I 
rode  to  Terryhugan,  where  the  poor  people  had 
raifed  a tent  (fo  called)  to  fcreen  me  from  the 
north  wind.  I urged  them  with  much  enlarge- 
ment of  heart.  Not  to  receive  the  grace  of  God  in 
vain.  Thence  we  rode  to  Lifburn.  The  wind 
was  ftill  piercing  cold  : yet  it  did  not  hinder  a 
multitude  of  people  from  attending  at  the  Linen- 
hall,  an  open  fquare  fo  termed,  as  are  all  the  Li- 
nen-halls in  Ireland. 

Thurfday  6.  I defigned  to  preach  at  noon  in 
the  market-houfe  at  Belfaft.  But  it  was  pre- 
engaged  bv  a dancing-mafier  : fo  I flood  in  the 
ftreet,  which  doubled  the  congregation,  to  whom 
I ftrongly  declared.  All  have  fumed,  and  are  come . 
Jhort  of  the  glory  of  Gad.  But  ibis  many  of  them 
had  no  ears  to  hear,  being  faithful  followers  of 
Dr.  Taylor. 


Coming 


[ 238  ] 

Coming  to  Cairickfergus,  I found  it  was  the 
time  of  the  quarter  feffions.  This  greatly  in- 
creafed  the  congregation.  And  moll  of  them 
feemed  to  be  deeply  affe£fed,  rich  as  well  as  poor. 
Friday  7.  I preached  at  eleven,  and  I believe,  all 
the  gentlemen  in  the  town  were  prefent.  So 
were  all  at  Newtown  in  the  evening,  while  I in- 
forced  thofe  folemn  words,  God  now  commandelh 
all  men,  every  where.,  to  repent. 

Saturday  b.  1 returned  to  Lifburn,  where  I was 
agreeably  lurprized  by  a vifit  from  Mr.  Higgin- 
fon,  redlor  of  Ballinderry.  He  faid,  “ I was 
prejudiced  in  favour  of  the  Moravians,  fettled  in 
my  parifh,  till  the  late  affair.  One  of  my  pa- 
rilhoners,  Mr.  Campbel,  died,  leaving  by  will 
his  fortune  to  his  two  daughters,  and  in  cafe  of 
their  death,  a thoufand  pounds  to  the  poor  of  the 
parilh.  His  widow  was  extremely  ill  ; notwith- 
lianding  which,  fome  of  the  brethren,  to  whom 
{he  was  quite  devoted,  came  in  the  depth  of 
winter,  and  carried  her  by  night  feveral  miles  to 
their  houfe.  She  died  in  a few  days  after  (lie 
had  made  a will,  wherein  fhe  made  two  of  them 
executors,  a third  guardian  to  the  children;  and 
in  cafe  of  their  death,  left  the  whole  ellate  to  the 
brethren.  They  concealed  her  death  fix  days. 
Mean  time  two  of  them  went  to  Dublin,  and 
procured  letters  of  adminiftration,  and  of  guar- 
dianfhip.  Soon  after  I was  preffed,  to  undertake 
the  caufe  of  the  orphans.  I went  to  Dublin  and 

laid 


[ 239  ] 

laid  the  affair  before  the  Lord  Chancellor,  who 
after  a full  hearing,  cancelled  the  fecond  will,  and 
ordered  the  firft  to  ftand.” 

At  my  leifure  minutes  yefterday  and  to-day,  I 
read  Mr.  Glanvil’s  Sadducifmus  Triumphatus. 
But  fome  of  his  relations  I cannot  receive  ; and 
much  lefs  his  way  of  accounting  for  them.  All 
his  talk  of  Acrtal  and  AJlral  Spirits , I take  to  be 
ftark  nonfenfe.  Indeed,  fuppofing  the  fa£Is 
true,  I wonder  a man  of  fenfe  fhould  attempt  to 
account for  them  at  all.  For  w'ho  can  explain  the 
things  of  the  invifible  world,  but  the  inhabitants 
of  it? 

Tuefday  n.I  preached  in  the  market-houfe in 
Tandragee  to  one  of  the  livelieft  congregations 
in  the  kingdom.  Thurfday  and  Friday  I preach- 
ed at  Dawfon’s  Grove  and  Kihnararty  ; and  on 
Saturday  15,  rode  to  Derry  Anvil,  a little  village, 
out  of  all  road,  furiounded  with  bogs,  juft  like 
my  old  parifh  of  Wroote  in  Lincolnfhire.  The 
congregation  however  was  exceeding  large,  and 
exceeding  lively.  I talked  large  with  feveral  of 
them  who  believe  they  are  faved  from  fin,  and 
found  no  caufe  to  difbelieve  them.  And  I met 
with  many  more  in  thefe  parts,  who  witnefs  the 
fame  confeffion. 

Sunday  16.  At  nine  I preached  in  a meadow 
near  Cock-hill  to  a liftning  multitude.  I fuppofe 
we  fhould  have  had  twice  the  number  in  the 
evening;  but  the  rain  prevented.  The  grafs 

being 


[ 240  ] 

being  wet,  I flood  in  the  highway,  while 
many  flood  in  the  neighbouring  houfes.  And 
the  word  of  God  was  as  the  rain  upon  the  tender 
herb. 

Monday  17,  In  the  evening,  and  twice  on 
Tuefday  1 preached  to  a genteel,  yet  furious  au- 
dience, in  Mr.  M’Gough’s  avenue  at  Armagh. 
But  God  only  can  reach  the  heart.  Wednefdav 
10.  As  it  rained,  I chule  rather  to  preach  in  Mr. 
M’Gough’s  yard.  The  rain  increafing,  we  re- 
tired into  one  of  his  buildings.  This  was  the  firft 
time  that  I preached  in  a liable  : and  I believe 
more  good  was  done  by  this,  than  all  the  other 
fermons  I have  preached  at  Armagh. 

We  took  horfe  abotlt  ten,  being  defired  to  call 
at  Kinnard  (ten  or  eleven  miles  out  of  the  way) 
where  a [little  focietv  had  been  lately  formed, 
who  were  much  alive  to  God.  At  the  town 
end  I was  met  by  a meffenger  from  Archdea- 
con C — — e,  who  defired  I would  take  a bed 
with  him,  and  foon  after  by  another,  who  told 
me,  “ The  Archdeacon  defied  I would  alight 
at  his  door.”  I did  fo,  and  found  an  old  friend 
whom  I had  not  feen  for  four  or  five  and  thirty 
years.  He  received  me  with  the  mofl  cordial  af- 
feftion,  and  after  a time,  faid,  “ We  have  been 
building  a new  church,  which  my  neighbours 
expected  me  to  open.  But  if  you  pleafe  to  do 
it,  it  will  be  as  well.”  Hearing  the  bell,  the  peo- 
ple flocked  together,  from  all  parts  of  the  town, 
and  received  the  word  with  all  readinefs  of 

mind. 


[ *4*  ] 

mind.  I faw  the  hand  of  God  was  in  this,  for  the 
■ftrengthning  of  this  loving  people  : feveral  of 
whom  believe,  that  the  blood  of  Chrift  has 
cleanfed  them  from  all fin. 

Hence  we  rode  through  a pleafant  country  to 
Charlemount,  where  I preached  to  a very  large 
and  ferious  congregation,  near  the  Fort,  which 
has  a ditch  round  it,  with  fome  face  of  a fortifica- 
tion : and  probably  (according  to  cuftom)  cofts 
the  government  a thoufand  a year,  for  not  three 
farthings  fervice  ! 

Thurfday  20.  I went  on  to  Cafile-Caulfield, 
and  preached  on  the  green  adjoining  to  the  caftle, 
to  a plain,  ferious  people,  who  ftill  retain  all  their 
earneftnefs  and  fimplicity.  Thence  I rode  to 
Cookfiown,  a town  confiding  of  one  ftreet,  about 
a mile  long,  running  direbtly  through  a bog.  I 
preached  to  moft  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  : 
and  fo  the  next  day,  morning  and  evening. 
Many  received  the  word  with,  gladnefs.  Perhaps 
they  will  not  all  be  Jlony-ground  hearers. 

We  took  the  new  road  to  Dungevan.  But  it 
was  hard  work. 

' I 

“ Nigh  foundered  on  we  fared, 

“ Treading  the  crude  confidence.” 

We  were  near  five  hours  going  fourteen  miles, 
partly  on  horfe-back,  partly  on  foot.  We  had  as 
ufual,  a full  houfe  at  Londondeny  in  the  even- 
ing, and  again  at  eight  on  Sunday  morning.  In 
Vol.  XXXII.  L the 


[ M2  ] 

the  afternoon  we  had  a brilliant  congregation  : 
but  fuch  a fight  gives  me  no  great  pleafure ; as  I 
have  very  little  hope  of  doing  them  good  : only 
with  God  all  things  are  pojjible. 

Both  this  evening  and  the  next  I fpoke  ex- 
ceeding plain  to  the  members  of  the  fociety.  In 
no  other  place  in  Ireland  has  more  pains' been 
taken  by  the  moll  able  of  our  preachers.  And  to 
how  little  purpofe!  Bands  they  have  none:  four 
and  forty  perfons  in  the  fociety ! The  greater 
part  of  thefe  heartlefs  and  cold  : the  audience 
in  general  dead  as  Hones.  However  we  are  to 
deliver  our  melfage.  And  let  our  Lord  do  as 
feemeth  him  good. 

Tuefday  25.  I fixt  again  the  meeting  of  the 
fingers  and  of  the  children,  both  which  had  been 
difcontinued.  Indeed  a general  remiffnefs  had 
prevailed,  fince  the  morning  preaching  was  given 
up  : no  wonder  : wherever  this  is  given  up,  the 
glory  is  departed  from  us. 

Wednefday  26.  Being  to  preach  at  Brickfield, 
four  or  five  (Englifh)  miles  from  Derry,  I chofe 
walking,  to  fhew  thefe  poor  indolent  crea'ures, 
how  to  ufe  their  own  feet.  Finding  the  bulk  of 
the  hearers  quite  fenfelefs,  I fpoke  as  ftrongly  as 
I could,  on,  Where  their  worm  dieth  not,  and  the 
jire  is  not  quenched.  But  I did  not  perceive 
they  were  at  all  affefled.  God  only  can  raife  the 
dead. 

Thurfday  27.  I went  to  a village  called  The 

New 


[ 243  ] 

New  Buildings,  about  three  miles  from  the  city, 
and  preached  in  a field  near  the  town,  to  a civil, 
carelefs  congregation.  In  the  evening  I preached 
in  our  room,  on,  If  thou  canjl  believe,  all  things 
are  pojjible  to  him  that  believeth.  And  now  firft  I 
faw  a profpecl  of  doing  good  here,  (I  mean  fince 
I came  lafi.)  God  did  arife  to  maintain  his  own 
caufe  : and  the  ftout-hearted  t'rembled  before 
him. 

Friday  28.  I preached  again  at  Brickfield  ; and 
God  made  home  impreffion  on  the  ftony  hearts. 
But  much  more  at  Derry  in  the  evening.  Here 
he  fpoke  with  his  mighty  voice  : and  I believe 
many  were  juft  on  the  brink  of  believing  in  the 
name  of  the  Son  of  God. 

Sunday  28.  1 preached  to  a very  large  congre- 
gation at  The  New  Buildings,  who  now  were 
all  attention.  I preached  in  the  evening  at 
Derry,  and  having  taken  a folemn  leave  of 
the  fociety,  rode  to  Brickfield  and  flept  in 
peace. 

Monday,  May  1.  I rode  to  Augher.  It  being 
extremely  hot,  I came  in  faint  and  weary  : be- 
fore I finifhed  my  ferinon,  my  head  turned 
giddy,  and  I could  hardly  Hand.  But  I had  a good 
night’s  reft,  and  rofe  as  well  as  when  I left  Dub- 
lin. 

Tuefday  2.  I began  preaching  at  Sydare,  about 
half  hour  after  five.  And  it  was  a day  of  God’s 
power.  The  impreffion  was  general,  if  not  uni- 
verfal : none  appeared  to  be  unmoved.  This 
L 2 coniirained 


[ 244  ] 


conftrained  me  to  inlarge  in  prayer,  as  I have  not 
done  for  fome  years.  So  that  I did  not  difmifs 
the  congregation,  till  it  was  almoft  eight 
o’clock. 

Wednefday  3.  About  neon,  I preached  in  the 
market-place  at  Innilkillen,  once  inhabited  only 
by  Proteftants.  But  it  has  loll  its  glorying,  hav- 
ing now  at  leaft  five  Papifls  to  one  ProtePiant. 
There  was  a large  number  of  hearers,  feme  civil, 
fome  rude,  almoft  all  totally  unaffedied.  Thence 
I rode  fix  or  feven  miles  to  Tonny-Lommon, 
where  was  a congregation  of  quite  another  kind. 
Great  part  of  them  knew  in  whom  they  had  be- 
lieved : all  were  deeply  and  fteadily  attentive. 
And  many  were  thoroughly  convinced  of  inbred 
fin,  and  groaning  for  full  redemption. 

Thurfday  4.  I found  near  Swadling-Bar,  as 
artlefs,  as  earned,  and  as  loving  a people  as  even 
at  Tonny-Lommon  About  fix  1 preached  at  the 
town’s  end,  the  very  Papifts  appearing  as  atten- 
tive as  the  Proteftants.  And  I doubt  not,  thou- 
fands  of  thefe  would  foon  be  zealous  Chriftians, 
were  it  not  for  their  wretched  priefts,  who  will 
not  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God  themfelves, 
and  diligently  hinder  thofethat  would. 

Friday  5.  I rode  over  the  Black  Mountains,  to 
Mannor-bamilton  : fo  called  from  a poor  wretch 
who  fettled  here  in  the  laft  century,  and  was  fa- 
mous for  nothing  elfe,  but  hanging  up  all  the 
Irifh  who  fell  into  his  hands.  There  was  a gene- 
ral 


C 245  ] 

ral  love  to  the  gofpel  here,  till  fimple  R.  W. 
preached  againft  the  clergy.  ’Tis  ftrange  every 
one  does  not  fee,  1.  The  finfulnefs  of  railing  at 
the  clergy  : if  they  are  blind  leaders  of  the  blind, 
then  (fays  our  Lord)  Let  them'  alone : 2.  The 
foolijhnejs  of  it.  It  never  can  do  good  ; and  has 
frequently  done  much  harm. 

At  fix,  I preached  to  a large  congregation  in 
the  feffions-haufe.  All  behaved  well,  but  one 
young  gentlewoman,  who  laughed  almoft  incef- 
fantly.  She  knew  there  was  nothing  to  laugh  at : 
but  fhe  thought  fhe  laughed  prettily. 

Saturday  6.  In  the  evening,  I preached  near 
the  market-houfe  in  Sligo,  to  a large  and  tolerably 
quiet  congregation.  But  I foon  found  I was 
{hooting  over  their  heads,  in  talking  of  falvation 
by  faith . So  at  eight  in  the  morning,  Sunday  7. 

I fuited  myfelf  to  their  capacity,  by  preaching 
on,  Where  their  worm  dieth  not , and  the  fre  is  not 
quenched.  The  effeft  was,  that  the  evening  con- 
gregation was  fuch  as  I had  not  feen  here  for 
many  years. 

Monday  8. 1 rode  to  Caftle  barr,  and  at  feven 
preached  in  the  court- houfe.  Tuefday  9..  I dined 
at  Sir  C.  B.’s  ; who  afked  me  if  it  would  be  con- 
venient for  me  to  give  them  a ferrnon  in  his 
hall?  We  fent  to  the  court-’noufe,  and  the  peo- 
ple w'ho  were  waiting  there,  came  up  without 
delay.  The  family  were  in  the  parlour,  the  bulk 
of  the  congregation  in  the  hall  and  the  long  paf- 
L 3 fage. 


[ ] 

fage.  Wednefday  10.  I preached  in  the  court- 
houfe,  on,  Put  on  the  zihole  armour  of  God : and 
taking  horfe  early  in  the  morning,  Thurfday  11, 
rode  to  Galway. 

About  feven  I preached  in  the  feflions-houfe, 
a large  commodious  place,  where  were  hearers 
of  every  fort.  All  were  filent  and  tolerably  civil : 
fome  appeared  to  be  a little  affe&ed.  Many  offi- 
, cers  and  a confiderable  number  of  genteel  peo- 
ple attended  the  next  evening.  And  I am  in 
hopes  a few  of  them  will  not  eaftly  forget  what 
they  then  heard. 

Saturday  13.  We  rode  to  Limerick.  This 
evening  I preached  in  the  room  ; and  at  eight  in 
the  morning,  Whitfunday,  but  was  much  fcanda- 
Jized  at  the  fmallnefs  of  he  congregation.  In  the 
evening  I preached  in  the  Qld  C-unp,  where 
the  congregation  was  larger  than  it  fad  been  for 
feveral  years.  So  it  was  likewife  on  h mday  and 
Tuefday  evening.  But  fiill  I obferved  none 
wounded  among  them  ; nor  any  thing  more  than 
a calm,  dull  attention. 

V/ednefday  17.  I preached  in  Ballygarane  at 
noon,  and  in  the  evening  at  Newmarket.  One 
gentlewoman,  violently  prejudiced  againft  this 
way,  at  fit  ft  flood  at  a diftance.  Then  fhe  came 
a little  nearer  ; afterwards  fat  down,  and  in  a Ihort 
time  hid  her  face.  She  attended  again  in  the 
morning,  being  much  convinced  of  fin,  particu- 
larly of  defpifing  the  real  word  of  God. 


We 


[ 2 47  j 

We  obferved  Friday  lg,  as  a day  of  faffing  and 
prayer,  for  a revival  of  his  work.  Many  attended 
both  at  five,  nine,  and  one,  but  abundance  more 
at  the  watch-night.  And  then  it  was  that  God 
touched  the  hearts  of  the  people,  even  of  thofe 
that  were  twice  dead.  * 

Sunday  21.  I was  in  hopes  of  taking  the  field 
in  the  afternoon  ; but  the  rain  prevented.  Yet  I 
did  not  repent  of  the  difappointment ; fo  great 
was  the  power  of  God  in  the  midft  of  us.  I be- 
lieve few  were  untouched  : many  were  deeply 
wounded;  many  rejoiced  with  joy  unfpeakable. 
The  fame  power  was  prefent  the  next  morning 
and  evening,  both  to  wound  and  to  heal.  God 
employed  his  two-edged  fword  on  every  fide,  in 
a manner  I bad  not  feen  here  for  many  years.  O 
how  ready  is  he  to  anfwer  every  prayer,  that  go • 
eth  not  out  oj  feigned  lips. 

Tuefday  23.  We  had  an  evening  congregation 
at  five,  and  an  exceeding  foiemn  parting.  At  fix 
in  the  evening  I cried  to  a company  a little 
above  brutes.  Why  zoUl'ye  die,  0 houfe.  of  If  rati? 
This  was  at  Kii finnan.  1 lodged  a mile  from  the 
town,  among  fome  that  were  alive  to  God. 

Thurfday  24.  I had  a cool  pleafant  ride  to 
Cork  ; where  I foon  heard  how  cold  and  care- 
lefs  the  people  were.  I aiked,  ‘ But  are  not  the 
fociety  at  leaf!  alive  ?’  “ No.  Thefe  are  the  cold- 
eft  of  all.”  What  then  ? Are  we  to  be  carelefs 
too  ? Nay,  fo  much  the  more  let  us  ftir  up  the 
gift  of  God  that  is  in  us.  1 began  in  the  evening 
L 4 to 


[ 248  ] 

to  fpeak  exceeding  plain  : and  I prefently  faw 
fome  fruit:  the  congregation  at  five  in  the  morn- 
ing was  not  much  lefs  than  it  was  in  the  evening. 
Many  faw  their  lofs ; God  gave  me  again  very 
fharp,  though  loving  words.  I truft  this  aifo  is  a 
token  for  good,  and  Satan  fhall  not  long  triumph 
over  us. 

Friday  25.  I rode  to  Bandon.  Sirree  I was 
here  before,  fevera!  have  gone  home  rejoicing. 
But  others  are  come  in  ti  ir  place.  So  that  the 
fociety  contains  juft  as  ma  ly  members  as  when  I 
left  it.  And  moll  of  he  believers  leem  much 
alive  ; particularly  the  young  men,  maidens  and 
children. 

In  the  evening  we  were  obliged  to  be  in  the 
houfe.  But  the  next,  Friday  26,  I Hood  in  the 
main  ftreet  and  cried  to  a numerous  congrega- 
tion, Fear  God  and  keep  his  commandment s,Jor  this 
is  the  whole  of  man.  Afterwards  I vifited  one, 
that  a year  or  two  ago  was  in  high  life,  an  emi- 
nent beauty,  adored  by _ her  hufband,  admired 
and  care  fled  by  fome  of  the  firft  men  in  the  na- 
tion. She  was  now  without  hulband,  without 
friend,  without  fortune,  confined  to  her  bed,  in 
conftant  pain,  and  in  black  defpair,  believing 
herfelf  forfaken  of  God  and  polfelfed  by  a legion 
of  devils!  Yet  I found  great  liberty  in  praying 
for  her,  and  a flrong  hope,  that  Ihe  will  die  in 
peace. 

Sunday  28.  I returned  to  Cork.  The  rain 
drove  us  into  the  houfej  which  was  once  more 

throughly 


C 249  ] 


throughly  filled.  I fcarce  ever  fpoke  fo  plain  as  I 
did  both  this  and  the  two  following  days.  Yet 
for  many  years  the  congregations  have  not  been 
fo  large.  Wednefday  and  Thurfday  I vifited  the 
dalles.  Decreafing  Hill ! Seven  years  ago  we  had 
near  four  hundred  members  in  this  city;  five 
years  fince,  about  three  hundred  members.  Two 
years  ago  they  were  two  hundred ; now  one 
hundred  and  ninety.  On  Thurfday  evening, 
June  1,  I preached  at  Blackpool,  to  fuch  a con- 
gregation as  I never  faw  there  before.  Friday  2. 
We  obferved  as  a day  of  fading  and  prayer.  At 
five  and  at  nine  we  found  God  was  with  us;  but 
much  more  at  one,  and  moll  of  all  at  the  watch- 
night,  during  the  application  of  thofe  awful 
words,  Where  their  worm  dieth  not , and  the  fire  is 
not  quenched. 

Saturday  3.  I preached  at  Blackpool  again. 
Again  multitudes  of  publicans  and  finners  drew 
near,  and  gladly  heard  that  there  is  joy  in  heaven 
over  one  fiinner  that  repenteth.  Sunday  4.  The  rain 
again  prevented  my  preaching  at  the  Barrack- 
hill.  But  God  was  again  prefent  at  the  roonv 
and  filled  many  fouls  with  ftrong  confolation.. 
When  I took  my  leave  of  the  fociety,  many 
were  moved,  fearing  we  fhould  meet  no  more. 
If  not,  is  it  not  enough  that  we  fhould  meet 
again,  at  the  refurreflion  of  the  jud  ? 

Monday  5.  Having  been  much  importuned,  to 
give  them  a day  or  two  more,  I rode  to  Lime- 
L 5 rick.. 


C 25o  ] 

rick.  Tuefday  6.  I looked  over  Mr.  Turner’s 
Remarkable  Providences.  What  pity  is  it,  that  the 
author  had  not  a little  judgment  as  well  as  piety! 
What  an  heap  of  things  has  he  huddled  together, 
good,  bad  and  indifferent!  But  how  fine  a treatife 
might  a man  of  fenfe  colled!  out  of  it  ? After  en- 
couraging as  many  as  I could  both  in  public  and 
private,  to prefs  on  toward  the  mark , on  Thurfday 
8. 1 once  more  took  my  leave  of  this  loving  peo- 
ple, and  fet  out  for  Waterford.  We  intended  to 
dine  at  Tipperary,  but  were  diredled  wrong.  At 
length  we  ftumbled  on  a little  town,  called  Gold- 
ing. And  here  I found  poor  Michael  Wefton, 
who  rambled  hither  from  Weftminfter,  fome 
months  fince,  in  queft  of  an  ellate.  I clearly  fa w 
the  providence  of  God,  diredling  me  hither,  be- 
fore he  was  quite  ftarved.  Thence  we  rode  to 
the  Garter,  near  Clonmell,  (where  we  had  ex- 
cellent entertainment :)  and  the  next  morning, 
over  exceeding  pleafant  ami  well- cultivated 
mountains,  to  Waterford. 

Never  was  the  profpeft  more  gloomy  here 
than  at  prefent.  Through  tire  continual  negledl 
of  the  preachers,  the  congregation  was  reduced 
aixo'ft  to  nothing:  and  fo  w«s  the  fociety.  Yet 
1 found  much  liberty  of  fpeech  in  the  evening, 
and  a ftrong  hope,  that  God  would  revive  his 
work. 

I was  invited  to  lodge  at  Mr.  Scot’s,  a confr- 
derable  tradefinan.  I found  a young  gentlewo- 


man 


[ a.51  ] 

man  there,  a vifitant,  well-bred,  fenfible,  good- 
humoured  ; fludious  to  oblige,  and  lacking  no- 
thing, but  the  one  thing.  Saturday  10.  The  room 
was  quite  filled  in  the  morning.  In  the  evening 
I preached  in  the  court,  to  thrice  as  many  as  the 
room  would  contain.  And  all  were  not  only  quiet 
but  attentive. 

Sunday  1 1.  The  congregation  at  eight  was  ftill 
larger.  But  not  many  feemed  to  be  unaffefled. 
In  the  evening  the  court  was  filled,  and  I be- 
lieve God  opened  both  the  underftanding,  and 
the  hearts  of  many.  Afterwards  I met  the  fociety, 
and  endeavoured  to  lift  up  the  hands  that  hung 
down.  Light  began  to  fpring  up.  Mifunderftand- 
ings  vanifhed  away,  and  the  fpirits  of  many  re- 
vived. 

Monday  12.  I laboured  to  re-unite  the  poor, 
fhattered  fociety,  and  to  remove  the  numberlefs 
offences  which  had  torn  them  in  pieces.  Tuef- 
day  13.  In  the  evening  God  began  to  anfwerfor 
himfelf.  I fcarce  ever  faw  a more  deep  and  ge- 
neral impreffion  made  on  a congregation.  At  the 
meeting  of  the  fociety  likewife,  he  refrefhed  us 
with  the  multitude  of  peace. 

Wednefday  14.  I preached  in  the  market- 
houfe  at  Paffage,  to  as  dull  a congregation  as  1 
have  feen-.  They  would  have  been  rude  enough 
too,  but  that  they  flood  in  awe  of  Mr.  Freeftone, 
who  gave  one  and  another,  when  they  did  not 
regard  his  figns,  a ftroke  on  the  head  with  his 
L6  flick. 


[ 252  ] 

flick.  By  this  means  the  whole  multitude  was 
tolerably  quiet,  and  many  feemed  much  affe&ed. 

A little  before  twelve  I came  to  Old  Rofs,  and 
preached  to  a fmall,  ferious  congregation. 
Thence  we  went  on  to  Innifcorthy  : but  the  dif- 
ficulty was,  where  I fhould  preach  ? It  rained, 
but  no  houfe  would  contain  the  people.  We 
made  the  belt  fhiit  we  could,  by  flowing  as  many 
as  pofftble  in  the  houfe:  the  reft,  as  I flood  near 
the  door,  w'ere  quiet  without.  It  was  an  uncom- 
mon time,  particularly  with  regard  to  thofe  who 
had  oppofed  the  truth.  One  dropt  down  like  a 
ftone  ; many  trembled  and  wept  exceedingly. 
All  declared,  that  fuch  a work  as  this,  was  never 
feen  at  Innifcorthy  before. 

Thurfday  15. 1 began  to  preach  a little  before 
five,  on  the  kingdom  of  God  within  us.  The  hearts 
of  the  hearers,  one  and  all,  feemed  to  be  as  melt- 
ing wax.  Surely  it  was  not  for  nothing,  that  Sa- 
tan fought  fo  furioufly,  to  keep  the  gofpel  from 
this  place. 

Indeed  there  has  not  been  hotter  perfecution 
of  late  years  any  where  in  the  kingdom  than 
here.  The  mob  encouraged  by  their  fuperiors, 
beat  and  abufed  whom  they  pleafed,  broke  open 
their  houfes,  and  did  juft  what  they  lifted.  A 
wretched  clergyman  confirmed  them  therein, 
and  applied  to  the  Methodift  preachers,  2 Tim. 
iit.  6,  7,  (the  very  text  of  that  unhappy  gentle- 
man at  Briftol,  which  he  uttered  and  dropped 
flown  in  the  pulpit)  After  he  had  painted  them 

' as 


L 253  ] 

as  black  as  devils,  he  added,  “ 1 have  not  time  to 
“ finifh  now  : next  Sun.  I will  give  you  the  reft. 
But  the  next  morning  he  was  {truck  in  a ftrange 
manner.  He  could  not  bear  to  be  a moment 
alone.  He  cried  out,  “ i hofe  hobgoblins,  do 
not  you  fee  them  ? There,  t'n^re  ! The  room  is 
full  of  them.”  Having  continued  thus  fome 
days,  he  (creamed  out,  “ See  that  hobgoblin  at 
the  bed’s  feet  ! O that  roll,  that  roll  which  he 
holds  up  to  me  ! All  my  fins  are  written  therein.-’ 
Not  long  after,  without  {hewing  the  lead  fign  of 
hope,  he  went  to  his  account. 

In  the  afternoon  I came  to  Kilkenny,  and  in  the 
evening  preached  in  the  Tholfel.  A more  civil 
and  unawakened  audience,  I know  not  when  I 
have  feen.  The  bulk  of  them  appeared  to  be  no 
more  affefted,  than  if  I had  been  talking  Greek. 
However  many  of  them  attended  the  next  morn- 
ing, and  more  than  ever  in  the  evening.  And 
all  behaved  well  but  one  gentleman,  who  took 
much  pains  to  divert  thofe  that  were  near  him. 

I fixed  my  eyes  upon  him,  but  he  did  not  regard 
it.  I was  then  obliged  to  fpeak  to  him  ; and  he 
was  filent. 

Saturday  17.  I finifired  “ Hiftoric  doubts  on 
“ the  Life  and  reign  of  Richard  the  third.” 
What  an  amazing  monfter  both  in  body  and  mind 
have  our  hiftorians  and  poets  painted  him  ! And 
yet  I think  Mr.  Walpole  makes  it  more  clear, 
than  one  could  expe£t  at  this  diflance  of  time,  1. 

“ That  he  was  not  only  not  remarkably  deform- 
ed,  but  on  the  contrary  remarkably  handfome. 

2.  That 


[ 2 <54  ] 

2.  That  his  Queen,  whom  he  entirely  loved, 
died  a natural  death.  3.  That  his  nephew,  Ed- 
ward the  fifth,  did  fo  too  : there  being  no  fhadow 
of  proof  to  the  contrary.  4.  That  his  other  ne- 
phew Richard,  was  the  very  perfon  whom  Henry 
the  feventh  murdered,  after  conflraining  him  to 
call  himfell  Perkin-W arheck.  5.  That  the  death 
of  his  brother,  the  Duke  of  Clarence,  was  the  foie 
aft,  not  of  him,  but  Edward  the  fourth.  6.  That  he 
had  no  hand  at  all  in  the  murder  of  Henry  the  fixth, 
any  more  than  of  his  fon.  And  laflly,  That  he 
was  clear  of  all  blame,  as  to  the  execution  of 
Lord  Haltings  : as  well  as  of  Rivers,  Grey,  and 

Vaughan.” What- a furprizing  thing  is  it  then 

that  all  our  hiltorians  fhould  have  fo  readily  fwal- 
lowed  the  account  of  that  wretch  who  killed , 
and  alfo  took  pojfejfion  of  the  throne  : and  blun- 
dered on  one  after  another  ? Only  it  is  to  be 
obferved,  for  fifty  years,  no  one  could  contra- 
di£l  that  account,  but  at  the  peril  of  his  head. 

Sunday  18.  As  it  rained,  I preached  morn- 
ing and  evening  in  the  Tholfel,  to  a multitude 
of  people.  I fpoke  exceeding  plain,  and  all 
received  it  in  love.  Perhaps  fome  may  bring 
forth  fruit. 

Mond.  19.  In  the  evening  I preached  at  Birr, 
and  removed  fome  mifunderllandings  wThich  had 
crept  into  the  fociety.  Tuefday  20.  I went  on 
to  Aghrim,  and  fpoke  as  plain  as  poffibly  I could 
to  a money-loving  people,  on  God faid  unto  him. 
Thou  fool ! But  I am  afraid  many  of  them  are  fer- 

mon- 


[ 255  ] 


mon-Droof.  Yet  God  has  all  power.  And  fome- 
times  he  fends,  when  and  whe-re  it  pleases  hinj, 

“ O’erwhelming  fliowers  of  faving  grace. 


But  I have  never  obferved  thefe  to  lad  long.  And 
in  all  the  intervals  of  them,  he  aSls  by  his  Hand- 
ing rule,  Unto  him , that  hath,  and  ufes  what  he 
hath  Jkall  be  given  : and  he  Jhall  have  more  abun- 
dantly : but  from  him  that  hath,  not , ufes  it  not, 
Jhall  be  taken  away  even  that  he  hath. 

Wednefday  21.  I went  on  to  Athlone.  Friday 
23.  I rode  to  Abidarrig,  to  the  quarterly  meet- 
ing. Many  of  the  people  came  from  far : and 
God  gave  them  a good  reward  for  their  labour. 
Saturd,  2q.  We  returned  to  Athlone.  Sund.  25. 
In  the  afternoon  I Hood  in  Barrack-Street,  and 
cried  aloud  to  a mixt  multitude,  Behold  I ftand 
at  the  door  and  knock.  I never  before  faw  fo 
quiet  a congregation  on  this  fide  the  water.  There 
was  not  only  no  tumult,  but  no  murmur  to  be 
heard,  no  fmile  to  be  feen  on  any  face. 

Monday  26.  About  noon,  I preached  on  the 
Green,  at  Clara,  to  an  exceeding  ferious  congre- 
gation : and  in  the  evening  at  Tuilarnore.  Tuef. 
27.  I found  a little  increafe  in  the  fociety.  But 
there  cannot  be  much  without  more  field-preach- 
ing. Wherever  this  is  intermitted,  the  work 
of  God  Hands  Hill,  if  it  does  not  go  back. 

To-day,  I wrote  to  a pious  and  fenfible  wo- 
man as  follows 


Tuilarnore, 


C *56  ] 

Tullamore,  27th  June,  1769* 

Dear  Madam, 

“ When  I had  the  pleafure  of  converfing  with 
you  fome  years  fince,  you  had  a regard  both  for 
me,  and  the  people  called  Methodifts.  II I am 
rightly  informed  you  are  now  of  another  mind. 
May  I alk,  when  did  that  change  begin  ? Was  it 
at  your  laft  journey  to  Dublin  ? Whenever  it 
was.  Suffer  me  to  afk,  What  were  the  reafons  of 
it  ? I will  tell  you  what  I conje&ure,  and  I do  it 
in  writing  becaufe  I may  not  have  an  opportuni- 
ty of  talking  with  you  ; becaufe  I can  write  more 
freely  than  I could  fpeak  : becaufe  I can  now 
fay  all  1 have  to  fay  at  once  : whereas,  if  we 
were  talking  together,  I might  probably  forget 
fome  part  : and  becaufe  you  may  by  this  means 
have  the  better  opportunity  of  calmly  confider- 
ing  it. 

“ I conje&ure,  (to  tell  you  juft  what  raifes  in 
my  heart)  that  this  change  was  owing  to  feveral 
caufes.  Some  admired  and  commended  you  as  a 
perfon  of  uncommon  fenfe  and  uncommon  attain- 
ments in  religion.  Others  told  you  at  large  from 
time  to  time,  all  the  real  or  fuppofed  faults  of  the 
Methodifts,  In  particular,  the  jarrs  which  had 
lately  been  in  Dublin,  on  account  of  Mr.  Mor- 
gan and  Olivers.  This  naturally  tended  to  breed 
and  increafe  pride  on  the  one  hand,  and  prejudice 
on  the  other.  Riches  increafed  : which  not  only 
led  you  ftep  by  ftep  into  more  comfcrmily  to  the 
world,  but  infenfibly  inftilled  felf-importance,  un- 

willingnefs 


C *57  j 

willinefs  to  be  contradicted,  and  an  over-bearing 
temper.  And  hence  you  was  of  courfe  difguded 
at  thofe  who  did  not  yield  to  this  temper,  and 
blamed  that  conformity.  Perhaps  fome  of  thefe 
profeiTedor  expected  to  be  perfeBed  in  love . They 
at  leafl  believed  perfeBion.  Now  this  you  feemed 
- to  hate  with  a perfeCt  hatred:  and  on  that  ac- 
count dillt  ked  them  the  more. 

“ Permit  me  to  add  a few  words  on  each  of 
thefe  heads.  And  firft  would  it  not  be  well,  if 
you  darted  back  from  every  appearance  of  ad- 
miration (which  you  know  is  deadly  poifon)  whe- 
ther on  account  of  your  fenfe  or  piety  ? Aodifyou 
utterly  difcountenanced  all,  who  direCVly  or  in- 
direCtly  commended  you  to  ) our  face  ? Yea,  and 
all  who  told  you  of  the  jarrs  or  faults  of  the  Metho- 
difts  ? Or  indeed  of  any  abfent  perfon  ? 

“ Should  you  not  earnedly  drive  and  pray 
againd  thinking  highly  of  your  own  underdand- 
ing,  or  attainments  in  religion  ? Otherwife  this, 
by  grieving  the  Holy  Spirit,  would  expofe  you  to 
dill  more  prejudice  ; efpecially  towards  thofe 
who  might  feem  to  vie  with  you  in  religion,  if 
not  in  underdanding. 

“ Can  you  be  too  fenfible,  how  hardly  they  that 
have  riches  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ? 
Yea,  or  into  the  kingdom  of  an  inward  heaven  p 
Into  the  whole  fpirit  of  the  gofpel  ? Plow  hard  is 
it  for  thefe  (whether  you  do  or  no)  not  to  conform 
too  much  to  the  world  ! How  hard  not  to  be  a 
little  overbearing , efpecially  to  inferiors  ? 

“ Is 


[ 25  8 ] 

*'  Is  it  right  to  be  dijgujled  at  triofe  who  fear 
you  conform  too  far:  who  do  not  fir. ! do  /n 
before  you  ? Nay,  perhaps  oppofe  youv  judgment, 
or  blame  your  pra&ice  : 

6‘  And  with  regard  to  perfection.  Have  not 
they  that  hold  it,  the  fain  at  to  be  angry  w;h 

you  for  denying  it,  as  yo  n them  for  affirm- 

ing it  ? 

“ But  what  is  it  you  are  angry  at  ? What  is  it 
you  objeft  o ? Let  us  undei  nd  the  gueftion, 
before  we  difpute  about  it. 

“ By  Chriftian  perfection  I mean  1.  Lc  g 
God  with  all  our  heart.  Do  you  oojeft  to  this  i'  I 
mean,  2.  A heart  and  life  all  devoted  to  God. 
Do  you  defire  lefs  ? I mean,  3.  Regaining  the 
whole  image  of  God.  What  objection  to  this  ? I 
mean,  4.  Having^// the  mi’id  that  was  in  Chrift.  Is 
this  going  too  far  ? I mean,  5.  Walking  uniformly 
as  Chrift  walked.  And  this  furely  no  Chriftian  w ill 
objeCt  to. — If  any  one  means  any  thing  more,  or 
any  thingelfe  by  perfection  I have  no  concern  with 
it.  But  if  this  is  wrong,  yet  what  need  of  this  heat 
about  it,  this  violence,  I had  almoft  faid  fury  ofop- 
pofttion?  Carried  fo  far  as  even  not  to  lay  out  anv 
thing  with  this  man,  or  that  woman  who  profef- 

fes  it.  “ Nay  fays  Mrs. 1 did  not  refrain 

from  it  for  this  only  ; but  for  their  efpoufing 
Mr.  Oliver’s  caufe  againft  Mr.  Morgan.” 
Worfe  and  worfe  ! what  are  people  to  ftarve  (at 
leaft  for  me)  unlefs  they  think  as  I think,  or  like 

whom 


[ 259  ] 

whom  I like  ? Alas,  what  religion,  what  numa- 
nity,  what  romaon  fenfe  is  this  ? 

“ But  I have  done.  I have  once  for  all  taken 
upon  myfelf  a molt  unthankful  office.  I ha\  e 
fpoken  with  all  piainnefsand  fimplicity,  and  now 
leave  the  event  to  God.  May  he  open  your  heart 
that  you  may  difcern  his  holy,  and  acceptable, 
and  perfeft  will,  that  you  may  have  a right  judg- 
ment in  all  things  and  evermore  rejoice  in  his 
holy  comfort. 

I am,  Dear  Madam, 

Your  affe&ionate  fervant, 

JOHN  WESLEY.” 

Wednefday  28.  I rode  to  Mountmelick,  and 
for  the  fake  of  fome  tender  perfons,  preached  in 
the  new  houfe.  It  was  a foletnn  time  ; in  conf'e- 
quence  of  which  it  was  pretty  well  filled  in  the 
morning.  A ferious  awe  fpread  over  the  whole 
congregation  : but  more  remarkably  the  next 
evening,  while  I was  opening  and  applying  the 
Itory  of  Dives  and  Lazarus.  Friday  30,  I rode 
over  to  Montrath,  a wild  place  as  molt  in  Ireland, 
and  preached  in  the  (hell  of  a new  houfe  to  many 
more  than  it  would  contain.  All  were  quiet  and 
attentive.  In  the  middle  of  the  fermon  a young 
woman  who  was  a /inner,  endeavoured  for  a 
while  to  hide  her  tears,  by  creeping  behind  ano- 
ther, till  in  a few  minutes  her  ftrength  failed,  and 

ffie 


[ 2 6o  J 

frte  funk  down  to  the  ground,  I was  forry  they 
carried  her  away  ; otherwife  I think  fbe  would 
have  foon  lifted  up  her  head  with  joy. 

In  the  evening  we  had  a iove-fealt  at  Mount- 
melick,  and  great  was  our  rejoicing  in  the  Lord. 
Many  were  filled  with  confolation,  trailing  he 
would  foon  make  an  end  of  /in,  and  bring  in  eve r- 
lajling  righteoufnefs. 

Saturday,  July  1.  I Found  a far  different  face  of 
things  at  Portarlington.  Thefociety  had  once  an 
hundred  and  thirty  members : (an  hundred  and 
four  I joined  in  three  days.)  It  had  now  no  more 
than  twenty  four  ; and  fome  of  thefe  had  only  a 
name  to  live.  In  the  evening  I applied  particularly 
to  the  backfliders.  But  almofl:  as  foon  as  I began, 
alage  company  of  quality  (as  they  called  them) 
came. and  embarralfed  me  not  a little,  I knew 
this  was  heathen  Greek  to  them.  But  I could  not 
then  change  my  fubjeft.  However  I diluted  my 
difcourfe  as  much  as  I could,  that  it  might  not  be 
quite  too  ftrong  for  their  digeltion. 

Sun.  2.  I read  Mrs.  Row’s  “ devout  exercifes 
of  the  heart”.  It  is  far  fuperior  to  any  thing  of 
her’s  which  I ever  read,  in  flile  as  well  as  in 
fenfe.  Her  experience  is  plain,  found  and  fcrip- 
tural,  no  way  whimfical  or  myftical.  And  her 
language,  is  clear,  firong  and  fimple  without  any 
of  that  affeffted  floridnefs  ; which  offends  all  who 
have  a tolerable  ear,  or  any  judgment  in  good 
writing. 

At  nine  we  had  a ferious  congregation,  to 
^ whom 


[ 261  ] 

whom  I could  fpeak  of  the  deep  things  of  God. 
And  the  new  houfe  held  them  tolerably  well  : 
but  in  the  evening  it  was  far  too  fmall.  Sol  flood 
in  a little  ground  adjoining  to  the  houfe.  Many 
tender  ones  fat  within,  but  the  bulk  of  the  congre- 
gation flood  in  the  meadow,  and  the  gardens  on 
each  fide.  I have  not  feen  in  all  the  world  a peo- 
ple fo  eafy  to  be  convinced  or  perfwaded  as  the 
Irifh.  What  pity  that  thefe  excellent  propenfi- 
ties  fhould  not  always  be  applied  to  the  mofl  ex- 
cellent purpofes  ! 

Monday  3.  I rode  to  Coolylough  (where  was 
the  quarterly  meeting)  and  preached  at  eleven : 
and  in  the  evening.  While  we  were  finging,  I 
was  furprized  to  fee  the  horfes  from  all  parts  of 
the  gound  gathering  about  us.  Is  it  true  then 
that  horfes,  as  well  as  lions  and  tigers,  have  an 
ear  for  mufic  P 

Wednef.  3.  I went  on  to  Tyrrelfpafs.  Thurf- 
day  6.  at  eleven  I preached  in  the  Court-houfe 
at  Molinger,  to  a very  genteel,  and  yet  ferious 
audience.  In  the  evening  I preached  at  Tyrrelf- 
pafs again  ; and  on  Friday  7.  at  Edinaerry.  Here 
I received  from  Jofeph  Fry,  a particular  account 
of  his  late  wife,  an  Ifraelite  indeed.  Hefaid  “ She 
“ was  a drift  attendant  on  all  the  means  of  grace, 
and  a fincere  lover  of  the  people  of  God.  She  had 
a remarkably  good  underflanding,  and  much 
knowledge  of  the  things  of  God.  Though  fhe  was 
of  an  exceeding  bafhful  temper,  yet  fhe  was  va- 
-liant  for  the  truth  ; not  fparing  to  fpeak  very 

plain 


[ 262  ] 

plain  in  defence  of  it,  before  perfons  ofa'l  con- 
ditions. Two  years  ago  {he  began  to  lofe  her 
health,  and  grew  worfe  and  worfe  till  September 
29th.  On  that  day  fhe  was  very  refilefs.  Obferv- 
ingher  to  have  an  unufual  colour,  I judged,  fhe 
could  not  continue  long.  She  was  fenhble  of  it, 
and  faid,  ‘ Do  not  go  from  me ; for  my  time  is 
fhort.  O ! it  is  an  hard  thing  to  die  !’  After  a 
while  (he  faid,  Dear  Jefus,  fhall  it  be  fo  with  me 
as  with  the  wicked  ?’  1 was  deeply  affe&ed  at  fee- 
ing her  in  luch  a Hate  : yet  fomenting  told  me, 
ail  will  be  well.  I exhorted  her  with  all  my  might 
to  lean  on  Jefus  : and  found  myfelf  unfually  bleft 
in  fo  doing.  But  Hill  {he  did  not  feem  to  re- 
ceive it,  till  I obferved  her  jaw  was  fallen.  I was 
then  concerned  more  than  ever,  left  fhe  fhould 
die  without  hope.  I fpoke  with  more  vehemence, 
while  lhe  lay  fpeechlefs,  with  her  eyes  up  to 
heaven.  But  on  a fudden,  flte  got  her  lips  toge- 
ther again,  and  faid  with  a loud  voice,  ‘ Now,  my 
love,  I experince  what  you  have  faid.  After  aft, 
my  Jefus  is  mine.  The  devil  is  conquered  : there, 
there',  ou  may  fee  him  going  with  {hame.’  She 
then  praifed  God  fo  loud,  that  one  might  hear 
her  in  the  ftreet ; and  added.  ‘ Fine  fport,  my 
dear  Joe,  the  devil  is  cait.’  After  rejoicing  in  God 
fome  time,  {he  clofed  her  eyes  : but  in  a little 
while  lhe  faid,  ‘ O was  it  not  very  pretty 
when  the  wife  virgins  went  otu  in  white,  to  meet 
their  Lord  ? Yet  what  would  their  robes  have 

fignified, 


[ z63  1 

fignified,  without  his  righteoufnefs  ?’ — And 
died.” 

The  next  day  I went  on  to  Dublin,  and  found 
all  things  as  quiet  as  I left  them.  Wednefday  12. 
I r<>de  through  a lovely  country  to  Ballymore,  in 
the  county  of  Wexford.  Near  twenty  years  ago, 
ail  tb  ; rouniry  was  moved  by  the  preaching  of 
James  Mo  .ns,  Thoufands  flocked  to  hear:  but 
one  falfe  itep  of  his  quite  fcattered  them  again. 
The  houfe  would  not  near  contain  the  people  : 
fo  I flood  abroad,  in  a fair  mild  evening.  And 
once  more  God  has  given  them  a loud  call,  to 
turn  unto  him,  that  they  may  fave  their  fouls 
alive. 

Thurfday  13.  I rode  on  to  Innifcorthy,  and 
preached  on,  Is  there  no  balm  in  Gilead  ? To  day 
I faw  one  of  the  mofl  lively  and  fenfxbie  children 
that  I have  met  wiih  in  the  kingdom.  What  a 
miracle  will  it  be,  if  flie  fnves  her  foul ! If  general 
admiration  does  not  dePrroy  her  ! 

Hence  I rode  to  Bunklcdy,  a little,  ugly,  fcat- 
tered town  : but  delightfully  fuuated.  I did 
not  find  1 hat  five  perfons  in  the  town  would  come 
a bow-fhot  to  hear.  So  I ordered  a table  to  be  fet 
in  the  flreet,  and  a few  (lowly  crept  together. 
They  were  as  quiet  and  feemed  as  much  aflfedled 
as  thdtrees.  Thence  I rode  on  to  Carlow.  The 
under-fheriff  had  promifed  the  ufe  of  the  town- 
hall.  But  the  high  fheriff  coming  to  town,  would 
not  fuffer  it.  I thank  him  : for  by  this  means  I 
was  driven  to  the  Barrack-field,  where  were  twice 


as 


[ a64  ] 

as  many  as  the  hall  could  have  contained  : over 
and  above  many  of  the  poor  Papifls  who  durfl 
not  have  come  into  it.  Afterwards  I met  the  little 
fociety.  I ufed  to  wonder  they  did  not  increafe. 
Now  I fhould  wonder  if  they  did  : fo  exquifitely 
bitter  are  the  chief  of  them  againfVthe  church. 

I folemnly  warned  them  againft  this  evil  : and 
fome  of  them  had  ears  to  hear. 

Friday  14.  At  noon  I preached  in  Baltinglafs. 
to  an  handful  of  ferious  people  : and  in  the  even- 
ing, at  Donard,  to  a much  more  numerous,  but 
not  more  ferious  congregation.  I could  not  but  ob- 
serve one  pretty  kind  of  woman,  with  a child  in 
her  arms.  She  flood  awhile  : then  walked  to  and 
fro  : then  flood  : then  walked  again  ; and  appear- 
ed as  perfectly  unconcerned,  as  fome'pretty  calves, 
which  flood  behind  her.  Saturday  15.  I croff- 
ed  the  country  to  my  old  pupil,  Mr.  Morgans, 
and  in  the  afternoon  returned  to  Dublin. 

All  the  following  week  we  had  a remarkable 
bleffing  both  at  the  morning  and  evening  fer- 
vice.  On  Wednefday  and  Thurfday  we  had  our 
little  conference,  at  which  moll  of  the  preachers 
in  the  kingdom  were  prefent.  W e agreed  to  fet 
apart  Friday  the  21ft  for  a day  of  falling  and  pray- 
er. At  every  meeting,  particularly  the  laft,  our 
Lord  refrefhed  us  in  an  uncommon  manner. 
About  ten  I was  a little  tired  : but  before  it 
flruck  twelve,  my  wearinefs  was  all  gone.  It 
feemed  to  be  the  fame  with  all  the  congregation, 
and  prayer  was  fwallowed  up  in  praife. 


Sunday 


C 265  ] 

Sunday  23.  At  nine  I preached  in  the  Royal 
fquare  at  the  Barracks,  on  The  dead , [mall  and 
great  j landing  before  God.  An  huge  multitude 
foon  gathered  together  and  liftenedwith  deep  at- 
tention. Many  of  the  foldiers  were  among  them. 
By  what  but  field-preaching  could  we  have 
reached  thefe  poor  fouls  F 

Monday  24.  After  preaching  in  the  evening,  I 
went  on  board  the  pacquet,  and  the  next  after- 
noon, landed  at  Holyhead.  We  reached  Chefter 
on  Thurfday  morning.  Here  I finifhed  Dr.  War- 
ner’s hifiory  of  the  Irilh  rebellion.  I never  faw 
before,  fo  impartial  an  account  of  the  tranfaftions 
of  thofe  times.  He  really  feems  to  be  of  no  fide, 
but  to  fpeak  the  naked  truth  of  all,  according  to 
the  bed  light  he  could  procure. 

Friday  28.  I rode  to  Manchelter.  As  we  were 
pretty  well  tired,  our  friends  there  infilled  on  my 
going  on  in  a chaife.  So  in  the  morning,  Satur. 
29,  we  fet  out.  When  we  were  on  the  brow  of 
the  hill  above  Rippondale,  fuddenly  the  faddle- 
horfe  fell,  with  the  driver  under  him,  and  both 
lay  without  motion.  The  lhaft-horfe  then  boggl- 
ed and  turned  Ihort,  toward  the  edge  ofthe  pre- 
cipice. But  prefently  the  driver  and  horfe  rofe  up 
unhurt,  and  we  went  on  fafe  to  Leeds. 

Sunday  30.  Mr.  Crook  being  out  of  order,  I 
read  players  and  preached  in  Hunflet  church, 
both  morning  and  afternoon.  At  five  I preached 
at  Leeds,  and  on  Monday  31,  prepared  all  things 
for  the  enfuing  conlerence.  Tuefday,  Auguft  1. 
Vol.  XXXII.  M It 


[ 266  ] 

It  began,  and  a more  loving  one  we  never  had. 
On  Thurfday  I mentioned  the  cafe  of  our  breth- 
ren at  New  York,  who  had  built  the  firll  Me- 
thodilfpreaching-houfe  in  America,  and  were  in 
great  want  of  money,  but  much  more  of  preach- 
ers. Two  of  our  preachers,  Richard  Boardman, 
andjofeph  Pillmoor,  willingly  offered  themfelves 
for  the  fervice  : by  whom  we  determined  to  fend 
them  fifty  pounds,  as  a token  of  our  brotherly  love. 

Saturday  5.  In  the  evening  I preached  at  Brad 
ford  to  an  extremely  crowded  audience.  The 
heat  was  hardly  fupportable.  Such  a day  I had 
feldom,  if  ever,  known  in  England.  It  was  nearly 
as  hot  at  four  in  the  morning,  Sunday  6.  But  the 
rain  began  before  five,  and  in  three  or  four  hours 
quite  cooled  the  air.  At  One  we  had,  the  ufual 
congregation  on  the  fide  ol  Birftal-hill.  But  it  was 
nearly  doubled  at  Leeds  in  the  evening.  Mon- 
day 7.  I returned  to  Manchefler  ; and  on  Tuef- 
day  8.  Went  on  to  Shrew  {bury.  1 preached  at 
five  ; and  foon  after,  receiving  an  invitation 
from  Mr.Powis,  at  Berwick.  I went  over  direilly, 
gave  a fhort  exhortation,  and  returned  to  Sa'op. 

Wednefday  9.  We  reached  Welchpcol  before 
nine,  where  notice  had  been  given  of  my  preach- 
ing, the  bailiffbaving  granted  the  ufe  of  theTown- 
hall.  But  he  had  now  changed  his  mind.  So 
rode  on  to  New  Town,  and  at  one  we  went  to 
the  market-houfe.  But  in  a few  minutes  a poor 
wretch  exceeding  drunk,  came  in  curbing  and 
blafpheming,  and  linking  all  that  Hood  in  his  way. 

His 


[ s67  ] 

His  flick  was  foon  taken  from  him  : but  the  noife 
increafing,  I removed  to  the  Brynn,  and 
quietly  flnifhed  my  difcourfe. 

At  fix  in  the  evening  I preached  at  the  Tuffln, 
the  next  morning,  at  Lanidlos,  and  in  the  even- 
ing, at  the  Abbey.  Friday  ti.  I reached  Car- 
marthen ; The  rain  continuing,  Mr.  Peter  Wil- 
liams offered  me  his  preaching-houfe,  in  which 
I inforced,  God  forbid  that  I fwuld  glory,  Jave  in 
the  cr  of s of  our  ord  Jfefus  Chrijl.  Saturday  12.  I 
preached  at  Haverford-Weft,  Sunday  13.  1 went 
to  St.  Daniel’s  and  after  reading  prayers,  preach- 
ed on  thofe  words  in  the  fecond  lefibn,  What 
God  hath  tlcanfd,  that  call  not  thou  common.  The 
bitrots  of  all  fides  feemed  afhamed  before  God, 
and  I truft  will  not  foon  forget  this  day.  In  the 
afternoon  I real  prayers  and  preached  again.  I 
then  met  the  fociety  in  Pembroke.  Once  more 
their  little  jars  are  laid  afleep  : God  grant  they 
may  rife  no  more. 

Monday  14.  I preached  in  the  town-hall, ' to 
almofl  all  the  gentry  in  Pembroke.  And  I think 
whatever  they  had  before,  they  had  then  aclear 
call  from  God.  Tuefday  15.  In'  the  evening 
altho’  the  wind  was  high,  yet  the .la  genefs  of  the 
congregation  obliged  me  to  ffand  on  the  outfide 
of  the  houfe  at  Haverford-Weft.  Wednefday  16I 
examined  the  members  of  the  fociety,  now  the 
moft  lively  one  in  Wales.  Many  of  them  are  re- 
joicing in  the  love  of  God  : and  many  groaning 
for  full  redemption. 

M 2 


To-day 


[ 268  ] 

To-day  I gave  a fecond  reading  to  that  lively 
book,  Mr.  Newton’s  account  of  his  own  expe- 
rience. There  is  fomething  very  extraordinary 
therein  : but  one  may  account  for  it  without  a jot 
of  predeflination.  I doubt  not  but  his  (as  well  as 
Col.  Gardiner’s  converfionj  was  an  anfwer  to  his 
mother’s  prayers. 

Thurfday  17.  At  twelve  I preached  in  the  Caf- 
tle  at  Carmarthen,  in  the  evening  at  Lanelly. 
The  behaviour  of  Sir  Thomas’s  fervants  here 
(four  or  five  of  whom  belong  to  the  fociety  has 
removed  all  prejudice  from  him,  as  well  as  from 
mod  of  the  town.  Indeed  they  are  a pattern  to 
all  of  their  rank,  truly  adorning  the  dctlrine  of  God 
our  Saviour. 

Friday  18.  I preached  at  eleven  in  Oxwych, 
and  thence  haftened  to  Swanfey,  where  an  effec- 
tual door  is  opened  once  more.  The  rain  drove 
us  into  the  room,  which  was  hot  as  an  oven,  be- 
ing much  crowded  both  within  and  without.  Sa- 
turday 19.  About  eight,  I preached  at  Neath  ; 
about  three,  in  the  church  ai  Bridge-End,  (where 
the  rain  doubled  the  congregation,  by  flopping 
the  harvefl-work)  And  at  feven  in  the  affembly 
room  at  Cowbridge,  on  Lord , Are  there  few  that  be 
Laved?  I.was  enabled  to  make  a clofe  and  pointed 
application  : I believe,  not  without  effect. 

Sunday  20.  I preached  there  again  at  eight, 
to  a congregation  who  feemed  to  feel  what  was 
fpoken.  At  eleven  the  vicar  read  prayers,  and  I 
preached  on  thofe  words  in  the  leffon,  Ga/ho 

cared 


[ z69  ] 

cared for  none  of  tkefe  things.  Mofl  of  the  hear- 
ers feemed  more  awake  than  I expected,  and  a 
few  appeared  to  be  affefted.  In  the  evening  I took 
my  old  Hand,  on  the  fteps  of  the  Caftle  at  Car- 
diff. Abundance  of  people  were  gathered  toge- 
ther, it  being  a fair  mild  evening  : on  whom  I in- 
forcedj  l Jaw  thedeadfmall  and greatjiand before 
God. 

Tuefday  22.  Mr.  Davies  read  pravers,  and  I 
preached  in  Carphilly  church,  and  in  the  even- 
ing at  IJanbraddoach.  Wednef.  23.  I went  on  to 
Trevecka.  Here  we  found  a concourfe  of  people 
from  all  parts,  come  to  celebrate  the  Countefs  of 
Huntingdon’s  birth-day,  and  the  anniverfary  of 
her  fchool,  which  was  opened  on  the  24th  of  Au- 
gufl  laft  year.  I preached  in  the  evening,  to  as 
many  as  her  chapel  could  well  contain,  which  is 
extremely  neat,  or  rather  elegant  as  is  the  dining 
room,  the  fchool,  and  all  the  houfe.  About  nine 
Howel  Harris  defiled  me  to  give  a fhort  exhor- 
tation to  his  family.  I did  fo  and  then  went  back 
to  my  Lady’s,  and  laid  me  down  in  peace. 

Thurfday  24.  I adminiftred  the  Lord’s  fupper 
to  the  family.  At  ten  the  public  fe'rvice  began. 
Mr. Fletcher  preached  an  exceeding  lively  fermon 
in  the  court,  the  chapel  being  far  too  fmall. 
After  him  Mr,  William  Williams  preached  in 
Welfli,  till  between  one  and  two  o’clock.  At 
two  we  dined  : mean  time  a large  number  of 
people  had  bafkets  of  bread  and  meat  carried  to 
them  in  the  court.  At  three  I took  my  turn 
M 3 there  •, 


[ 27°  ] 

there,  then  Mr.  Fletcher,  and  about  five,  thc- 
congregation  was  difmiffed.  Between  feven  and 
eight  the  love-feaft  began,  at  which  I believe 
many  were  comforted.  In  the  evening  feveral  of 
us  retired  into  the  neighbouring  wood,  which 
is  exceeding  pleafantly  laid  out  in  walks,  one  or 
which  leads  to  a little  mount,  railed  in  the  midft 
•f  a meadow,  that  commands  a delightful  prof- 
pe£l  : this  is  Howell  Harris’s  work  : who  has 
likewife  greatly  inlarged  and  beautified  his  houfe. 
So  that  with  the  gardens,  orchards,  walks  and 
pieces  of  water  that  furround  it,  it  is  a kind  of 
little  paradife. 

Friday  2,5.  We  rode  thro’  a lovely  country  to 
Chepftow.  I had  defigned  to  go  flrait  on  : but 
yielded  to  the  importunity  of  our  friends,  to  flay 
and  preach  in  the  evening.  Meantime  I took  a 
walk  thro’  Mr.  Morris’s  woods.  There  is  fcarce 
any  thing  like  them  in  the  kingdom.  They  fiand 
on  the  top  and  down  the  fide  of  a deep  moun- 
tain, hanging  in  a femicircular  from  over  the 
river.  Thro’  thefe  woods  abundance  of  ferpen- 
tine  walks  are  cut,  wherein  many  feats  and  alcoves 
are  placed  ; moft  of  which  command  a furpriz- 
ing  profpeft  of  rocks  and  fields  on  the  other  fide 
of  the  river.  And  mud  all  thefe  be  burnt  up? 
What  will  become  of  us  then,  if  we  fet  our  hearts 
upon  them  ? 

Saturday  26.  Refolving  not  to  be  too  late  now 
as  I was  la  it  year  I took  horfe  at  four.  But  being 
earneilly  engaged  in  coverfation,  we  miffed  our 

way, 


[ 27*  3 

W3y  and  came  to  the  paffage  juft  as  the  boat  was 
gone.  About  three  in  the  afternoon,  it  pafted 
again  : and  foon  after  fix  we  reached  Briftol. 

Sunday  27.  After  preaching  at  Kingfwood 
and  Briftol,  I rode  to  Crofs,  to  leffen  the  next 
day’s  journey.  Monday  28.  I rode  to  Tiverton  ; 
on  Tuefday  to  Lancefton,  where  I ftronglv  ap- 
plied, Hath  God  forgotten  to  be  gracious  ? And  I 
believe,  he  anfwered  for  himfelf,  in  the  hearts  of 
feveral  backfiiders. 

Being  informed,  it  was  between  fixty  and  fe- 
venty  miles  to  St.  John’s,  I fent  my  horfe  a few 
miles  forward  to  nigbt.  JWednefday  30.  I pur- 
pofed  taking  horfe  at  four  : but  the  horfe  was  riot 
brought  from  the  field.  So  I borrowed  another, 
and  rode  on  without  delay  to  the  houfe  where  my 
own  waited  forme.  We  badinceflant  rain,  driv- 
en upon  us  by  a furious  wind.  However  I reach- 
ed Bodmin  about  eight  : where  at  the  requeft 
of  one  of  our  friends,  I preached  to  & fmall,  feri* 
ous  company  in  theTownhall.  The  rain  accom- 
panied us  moft  of  the  wav  to  Truro.  I knew  not 
where  to  call,  till  a friend  met  me  and  mid  me, 
“ Mr.  Painter  had  been  very  ill.”  So  I rode  di- 
reftly  to  his  houfe.  While  I was  there,  one  of 
Redruth  came  in,  who  lent  me  a refh  horfe,  with 
which  I reached  St.  John’s  about  five  o’clock. 
I preached  at  fix,  and  was  much  comiorted  among 
a loving,  earned;  people. 

Thursday  31.  I rode  over  to  St,  Juft,  but 
could  not  preach  abroad,  becaufe  of  the  violent 
M 4 wind. 


C 272  ] 

wind.  However  God  fpoke  to  many  hearts,  both 
this  evening  and  in  the  morning.  Sept.  1.  I now 
confidered  Dr.  Erlkine’s  account  of  faving  faith. 
He  afferts  (if  I comprehend  him  right)  “ it  is  in 
general,  an  alfent  to  the  word  of  God,  in  which 
there  is  a light,  a glory,  a brightnefs,  which  be- 
lievers, and  they  only  perceive.  In  particular  it  is 
an  alfent  of  the  underloading,  to  the  gofpel  me- 
thod of  falvation  ; in  which  there  is  an  excel- 
lency and  glory,  which  only  believers  fee.  A 
fupernatural  conviftion  of  this  is  faith.”  But  if 
this  be  his  judgment,  why  does  he  quarrel  with 
me?  For  how  marveloufly  fmall  is  the  differ- 
ence between  us  ? Only  change  the  word  alfent 
for  convi&ion  ; (which  certainly  better  anfwers 
St.  Paul’s  word  And  do  we  not  come 

within  an  hair’s  breadth  of  each  other  ? Ido  not 
quarrel  with  the  definition  of  faith  in  general, 
“ Kfuper  natural  ajfent  to  the  word  of  God 
though  I think,  “A  fupernatural  convichon  of  the 
truths  contained  in  the  word  of  God,”  is  clearer. 
I allow  too,  that  the  holy  fpirit  enables  us  to  per- 
ceive a peculiar  light  and  glory  in  the  word,  of 
God,  and  particularly  in  the  gofpel-method  of 
falvation.  But  I doubt,  whether  faving  faith  be 
properly,  “ An  alfent  to  this  light  and  glory.”  Is 
it  not  rather,  an  alfent  (if  we  retain  the  word)  to 
the  truths  which  God  has  revealed  ? ’ Or  more 
particularly,  a divine  convifbon,  that  God  was  in 
Chrijl,  reconciling  the  world  unto  himfelf  ? 

The  congregation  at  St.  Ives’  in  the  evening 

was 


[ m ] 

was  the  largeft  I have  feen  fince  I came  to  Corn- 
wall. And  it  was  a folemn  affembly.  We  had 
another  happy  opportunity  at  the  meeting  of  the 
fociety.  Saturday  2.  Our  quarterly  meeting  was 
at  Redruth.  In  the  evening  I preached  to  eleven 
or  twelve  hundred  people.  But  there  was  no  trifl- 
er,  much  lefs  mocker  among  them.  They  heard, 
as  for  eternity. 

Sunday  3,  We  had  a very  large  congrega- 
tion, and  an  ufeful  fertnon  at  church.  Between 
one  and  two  I preached  to  fome  thoufandsin  the 
main-flreet  : but  to  abundantly  more  at  five  in 
our  amphitheatre  at  Gwenap  : and  they  were 
fo  commodioufly  placed,  row  above  row,  that  I 
believe  all  could  hear. 

Monday  4.  About  noon  I preached  in  the 
Lower-ftreet  at  St.  Awflle,  to  a very  numerous 
and  very  ferious  congregation.  But  at  Medros, 
where  was  once  the  livelieft  fociety  in  Corn- 
wall, I found  but  a few  and  moll  of  thofe  faint 
and  weary.  Tuefday  5.  I rode  on  to  Plymouth- 
dock,  and  preached  on,  Love  is  the  bond  of  per- 
feElnefs.  What  pity  that  any  thing  fhort  of  this, 
fhould  ufurp  the  name  of  religion  ! 

Laft  week  I read  over,  as  I rode,  great  part  of 
Homer’s  Odyffey.  I always  imagined,  it  was  like 
Milton’s  paradife  regained, 

“ The  faint  effort  of  an  expiring  mufe.’* 

M 5 v But 


[ 274  ] 

Bfithow  was  I midaken?  How  far  has  Homer's 
latter  poem  the  pre-eminence  over  the  former  ? 

It  is  not  indeed  without  its  blemifhes,  among 
which  perhaps  one  might  reckon  his  making 
Ulyffes  fwim  nine  days  and  nine  nights  without 
fudenance;  the  incredible  manner  of  his  efcape 
from  Polyphemus,  (unlefs  the  goat  was  as  ilrong 
as  an  ox  :)  and  the  introducing  Minerva  at  every 
turn,  without  any  dignus  vmdice  nodus.  But  his 
numerous  beauties  make  large  amends  for  thefe. 
Was  ever  man  fo  happv  in  his  defcriptions,  fo 
exaCt  and  confident  in  his  characters,  and  fo  na- 
tural in  telling  a dory  ? He  likewife  continually 
inferts  the  fined  drokes  of  morality,  (which  I can- 
not find  inVirgil)  on  all  occafions  recommending 
the  fear  of  God,  with  juffice,  mercy  and  truth. 
In  this  only  he  is  inconfiflent  with  himfelf.  He 
makes  his  hero  fa)-, 

“ Wifdom  never  lies.”  And 

“ Him,  on  whate’er  pretence,  that  lies  can  tell 

“ My  foul  abhors  him  as  the  gates  of  hell.” 

Meantime  he  himfelf,  on  the  flighted  pretence, 
tells  deliberately  lies  over  and  over:  nay',  and  is 
highly  commended  for  fo  doing,  even  by  the 
goddefs  of  wifdom ! 

Wednefday  6.  I rode  to  Collumpton;  and  on 
Thurfday  reded  at  Tiverton.  Friday  8.  I preach- 
ed 


[ 275  ] 

ed  about  nine  at  Taunton,  and  then  rode  on  to 
Bridgwater,  where  the  preaching  had  been  dif- 
continued  for  fome  years.  It  was  fuppofed  there 
would  be  much  difturbance.  But  there  was  none 
at  all.  The  very  gentry  (all  but  two  or  three 
young  women)  behaved  with  good  fenfe  and  de- 
cency. 

This  afternoon  I went  to  the  top  of  Brent  hill : 
I know  not,  I ever  before  faw  fuch  a profpeft. 
Weflward,  one  may  fee  to  the  mouth  of  theBuf- 
tol  channel,  and  die  three  other  ways,  as  far  as 
the  eye  can  reach.  And  mod.  of  the  land  which 
you  fee  is  well  cultivated,  well  wooded,  and  well 
watered  : fothat  the  globe  of  earth,  in  itsprefent 
condition  can  hardly  afford  a more  pleafing 
fcene.  Saturday  9,  I returned  to  Briftol. 

Tuefday  12.  I enquired  into  the  ftateofKingf- 
wood-fchool.  The  grievance  now  is  the  number 
of  children.  Inflead  of  thirty  (as  I defired)  we 
have  near  fifty,  whereby  our  mailers  are  bur- 
dened. And  it  is  fcarce  polfible  to  keep  them  in 
fo  exact  order,  as  we  might  do  a fmaller  number. 
However  this  ffill  comes  nearer  a Chriftian 
fchool,  than  any  I know  in  the  kingdom. 

Sunday  17.  I preached  to  a ferious  congrega- 
tion, in  Prince’s-ftreet,  many  of  whom  came 
from  the  fiiips  on  the  river,  and  gaped  and  flared 
as  if  they  had  never  heard  a fermon  before.  In 
the  afternoon  I preached  near  the  New-fquare,on, 
M 6 What 


[ 276  ] 

WkaL  God  hath  cleanfed , that  call  not  thou  common. 
I was  in  hopes,  this  would  remove  rather  than 
increafe  prejudice  : but  I was  much  miftaken. 
One  of  the  hearers  foon  after  told  his  friend, 
“ Mr.  W.  is  as  dark  and  blind  as  ever/’ 

Tuefday  19.  Between  twelve  and  one  I 
preached  at  Frefhford  ; and  on  White’s-hill,  near 
Bradford  in  the  evening.  By  this  means  many 
had  an  opportunity  of  hearing,  who  would  not 
have  come  to  the  room.  I had  defigned  to  preach 
there  again  the  next  evening:  but  a gentleman 
in  the  town  defired  me  to  preach  at  his  door. 
The  beafts  of  the  people  were  tolerably  quiet, 
till  I had  nearly  finifhed  my  fermon.  They  then 
lifted  up  their  voice,  efpecially  one,  called  a gen~ 
tleman,  who  had  filled  his  pocket  with  rotten 
eggs.  But  a young  man  coming  unawares,  clapt 
his  hands  on  each  fide,  and  malhed  them  all  at 
once.  In  an  inflant  he  was  prefume  all  over; 
though  it  was  not  lo  fweet  as  balfam! 

Friday  22.  I faw  poor  Mrs. at  Briflol,  on 

the  very  brink  of  defpair.  I prayed  for  her  in 
faith,  and  not  many  days  after,  found  her  fweetly 
rejoicing  in  God  her  Saviour.  Thurfday  23.  I 
rode  to  Pill,  and  preached  in  the  ftreetfthe  only 
way  to  dp  much  good  there,)  to  a more  numerous 
and  more  attentive  congregation  than  I have 
feen  there  for  many  years. 

1 hurfday,  October  5.  I had  the  fatisfaftion  to 
find,  that  two  of  our  brethren,  with  whom  I had 

taken 


[ 277  ] 

taken  much  pains,  had  at  length  put  an  end  to 
their  Chancery  fait,  and  clofed  their  debate  by  a 
reference. 

Sunday  8.  I permitted  all  of  Mr.  Whitefield’s 
fociety  that  defired  it,  to  be  prefent  at  our 
love-feaft.  I fuppofe,  there  were  a thou- 
band  of  us  in  all.  And  we  were  not  fent  empty 
away. 

Monday  9.  I preached  at  Briftol,  Pensford, 
Shepton-Mallet ; and  in  the  evening  at  Win- 
caunton.  The  people  here  had  juft  as  much 
feeling  as  the  benches  on  which  they  fat.  Tuef- 
day  10.  I preached  in  Shaftefbury  at  noon  ; and 
in  the  evening  at  Salifbury.  Here  I was  as  in  a 
new  world.  The  congregation  was  alive,  and 
much  more  the  fociety.  How  pleafing  would  it 
be  to  be  always  with  fuch  ! But  that  is  not  our 
calling. 

Wednefday  11.  I preached  in  Rumfey  at 
noon:  in  the  evening  at  Winchefter.  Thurfday 
12.  I preached  at  Fareham  about  one;  and  at 
Portfmouth-common  in  the  evening.  Friday  13. 1 
very  narrowly  miffed  meeting  the  great PafcalPao- 
li.  He  landed  in  the  dock  but  a very  few  minutes 
after  I left  the  water- fide.  Surely  he  who  hath 
been  with  him  from  his  youth  up,  hath  not  fent 
him  into  England  for  nothing.  Lord  fhew  him 
. what  is  thy  will  concerning  him  ! And  give  him 
a kingdom  that  cannot  be  moved  ! 

Saturday  14.  Setting  out  at  two  in  the  morn- 


t 278  ] 

ing,  I came  to  London  in  the  afternoon.  Sunday 
15.  My  brother  and  I had  fuch  a congregation  at 
Spitalfields,  as  has  not  been  there  fince  the  cove- 
hant-night.  The  Foundery  was  equally  crowded 
in  the  evening : is  God  about  to  work  here, 
as  he  did  fome  years  ago?  If  fo,  having 
learnt  experience  by  t]ie  things  we  have  fujf'ered , 
I trult  we  fhall  not  quench  the  fpirit,  as  we  did 
before. 

Monday  16.  1 began  my  journey  into  Oxford- 
fhire,  and  in  the  evening  preached  at  Henley.  A 
great  part  of  the  congregation  was  perfebily  void 
both  of'fenfe  and  modefty.  But  at  this  time 
they  were  unufually  quiet,  as  I did  not  take 
them  out  of  their  depth,  in  opening  and  apply- 
ing thofe  words,  It  is  appointed  unto  men  once  to 
die, 

Tuefdav  17.  We  went  to  Wallingford,  a town 
I never  faw  before,  though  I lived  fo  many  years 
at  Oxford.  How  white  are  the  fields  here  unto 
theharveft?  The  whole  town  feemed  flocking 
together,  rich  and  poor,  in  the  evening,  and  re- 
ceived the  word  with  joy.  But  who  will  endure 
to  the  end  ? Abundance  of  people  came  again  at 
five  in  the  morning,  and  were  ready  to  devour 
the  word.  How  pleafant  it  is,  to  fee  the  dawn  of 
a work  of  grace  ! But  we  mufl  not  lay  too  much 
flrefs  upon  it.  Abundance  ofblofToms!  But  when 
the  fun  is  up,  how  many  of  thefe  will  wither 
away ! 


Having 


C 279  ] 

Having  appointed  to  preach  in  Oxford  at  ten, 

I was  under  fome  difficulty.  I did  not  like  to 
preach  in  the  diffenting  meeting-houfe  : and  I 
did  not  fee  how  to  avoid  it.  But  the  proprietors 
cut  the  knot  for  me,  by  locking  up  the  doors. 
So  I preached  in  James  Mears’  garden  : and  to 
fuch  a congregation  as  I had  not  had  in  Oxford 
fince  I preached  in  St.  Mary’s  church. 

Thence  we  went  on  to  Witney,  where  we 
have  now  a large  and  commodious  houfe.  It  was 
well  filled  in  the  evening:  and  (whoever  elfe  did) 

I found  it  good  to  be  there  : efpecially  at  the 
meeting  of  the  fociety:  the  Spirit  of  glory  and 
of  Chrift  was  among  them. 

I had  defigned  to  fpend  another  day  here. 
But  two  of  our  friends,  who  were  come  on  pur- 
pofe  from  Broadmarfton,  importuned  me  much 
to  go  thuher.  So  I fet  out  with  them  on  Thurf- 
day,  and  came  to  Broadmarfton  in  the  after- 
noon. The  lovely  family,  and  the  congregation 
from  all  parts,  made  me  full  amends  for  my  la- 
bour. Great  was  our  glorying  in  the  Lord. 
Many  felt  the  two-edged  fword,  and  many  were 
filled  with  confolation. 

Friday  20.  I had  appointed  to  be  in  Oxford  at 
eight.  So  I took  horfe  at  two,  and  took  chaifes 
from  Shipfton,  which  brought  me  thither  at  my 
time.  After  fpending  an  hour  quite  agreeably 
with  a few  young,  ferious  ftudenls,  I fet  out  for 
Ipftone,  near  Stoken-chureh.  But  I was  obliged, 

when 


[ 28o  ] 

when  we  came  to  the  bye-road,  to  quit  my  chaii'e 
and  go  as  I could,  part  on  horfe-back,  part  on 
foot.  The  congregation  had  waited  for  me  fome 
time.  So  I began  immediately,  on,  Fear  God , 
and  keep  his  commandments  : for  this  is  the  whole 
of  man.  In  the  evening  I preached  to  a lively 
congregation  at  High-Wycombe,  and  on  Satur- 
day reached  London. 

Monday  23.  I rode  to  Towcefter,  and  preach- 
ed to  an  heavy,  unawakened  people,  on  what 
they  did  not  feemat  all  to  think  of,  namely,  that 
they  were  to  die.  I believe  it  fuited  them  : they 
appeared  to  be  more  affe£led  than  with  any  dif- 
courfe  I had  ever  preached.  Tuefday  24.  I 
preached  at  Alfton,  in  a large  malt-room,  where 
one  fide  of  my  head  was  very  warm,  through  the 
crowd  of  people,  the  other  very  cold,  having  an 
open  window  to  my  ear.  Between  fix  and  feven 
I preached  at  Northampton,  and  it  was  an  awful 
feafon. 

This  evening  there  was  fuch  an  Aurora 
Borealis,  as  I never  faw  before  : the  colours, both 
the  white,  the  flame-colour,  and  the  fcarlet,  were 
fo  exceeding  flrong  and  beautiful.  But  they  were 
awful  too : fo  that  abundance  of  people  were 
friejited  into  many  good  refolutions. 

Wednefday  2,5.  At  ten,  I was  forced  to  preach 
abroad  at  Brighton,  by  reafon  of  the  great  con- 
courfe  of  people  : and  at  Haddon,  about  one.  I 
believe  at  both  places,  God  applied  his  word  to 
their  hearts.  Thurfday  26,  About  nine  I preached 

at 


[ *8«  ] 

at  Harpole,  to  a thirfly  multitude:  atone,  to 
near  the  fame  number  at  Weedon  ; in  the  even- 
ing at  Wittlebury.  Friday  27,  about  noon,  we 
had  a ferious  congregation  at  Cranfield,  and  at 
Bedford  in  the  evening,  Saturday  28. 1 preached 
about  one  at  Hertford,  and  at  Snowfields  in  the 
evening  : and  after  preaching  three  times  a day 
for  three  days,  and  four  times  a day  for  two  mr  e, 
I found  no  more  hoarfenefs  or  wearinefs  man 
when  I fet  out  from  London. 

Monday  go.  I fet  out  with  a little  company  of 
our  friends,  and  the  next  day  came  to  Nor- 
wich. At  fix  I preached  in  the  fhell  of  the 
new  houfe,  crowded  enough  both  within  and 
without. 

Thurfday,  November  2.  We  went  to  Yar- 
mouth, a cold,  dead,  uncomfortable  place.  Fri- 
day 3.  I laboured  to  gather  up  the  fragments  of 
the  poor  fociety,  fhatrered  to  pieces  by  Prefby- 
terians,  Anabaptiffs,  and  difputers  of  all  kinds: 
efpecially  by  one  unhappy  man,  who  had 
arifen  among  ourfelves.  In  the  evening  I 
flrongly  exhorted  them,  to  r epent  and  do  the  firji 
works. 

Saturday  4.  We  returned  to  Norwich.  In  com- 
ing to  Yarmouth,  I had  called  upon  a young  wo- 
man, alive  to  God,  but  exceeding  ill.  She  died 
before  I came  back.  This  afternoon  I was  defired 
to  bury  her.  I took  the  opportunity  of  preach- 
ing at  five  in  the  burying-ground,  to  a multi- 
tude  of  people,  who  were  all  attention,  as  though 

they 


I 282  ] 


they  had  already  feen  the  dead  Jlanding  before 
God. 

Monday  6.  And  the  follow  ing  days,  I vifited  as 
many  of  the  people,  fick  and  well,  as  1 poffibly 
could.  And  on  Friday  9,  leaving  them  more 
united  than  they  had  been  for  many  years,  I took 
coach  again,  ancl  the  next  afternoon  came  to 
London. 

In  the  coach  going  and  coming,  I read  feveral 
volumes  of  Mr.  Guthrie's  ingenious  hi  dory  of 
Scotland,  I fuppofe,  as  impartial  an  one  as  any 
to  be  found,  and  as  much  to  be  depended  upon.' 
I never  read  any  writer  before,  who  gave  me  fo 
much  light  into  the  real  charafler  of  that  odd 
mixture,  King  James  the  firft  : nor  into  that  of 
Mary  Queen  of  Scots,  fo  totally  mifreprefenled 
by  Buchanan,  Queen  Elizabeth’s  penfioner,  and 
her  other  hireling  writers  : and  not  much  lefs,by 
Dr.  Robertfon.  Them  he  effectually  expofes, 
fhewing  ho\y  grofly  they  contradiH  matter  of  fact, 
and  one  another.  He  likewife  points  out  the 
many  and  great  miltakes  of  Dr.  R.  fuch  as  feem 
to  imply  either  great  inattention  or  great  partia- 
lity. Upon  the  whole,  that  much  injured  Queen 
appears  to  have  been  far  the  grealeft  woman  of 
that  age,  exquifiteiv  beautiful  in  her  perfon,  of  a 
fine  addrefs,  of  a deep,  unaffefled  piety,  and  of 
a ftronger  underftanding  even  in  youth,  than 
Queen  Elizabeth  had  at  three-fcore.  And  pro- 
bably the  defpair  wherein  Queen  Elizabeth  died, 

was 


[ 283  ] 


was  owing  to  her  death  rather  than  that  of  Lord 
Eflex. 

Friday  17.  I preached  at  a chapel  near  St. 
John-ftreet,  built  on  the  very  fpot  of  ground, 
whereon  many  hundred  years  ago  Pardon  church 
flood.  In  this  and  the  following  week  1 vifited 
the  fociety  in  London,  containing  now  fcarce 
nineteen  hundred  members.  So  has  God 
cut  us  floor t knee  the  wound  received  by  a fake 
friend,  from  which  we  are  now  (lowly  reco- 
vering. 

Saturday  25.  I went  down  to  Mr.  Perronet’s 
juft  recovering  from  a long  illnefs.  In  the  even- 
ing I preached  :n  the  houfe,  and  at- (even  in  the 
morning.  On  Sunday  26.  Mr.  P.  defigned  to  read 
prayers  at  ten but  we  thought  it  not  fafe  for  him 
to  go  out.  So  I read  prayers,  and  then  applied, 
What  doth  the  Lord  thy  God  require  of  thee,  but  to 
do  mJily,  to  love  mercy,  oncl  to  walk  humbly  with 
thy  God?  Many  who  had  conftantly  appealed  to 
this  text,  found  themfelves  fhort  in  every  parti- 
cular. 

I read  prayers  in  the  afternoon,  having  been 
informed,  that  it  was  not  ufual  to  preach.  But 
obferving  a numerous  congregation,  quite  un- 
willing to  go  away,  I went  into  the  pulpit,  and 
(hewed  them  the  nature  and  the  pleafantnefs  of 
true  religion.  At  five  I preached  in  the  room  : 
I truft  our  Lord  has  touched  many  hearts  this 
day. 


Thurfday 


[ 284  ] 

Thurfday  go.  I preached  at  Wandfworth.  For 
many  years  the  people  here  were  the  rnoft  dead, 
but  are  now  the  moll  alive  of  any  about  London. 
Friday,  December  the  lft,  I preach  d at  Barnet, 
which  was  laft  year  what  Wandfworth  is  now. 
Monday  4.  I went  to  Chatham:  Mr.Whitefield’s 
people  (fo  called)  refufing  me  the  ufe  of  their 
room,  I preached  in  the  barracks  to  a liifening 
multitude,  and  our  hearts  were  fweetly  enlarged 
and  knit  together.  One  of  their  fociety,  gtieved 
at  the  bigotry  of  his  brethren,  invited  me  to 
preach  in  hishoufe  in  the  morning  ; which  I did 
(the  barracks  not  being  open)  to  as  many  as  it 
could  well  contain.  Tuefday  5.  I went  to  Sbeer- 
nefs,  and  preached  in  the  old  play-houfe,  filled 
from  end  to  end.  So  it  was  the  next  night.  Our 
own  room  contained  us  in  the  mornings.  I was 
much  comforted  among  the  poor  people,  which 
in  the  midft  of  difputers,  keep  ftrait  on  following 
after  peace  and  holinefs. 

Thurfday  7.  I returned  to  Chatham,  and 
the  next  day  to  London,  leaving  an  earned  peo- 
ple at  peace  with  each  other,  and  with  all  the 
world. 

Monday  11.  Riding  an  uneafy  horfe,  I was 
much  tired  before  I reached  Slaplehurft.  But  the 
ferious,  earned  congregation  foon  made  me  for- 
get my  wearinefs,  and  I was  not  a little-  helped  by 
the  fpirit  of  Mr.  C.  breathing  nothing  but  faith  and 
love.  I was  again  heartily  tired,  when  I came  to 

Mr. 


[ ] 


Mr.  Holman  near  Rye.  Judging  moft  of  the  con- 
gregation here  to  be  unawakened,  I preached  on 
the  flory  of  Dives  and  Lazarus.  God  gave  me 
to  fpeak  ftrong  words,  fo  that  I trull  fome  were 
pricked  to  the  heart.  Wednefday  13. 1 preached 
at  Ewhuft,  (it  being  the  quarterly  meeting)  both 
at  noon  and  in  the  evening.  Thurfday  14.  We 
rode  through  heavy  rain  to  New-bounds,  where 
Mr.  I’Anfon  and  his  family  gladly  received  us  : 
and  I never  faw  the  houfe  fo  filled  before,  as 
it  was  in  the  evening.  Friday  17.  I preached  at 
Seven -Oaks,  and  on  Saturday  returned  to  Lon- 
don. 

Being  defirous  to  finifh  my  winter  journies 
before  Chriflmas : on  Monday  18.  I fet  out  for 
Canterbury.  Friday  22.  I preached  at  Sitten- 
burn  and  Chatham,  and  on  Saturday  came  to 
London. 

Monday,  being  Chriflmas- day,  we  had  fuch  a 
congregation  at  four,  as  I have  not  feen  for  many 
years.  And  from  morning  to  evening  we  had 
abundant  proof,  that  God  is  vifiting  and  re- 
deeming his  people. 

Tuefday  16.  I read  the  letters  from  our 
preachers  in  America,  informing  us  that  God  had 
begun  a glorious  work  there : that  both  in  New- 
York  and  Philadelphia  multitudes  flock  to  hear, 
and  behave  with  the  deepeft  ferioufnefs  : and 
that  the  fociety  in  each  place  already  contains 
above  an  hundred  members. 


Friday 


[ 285  ] 

Friday  29,  we  obferved  as  a day  of  failing  and 
prayer,  partly  on  account  of  the  confufed  date 
of  public  affairs,  partly'  as  preparatory  to  the 
folemn  engagement,  which  we  were  about  to  re- 
new. 

Monday,  January  the  iff,  1770,  about  eigh- 
teen hundred  of  us  met  togeiher  ; it  was  a mod 
folemn  feafon.  As  we  did  openly  avouch  the 
Lord  to  be  our  God,  fo  did  he  avouch  us  to  be  his 

Wednefday  17.  In  a little  journey,  which  I 
took  into  Bedfordfhire,  I finilhed  Dr.  Burnet’s 
Theory  of  the  Earth.  He  is  doubtlefs  one  of  the 
full-rate  writers,  both  as  to  fenfe  and  Bile ; his 
language  is  remarkably  clear,  unaffected,  ner- 
vous, and  elegant.  And  as  to  his  theory,  none 
can  deny  that  it  is  ingenious,  and  confident  with 
itfelf.  And  it  is  highly  probable,  1.  That  the 
earth  arofe  out  of  the  chaos  in  fome  fuch  manner 
as  he  deferibes:  2.  That  the  antediluvian  earth 
was  without  high  or  abrupt  mountains,  and  with- 
out fea,  being  one  uniform  crufi,  inclofing  the 
great  abyfs.  3.  That  the  flood  was  caufed  by  the 
breaking  ol  this  crull,  and  its  finking  into  the 
abyfs  of  waters  : and  4. 1 hat  the  prefent  date  of 
the  earth,  both  internal  and  external,  fhews  it  to 
be  the  ruins  of  the  former  earth.  This  is  the  fub- 
dance  of  his  two  former  books,  and  thus  far  I can 
go  with  him. 

I have  no  objection  to  the  fubdance  of  his 

third 


[ *8;  ] 

third  book  upon  the  general  conflagration,  hut 
think  it  is  one  of  the  nobleft  tradls,  which  is  ex- 
tant in  our  language.  And  I do  not  much  objedf 
to  the  fourth,  concerning  the  new  heavens,  and 
the  new  earth.  The  fubliance  of  it  is  highly  pro- 
bable. 

Tuefday  go.  One  informed  me,  that  Mrs. 
Kitely  at  Lambeth,  not  expedited  to  live  many 
hours,  had  a great  deflre  to  fee  me  before 
flie  died.  I went  as  quick  as  poflible:  but  when 
I came,  fhe  feemed  fenfelefs,  as  well  as  fpeech- 
lefs.  I regarded  not  this,  but  fpoke  to  her  imme- 
diately ; and  immediately  both  her  under- 
flanding  and  her  fpeech  returned,  to  teflify 
an  hope  full  of  immortality.  Having  had  her 
deflre,  fhe  fell  afleep,  two  days  before  her  huf- 
band  ; 

“ A perfedl  pattern  of  true  woman-hood  1” 

A good  wife,  a good  parent,  a good  miflrefs. 
And  her  works  Jhall  praife  her  in  the  gates.  How 
fuitable  was  her  death  to  her  life!  After  many 
years  fpent  in  doing  good,  fhe  redeemed  a poor, 
friendlefs  youth  out  of  piifon,  took  the  goal-dif- 
temper  and  died. 

Saturday,  February  g,  and  at  my  leifure  mo- 
ments on  feveral  of  the  following  days,  I read 
with  much  expedition,  a celebrated  book,  Rouf- 
feau  upon  Education.  But  how  was  1 difap- 

pointed  ! 


[ 288  ] 


pointed  ! Sure  a more  confummate  coxcomb 
never  faw  the  fun  ! How  amazing  full  of  him- 
felf?  Whatever  he  fpeaks,  he  pronounces  as  an 
oracle.  Rut  many  of  his  oracles  are  as  palpably 
falfe,  as  that  “ young  children  never  love  old 
people.”  No  ! Do  they  never  love  grandfathers 
and  grandmothers  P Frequently  more  than  they 
do  their  own  parents.  Indeed  they  love  all 
that  love  them,  and  that  with  more  warmth 
and  fincerity,  than  when  they  come  to  riper 
years. 

But  I objefito  his  temper,  more  than  to  his 
judgment ; he  is  a mere  mifanthrope,  a cynic  all 
over.  So  indeed  is  his  brother  infidel,  Voltaire  : 
And  well  nigh  as  great  a coxcomb.  But  he 
hides  both  his  doggednefs  and  vanity  a little 
better  : whereas  here  it  flares  us  in  the  face  con- 
tinuallv. 

J 

As  to  his  book,  it  is  whimfical  to  the  lafl  de- 
gree, grounded  neither  upon  reafon,  nor  expe- 
rience. To  cite  particular  paffages  would  be  end- 
lefs : but  any  one  may  obfetve  concerning  the 
whole,  the  advices  which  are  good,  are  trite  and 
common,  only  difguifed  under  new  expreffions. 
And  thofe  which  are  new,  which  are  really  his 
own,  are  lighter  than  vanity  itfelf.  Such  difco- 
veries  I always  expefl  from  thofe,  who  are  too 
wife  to  believe  their  bibles. 

Thurfday  8.  I went  to  Wandfworth.  What  a 
proof  have  we  here,  that  God’s  thoughts  are  not 
as  our  thoughts?  Everyone  thought  no  good 

could 


[ ■*  9 ] 

•ould  be  done  here : we  had  tried  for  abov# 
twenty  years.  Very  few  would  even  give  us  the 
hearing;  and  the  few  that  did,  feeraed  little  the 
better  for  it.  But  all  on  a fudden,  crowds  flock 
to  hear : many  are  cut  to  the  heart : many  filled 
with  peace  and  joy  in  believing  : many  long  for 
the  whole  image  of  God.  In  the  evening,  though 
it  was  a fharp  froff,  the  room  was  as  hot  as  a 
flove.  And  they  drank  in  the  word  with  all  gree- 
dinefs,  as  alfo  at  five  in'the  morning,  while  I ap- 
plied, Jefus  put  forth  his  hand  and  touched  him , 
faying,  I will : Be  thou  clean  ! 

Tuefday  13.  I read  with  all  the  attention  I was 
mafler  of,  Mr.  Hutchinfon’s  Life,  and  Mr.  Spear- 
man’s Index  to  his  works.  And  I was  more  con- 
vinced than  ever,  1.  That  he  had  not  the  leaft 
conception,  much  lefs  experience,  of  inward  re- 
ligion : 2.  That  an  ingenious  man  may  prove 
juft  what  he  pleafes,  by  well-devifed  fcriptural 
etymologies : efpecially  if  he  be  in  the  fafhion, 
if  he  affe&s  to  read  the  Hebrew  without  vowels: 
and  3.  That  his  whole  hypothefis,  philofophical 
and  theological,  is  unlupported  by  any  folid 
proof. 

Friday  23.  I was  defired  to  hear  Mr.  Leoni 
fing,  at  the  Jewifh  fynagogue.  I never  before  faw 
a Jewifh  congregation  behave  fo  decently.  In- 
deed the  place  itfelf  is  fo  folemn,  that  it  might 
ftrike  an  awe  upon  thofe  who  have  any  thought 
of  God. 

Wednefday  28.  1 fat  down  to  read  and  feri- 
Vol,  XXXII.  N oufly 


[ 29°  J 

oufly  confider  fome  of  the  writings  of  Baron 
Swedenborg.  1 began,  with  huge  prejudice  in 
his  favour,  knowing  him  to  be  a pious  man,  one 
of  a drong  underdanding,  of  much  learning,  and 
one  who  throughly  believed  himfelf.  But  I could 
not  hold  out  long.  Any  one  of  his  vifions  puts 
his  real  character  out  of  doubt.  He  is  one  of  the 
mod  ingenious,  lively,  entertaining  madmen, 
that  ever  fet  pen  to  paper.  But  his  waking 
dreams  are  fo  wild,  fo  far  remote  both  from 
feripture  and  common  fenle,  that  one  might  as 
eafily  fwallow  the  dories  of  d om  Thumb,  orjack 
the  Giant-killer. 

Monday,  March  j.  1 came  to  Newbury, 
where  I had  been  much  importuned  to  preach. 
But  where  ? The  diiTenters  would  not  permit  me 
to  preach  in  their  meeiing-houfe.  Somethenwere 
defirous  to  hire  the  old  play-houfe : but  the  good 
mayor  would  not  fuffer  it  to  be  fo  profaned  ! So 
1 made  ufe  of  a work-fhop,  a large,  commodious 
place.  But  it  would  by  no  means  contain  the 
congregation.  All  that  could  hear,  behaved  well; 
and  I was  in  hopes  God  would  have  a people  in 
this  place  alfo.  The  next  evening  I preached  at 
Bridol,  and  fpent  the  red  of  the  week  there. 
Monday  12.  I went  to  Stroud,  where  the  houfe 
was  filled  as  ufual.  Tuefday  13.  1 went  byPainf- 
wick  and  Glocederto  Tewkefbttry.  Wednefday 
14.  1 preached  in  the  new  room,  which  is  jud 
finifhed  at  Upton,  and  thence  rode  on  to  Wor- 
ceder,  where  I preached  in  a large,  old,  awkward 

place. 


[ 29*  ] 

place,  to  a croud ed  and  much  aflefied  audience. 
Afterwards  I met  the  fociety  of  about  an  hun- 
dred members,  all  of  one  heart  and  one  mind, 
fo  lovingly  and  clofely  united  together,  that  I 
have  fcarce  feen  the  like  in  the  kingdom. 

Thurfday  15.  I met  the  feleft  fociety.  How 
fwiftly  has  God  deepened  his  work  in  thefe  ! I 
have  feen  very  few  either  in  Briftol  or  London, 
who  are  more  clear  in  their  experience.  The 
account  all  whom  I had  time  to  examine  gave,  was 
fcriptural  and  rational.  And  fuppofe  they  fpoke 
true,  they  are  witne'ffes  of  the  perfection  which 
X preach.  Yet  that  they  may  fall  therefrom,  I 
know  ; but  that  they  mu/},  I utterly  deny. 

After  preaching. at  Evefham  about  noon,  we 
rode  through  a furious  (hower  of  fnow,  driven 
full  in  our  faces  to  Broadmarflon.  The  very  un- 
common feverity  of  the  weather,  fomewhat  lef- 
fened  the  congregation  in  the  evening.  All  who 
were  there  feemed  prepared  for  that  awful  fub- 
je£i,  1 fa-w  the  dead,  frnall  and  great,  Jland  before 
God . 

Saturday  17.  We  rode,  in  another  bitter  day, 
with  the  wind  and  fnow  juft  in  our  face,  to  Bir- 
mingham. In  the  evening  the  people  were  wedg- 
ed in  as  clofe  as  poflible  : yet  many  were  ob- 
liged to  go  away.  We  had  juft  the  fame  congre- 
gation in  the  morning,  Sunday  18.  At  half  hour 
after  one  I was  to  preach  at  Bromwich-heaih  ; 
but  the  houfe  would  fcarce  contain  a fourth  .part 
N 2 ef 


[ 292  ] 

of  the  congregation.  So  I made  a virtue  of  necef- 
fity,  and  preached  in  a ground,  where  there  was 
room  for  all  that  came.  And  I believe  God  kin- 
dled a fire  in  many  frozen  hearts. 

In  the  evening  I preached  in  the  houfe  at 
Wednefbury  a funeral  fermon  for  Elizabeth 
Longmore,  I think,  the  firft  witnefs  of  Chriftian 
Perfe£iion,  whom  God  raifed  up  in  thefe  parts. 
I gave  fome  account  of  her  experience  many 
years  ago.  From  that  time  her  whole  life  was 
anfwerable  to  her  profeffion,  every  way  holy  and 
unblameable.  Frequently  fhe  had  not  bread  to 
eat ; but  that  did  not  hinder  her  rejoicing  ever- 
more. She  had  clofe  trials  from  her  poor,  apoflate 
liufband,  in  the  midfl  of  fharp  pain  and  pining 
ficknefs.  But  /he  was  fuperior  to  all,  flill  fee- 
ing her  Father’s  hand,  and  in  every  thing 
giving  thanks.  Her  death  was  fuitable  to 
her  life. 


“ No  cloud  cou’d  arife 
“ To  darken  the  Ikies, 

Or  hide  for  a moment  her  Lord  from  her  eyes.” 

All  was  noon  day.  She  praifed  God  with  every 
breath  till  he  took  her  to  himfelf. 

Monday  19. 1 rode  to  Craidly.  Here  alfo  the 
multitude  of  people  obliged  me  to  Hand  abroad, 
although  the  north  wind  whiffled  round  my  head. 
About  one  I took  the  field  again  at  Stourbridge. 

Many 


t 293  ] 

Many  of  the  hearers  were  wild  as  colts  untamed. 
But  the  bridle  was  in  their  mouths.  At  fix  I be- 
gan at  Dudley.  The  air  was  as  cold  as  I had 
almolt  ever  felt.  But  I trull  God  warmed  many 
hearts. 

Wednefday  21.  I took  my  leave  of  Wednef- 
buryatfive;  preached  about  ten  at  Billltone; 
about  one  at  Bilbrook,  and  about  five  in  the 
evening  at  Wolverhampton.  Many  here  weie 
wild  and  ftupid  enough  ; however  the  greater 
part  were  deeply  attentive. 

I now  procured  an  account  of  two  remarkable 
children,  which,  I think,  ought  not  to  be  buried 
in  oblivion. 

“ About  three  weeks  before  Chriftmas,  1768, 
William  Cooper,  at  Walfal  in  Staffordlhire, 
then  nine  years  old,  was  convinced  of  fin,  and 
would  frequently  fay,  he  Ihould  go  to  hell,  and 
the  devil  would  fetch  him.  Sometimes  he  cried 
out,  “ I hate  him.”  Being  alked,  “ whom  ?”  He 
anfwered  with  great  vehemence,  “God.”  This 
terrified  his  mother,  who  not  knowing  what 
was  the  matter  with  the  child,  ftrove  to  keep  it 
fecret. 

“ But  in  about  a fortnight,  it  pleafed  God  to 
reveal  to  him  his  pardoning  love.  His  mouth  was 
then  filled  with  praife,  declaring  to  all  what  God 
had  done  for  his  foul. 

“ A few  days  after  Billy  was  awakened,  God 
was  pleafed  to  convince  his  filter  Lucy,  then  ele- 
N 3 ven 


C 294  ] 


ven  years  old.  He  foon  put  a for.g  of  praife  into 
her  mouth  alfo,  fo  that  they  mightily  rejoiced  to- 
gether in  God  their  Saviour.  At  the  fame  time 
they  w ere  bo, h heavily  affh£led  in  theii  bodies. 
But  fo  much  the  more  was  the  power  of  God 
manifested,  caufing  them  to  continue  in  the 
triumph  of  faith,  throughout  their  fharpeft 
pains. 

“ On  December  30,  one  of  their  fillers  com- 
ing to  fee  them,  Billy'  told  her,  he  had  been  very 
ill ; but,  faid  he,  “ I -do  not  mean  in  my  body, 
but  in  my  foul  : I felt  my  fins  fo  heavy,  that  I 
though!  I fhould  go  to  hell,  and  I law  the  devil 
ready  to  drag  me  away.  Nay,  for  a week,  I 
thought  myfelf  juft  in  the  flames  of  hell.  The 
fins  that  troubled  me  fn£>ft  were,  telling  lies  and 
quarrelling  with  mv  fifter.  I fawr,  if  God  did  not 
forgive  me  I was  loft.  And  I knew,  quarreling 
was  as  great  a fin  in  Lucy  as  in  me,  and  if  five 
did  not  get  a pardon,  and  feel  the  love  of  Jefus, 
fire  could  not  go  to  heaven.” 

“ Lucy  faid,  “ When  I heard  Mr.  A.  deferibe 
two  forts  of  people,  one  fort  wafhed  in  the  blood 
of  Chrift,  and  the  other  not,  I found  I was  not, 
and  therefore  if  I died  fo,  mufl  go  to  hell.”  Be- 
ing afked  what  fin  lay  moft  on  her  confcience, 
file  replied,  “ Taking  his  name  in  vain,  by  re- 
peating my  prayers,  when  I did  not  think  of 
God.” 

When  Billy  was  confeffing,  that  he  had  loved 

money, 


[ 2 9-5  ] 


money,  Lucy  Laid,  “ And  fo  did  I ; and  was  an- 
gry if  I had  not  as  much  as  Billy,  I loved  mo- 
ney more  than  God,  and  he  might  jultly  have 
fent  me  to  hell  for  it.” 

“When  Billy  was  afked,  ‘ How  he  knew  his 
fins  were  forgiven  ?’  He  anfwered,  “ Chrift  told 
me  fo.  I had  a great  ftruggle  in  my  heart  with 
the  devil  and  fin,  till  it  pleafed  Jefus  to  come 
into  my  foul.  I now  feel  his  love  in  my 
heart,  and  he  tells  me,  he  has  forgiven  my 
fins.” 

“Being  afked,  How  he  did?  He  replied, 

“ Happy  in  Jefus:  Jefus  is  fweet  to  my  foul.” 

‘ Do  vou  chufe  to  live  or  die  ?’  He  anfwered, 
“ Neither.  I hope,  if  I live  I fiiall  praife 
God  : and  if  I die,  I am  fure  I fhall  go  to  him. 
For  he  has  forgiven  my  fins,  and  given  me  his 
love.” 

“ One  afked  Lucy,  how  long  fhe  had  been  in 
the  triumph  of  faith  ? She  anfwered,  “ Only  this 
week;  before  I had  much  to  do  with  Satan  : 
but  now  Jefus  has  conquered  him  for  me.” 
While  fire  was  fpeaking,  feeling  great  pain  of 
body,  fhe  faicd,  “ O I want  more  of  thefe  pains, 
more  of  thefe  pains,  to  bring  me  nearer  to  Je- 
fus.” 

“ One  fpeaking  of  knowing  the  voice  of 
Chrift,  fhe  faid,  “ The  voice  of  Chi  iff  is  a flrange 
voice  to  them  who  do  not  know  their  fins  for- 
given. But  I know  it.  For  he  has  pardoned  all 
my  fins,  and  given  me  his  love.  And  O what  a 
N 4 rneicy, 


[ *9«  ] 

mercy,  that  fuch  a hell-deferving  wretch  as  me, 
as  me,  fhould  be  made  to  tafteof  his  love!” 

“ Billy  had  frequent  fits.  When  he  found 
one  coming,  he  with  a fmile  laid  down  his  head, 
faying,  “ O fweet  love  !”  or  “ O fweet  Jefus !” 
And  as  foon  as  he  came  to  himfelf,  being  afked, 
How  he  did  ? He  would  reply,  “ I am  happy 
in  the  love  of  Chrifl.’’ 

When  a gentleman  faid,  ‘ My  dear,  you 
could  praife  God  more,  if  it  were  not  for  thofe 
ugly  fits  he  replied,  “ Sir,  They  are  not  ug- 
ly ; for  my  dear  Jefus  fent  them.  And  he  has 
given  me  patience  to  bear  them.  And  he  bore 
more  for  my  fins.” 

“ One  night  a gentleman  and  his  wife 
came  to  fee  them  : and  the  gendewoman  look- 
ing on  Lucy,  faid,  ‘ She  looks  as  if  nothing  was 
the  matter  with  her  : fhe  is  fo  pleafant  with  her 
eyes.’  She  replied,  “ I have  enough  to  make  me 
look  fo ; for  I am  full  of  the  love  of  God.” 
While  fhe  fpoke,  her  eyes  fparkled  exceedingly, 
and  the  tears  flowed  down  her  cheeks.  At  this 
Billy  fmiled  but  could  not  fpeak  ; having  been 
fpeechlefs  for  more  than  an  hour.  It  feemed  he 
was  juft  going  into  eternity:  but  the  Lord  reviv- 
ed him  a little  ; and  as  foon  as  he  could  fpeak, 
he  defired  to  be  held  up  in  bed,  and  looked 
at  the  gemleman,  who  afked  him,  How  he  did  ? 
He  anfwered,  “ I am  happy  in  Chrift  : and 
I hope  you  are.”  He  faid,  ‘ I hope  I can  fay  I 
am.’ Billy  replied,  “ Has  Chrift  pardoned  your 

fins  r 


t 297  ] 

fins  ?”  He  laid,  ‘ I hope  he  has.’  “ Sir,”  faid  Billy, 
“ Hope  will  not  do.  For  I had  this  hope,  and 
yet  if  I had  died  then,  I fhould  furely  have  gone 
to  hell.  But  he  has  forgiven  me  all  my  fins  and 
given  me  a tafte  of  his  love.  If  you  have  this  love 
you  will  know  it  and  be  fiire  of  it : but  you  can- 
not know  it  without  the  power  of  God.  You  may 
read  as  many  books  about  Chrift  as  you  pleafe, 
(He  was  a great  reader)  “ But  if  you  read  all  your 
life,  this  will  only  be  in  your  head,  and  that 
head  will  pei  ifh.  So  that  if  you  have  not  the  love 
of  God  in  your  heart,  you  will  go  to  hell.  But  I 
hope  you  will  not : I will  pray  to  God  for  you, 
that  he  may  give  you  his  love.” 

“ Another  coming  to  fee  them  enquired, 
how  they  were  ? Billy  faid,  “ Happier  and  hap- 
pier in  Chrift ; Are  you  fo  ?”  He  faid,  * No  : 

I am  not  fo  happy  as  you.’  “ Why,”  faid  Billy, 
what  is  the  matter  ? I am  afraid  you  don’t  pray  to 
Chrift,  for  I am  fure  he  is  willing  to  make  you 
happy.” 

“ One  who  fat  by,  feemed  ftruck  with  the 
difcourfe,  but  did  not  fpeak.  Billy  obferving  her 
faid,  “ And  you  do  not  pray  as  you  ought.  For 
ifyouhadthe  love  of  Chrft  in  your  heart,  you 
would  not  look  down  fo.  I wifh  you  and  every 
one  had  it”  One  faid,  ‘ My  dear  would  not  you 
give  it  them  if  you  might  ? He  anfwered,  “ No : 
for  that  would  be,  to  take  Chrift’s  work  out  of 
his  hands.” 

“ Many  who  heard  what  great  things 
N 5 God 


C 298  ] 

God  had  done  for  them,  faid,  4 It  will  not  be  fo 
with  you  always.  If  you  (hould  live  to  come  in- 
to the  wot  Id  again,  he  would  leave  you  in  the 
dark.’  They  anfwered,  44  We  do  not  think  fo  : 
for  our  Jefus  has  promifed,  that  he  will  never 
leave  us.” 

44  A young  woman,  who  had  told  them  fo 
before,  fpeaking  in  this  manner  a fecond  time, 
Billy  faid  to  her,  44  Mifs,  are  you  allured  of  your 
intercftf'in  Chrift  ?”  She  anfwered,  4 I hope  I 
am  in  Chrift:  but  affurance  is  no  way  effemial.’ 
He  replied,  “But  if  you  have  his  love,  you  will  be 
fure  you  have  It.  You  will  know  it  in  your  heart. 

I am  afraid  your  hope  is  only  in  your  head.  Do 
ton 'never  quarrel  with  any  body  ?”  She  faid, 

4 No.’  But,  fays  he,  “ You  quarrel  with  God’s 
word.  For  he  has  promifed  me,  None  fhall  pluck 
me  out  of  his  hand.  And  you  fay,  the  wmrld 
will : fa  you  make  God  a ftory-teller.”  At  this 
fhe  went  away  difpleafed. 

44  There  were  few  came  to  fee  them,  when 
either  of  them  was  able  to  fpeak,  but  they  enquir- 
ed into  the  ftate  of  them  fouls,  and  without  fear 
told  them  the  danger  of  dying  without  an  alfur- 
ance  of  the  love  of  God. 

44  One  coming  to  fee  them,  was  talked  to  very 
clofely  by  Billy,  Lift  fhe  could  bear  no  more-  She 
turned  to  Lucy,  and  faid.  ‘You  were  always  good 
children  and  never' told  ftories.’  “Yes,  madam, 
faid  Lucy, 44  but  I did,  when  I was  afraid  of  being 
beat:  and  when  I faid  my  prayers ; for  I did  not 

think 


C 2 99  ] 

think  of  God.  And  1 called  him,  My  Father, 
when  I was  a child  of  wrath.  And  as  to  praying, 
I could  not  pray,  ’till  it  pleafed  him  by  his  fpirit  to 
fhew  me  my  fins.  And  he  fhewed  me,  we  might 
fay  as  man}'  prayers  as  we  would,  and  go  to  church 
or  meeting.  Yet  all  this,  if  we  had  not  Chrilt  for 
our  foundation,  would  not  do.” 

“ When  they  were  afked,  if  they  were  afraid 
to  die,  they  always  anfwered,  “ No,  For  what 
can  death  do  ? He  can  only  lay  his  cold  hand 
upon  our  bodies.” 

“ One  told  Lucy,  * Now  you  may  live  as  you 
pleafe,  fince  you  are  fure  of  going  to  heaven.’ 
She  replied,  “ No,  I would  not  fin  againft  my 
dear  Saviour,  if  you  would  give  me  this  room 
full  of  gold.” 

“ On  the  Monday  before  he  died,  Billy  re- 
peated that  hymn,  with  the  mofl  triumphant  joy, 

“ Come  let  us  join  ourchearful  forigs 
“ With  angels  round  the  throne  !” 

Afterwards  he  repeated  the  Lord’s  prayer.  The 
laft  words  he  fpoke  intelligibly  were,  “ How 
pleafant  is  it  to  be  with  Chrifl,  for  ever,  and  ever 
— for  ever  and  ever!  Amen!  Amen!  Amen!” 

“ While  he  lay  fpeechlefs,  there  came  into 
the  room,  fome  who  he  feared  knew  not  God. 
He  feemed  much  affefled,  wept  and  moaned 
much,  waved  his  hand,  and  put  it  on  his  filler’s 
mouth  ; intimating,  as  (lie  fuppofed,  that  fhe 
N 6 fhould 


[ 300  j 

fhould  fpeak  to  them.  On  Wednefday  even- 
ing, February  1.  his  happy  fpirit  returned  to 
God.”  She  died  not  long  after. 

In  the  following  days  I went  on  {lowly,  through 
Staffordfhire  and  Chefhire,  to  Manchefler,  In 
this  journey,  as  well  as  in  many  others,  I ob- 
{erved  a miflake  that  almoft  univerfally  prevails. 
And  I defire  all  travellers  to  take  good  notice  of 
it,  which  may  fave  them  both  from  trouble  and 
danger.  Near  thirty  years  ago  I was  thinking, 
“ How  is  it,  that  no  horfe  ever  Humbles  while 
I am  reading  ?”  (Hiftory,  poetry,  and  philofo- 
phy  I commonly  read  on  horfe-back,  having 
other  employment  at  other  times.)  “ No  ac- 
count can  poflibly  be  given  but  this,  becaufe  then 
I throw  the  reins  on  his  neck.  I then  fet  my- 
felf  to  obferve.  And  I aver,  that  in  riding 
above  an  hundred  thoufand  miles,  I fcarce  ever 
remember  any  horfe,  (except  twro,  that  would 
fall  head  over  heels  any  way)  to  fall,  or  make  a 
confiderable  Humble,  while  I rode  with  a Jlack 
rein.  To  fancy  therefore  that  a tight  rein  pre- 
vents Humbling,  is  a capital  blunder.  I have  re- 
peated the  trial  more  frequently,  than  moH  men 
in  the  kingdom  can  do.  A Jlack  rein,  will  pre- 
vent Humbling,  if  any  thing  will : but  in  fome 
horfes  ; nothing  can. 

Thurfday  29.  I preached  in  the  new  preach- 
ing-houfe  at  Rochdale,  and  on  Saturday  31,  at 
CheHer.  Tuefday,  April  3.  I went  on  to  Li- 
verpool ; 


[ 30i  j 

verpool:  on  Wednefday  and  Thurfday,  I read 
Mr.  Sellon’s  anfwer  to  Elifha  Cole’s  book  on 
God’s  fovereignty,  fo  plaufibly  written,  that  it  is 
no  wonder  fo  many  are  deceived  thereby." 

Friday  6.  I preached  in  Wigan  at  noon,  and 
in  the  evening  at  Bolton.  Sunday  8.  after  preach, 
ing  at  eight  and  one,  I hafl.en.gd  on  to  James 
Edmundfon’s,  preached  to  a few  ferious  people, 
and  gave  direftions  to  his  poor  fick  daughter, 
which  it  is  poflible,  may  fave  her  life.  Monday 
9.I  rode  on  to  Amblefide,  onTuefday,  to  White- 
heaven. 

Here  I found  a faintnefs  had  fpread  through 
all.  No  wonder  fince  there  had  been  no  morning 
preaching  for  fome  months.  Yet  every  morning  I 
was  here,  the  congregations  were  as  large  as  they 
had  been  for  many  years.  Thurfday  12.  I met 
fuch  a company  of  children,  as  I have  not  found 
within  an  hundred  miles.  Several  of  them  ap- 
peared to  be  convinced  of  fin  ; five,  rejoicing  in 
God  their  Saviour.  And  upon-  enquiry,  I found 
their  whole  behaviour  was  fuitable  to  their  pro- 
feflion. 

Good-Friday,  13 . Notice  having  been  given 
thro’  miftake  of  my  preaching  at  Carlifle,  I was 
obliged  to  fet  out  from  Whitehaven,  immedia- 
tely after  the  morning  preaching.  I preached  in 
Cockermouth  at  one  and  then  rode  on  to  Car- 
lifle. It  was  here  the  day  of  fmall  things ; the  fo- 
ciety  confiding  but  of  fifteen  members.  I preach- 
ed 


r 302  ] 

ed  at  fix,  and  as  many  as  could  hear,  behaved 
with  the  utmoft  ferioufnefs.  Afterwards  I walked 
to  Houghton,  a village  two  miles  from  Cailille, 
and  on  an  hard,  clean  bed,  flept  in  peace. 

Saturday  14.  I preached  at  five  to  moft  of  the 
village,  though  on  fo  fhort  a warning:  and  at 
night  in  Carlifle.  Leaving  Mr.  Rankin  to  preach 
in  the  evening,  I rode  on  to  Longtown:  where 
finding  no  better  place  to  fcreen  us  from  the  wind, 
I flood  in  a large,  broad  entry,  with  a room  on 
either  hand.  Many  crouded  in  here  ; the  reft 
flood  at  the  door.  Eafter-dav  1 5, Jofeph  Guilford 
preached  at  five.  At  eight  I preached  in  a little 
fquare.  But  at  one  I was  defired  to  preach  in  the 
market-place,  where  was  a far  more  numer- 
ous congregation.  Afterwards  we  took  horfe, 
and  before  eight,  reached  an  admirable  inn  at 
Dumfries. 

Monday  16.  We  had  a fair  morning  till  we 
began  to  climb  up  Enterkine,  one  of  the  higheft 
mountains  in  the  weft  of  Scotland.  We  then  got 
into  a Scotch  mift,  and  were  dropping  wet,  before 
we  came  to  the  Lead -hills.  In  the  evening  we 
reached  Lefmahagow,  andGlafgowonTuef.  where 
1 fpent  two  days  with  much  fatisfadlion.  I had 
defigned  to  go  ftrait  from  hence  to  Perth  : but 
being  defired  to  take  Edinburgh  in  my  way.  I 
rode  thither  on  Friday  and  endeavoured  to  con- 
firm thofe  whom  many  had  ftrove  to  turn  out  of 
the  way.  What  pity  is  it  that  the  children  of 
God,  fhould  fo  zealoufly  do  the  devil's  work  ! 

How 


[ 3°3  ] 

How  is  it,  that  they  are  {fill  ignorant  of  Sa- 
tan’s devices  ? Lord  what  is  man  ? 

Saturday  21.  Pufhing  through  violent  wind 
and  rain  we  came  to  Perth  in  the  afternoon. 
This  evening  the  Tolbouth  contained  the  con- 
gregation ; and  at  eight  in  the  morning.  The  ftor- 
my  wind  would  not  fuffer  me  to  preach  abroad  in 
the  evening.  So  we  retired  into  the  court  houfe, 
as  many  as  could,  and  had  a folemn  and  comfort- 
able hour,  Monday  23,  I walked  over  to  Scone, 
and  took  another  view  of  that  palace  ofantient 
men  of  renown,  long  fince  mouldered  into  com- 
mon dull.  The  buildings  too  are  now  decaying 
apace.  So  pafTes  the  dream  of  human  greatnefs  ! 

Tuefday  24.  I fpent  a few  agreeable  hours 
with  Dr.  O.  an  upright,  friendly,  fenfible  man. 
Such  likewife  I found  Mr.  Black,  the  fenior  mi- 
nifier  at  Perth,  who  loon  after  went  to  Abraham’s 
bofom. 

Wednefday  25,  Taking  horfe  at  five,  we 
rode  to  Dunkeld,  the  firft  confiderable  town  in 
the  Highlands.  We  were  agreeably  fuprized  ; a 
pleafanter  fituation  cannot  be  eafily  imagin- 
ed. Afterwards  we  went  fome  miles  on  a 
fmooth  delightful  road,  hanging  over  the 
river  Tay,  and  then  went  on,  winding  through 
the  mountains,  to  the  caftle  of  Blair.  The 
mountains  for  the  next  twenty  miles,  were  much 
higher  and  covered  with  fnow.  In  the  evening 
we  came  to  Dalwhinny,  the  deareft  inn  I have 
met  with  in  North-Britain.  In  the  morning,  we 

were 


C 3°4  ] 

were  informed  fo  much  fnow  had  fall  an  in  the 
night,  that  we  could  get  no  farther.  And  indeed 
three  young  women,  attempting  to  crofs  the 
mountain  to  Blair,  were  fwallowed  up  in  the 
fnow.  However  we  refolved,  with  God’s  help, 
to  go  as  far  as  we  could.  But  about  noon  we 
were  at  a full  flop  : the  fnow  driving  together  on 
the  top  of  the  mountain,  had  quite  blocked  up 
the  road.  We  difmounted,  and  ftrjking  out  of  the 
road  warily,  fometimes  to  the  left,  with  many 
{tumbles,  but  no  hurt,  we  got  on  to  Dalmagarry, 
and  before  funfet,  to  Invernefs. 

Benjamin  and  William  Chappel,  who  had 
been  here  three  months,  were  waiting  for  a vef- 
fel,  to  return  to  London.  They  had  met  a few 
people  every  night,  to  fing  and  pray  together. 
And  their  behaviour,  fuitable  to  their  profeffion, 
had  removed  much  prejudice. 

Frid.  27.  I breakfafled  with  the  fenior  minifler 
Mr.  M’Kenzie,  3 pious  and  friendly  man.  At  fix 
in  the  evening,  I began  preaching  in  the  church, 
and  with  very  uncommon  liberty  of  fpirit.  At  feven 
in  the  morning  I preached  in  the  library,  a large 
commodious  room.  But  it  would  not  contain  the 
congregation  : many  were  contained  to  go  a* 
way.  Afterwards  I rode  over  to  Fort  George,  a 
very  regular  fortification,  capable  of  containing 
four  thoufand  men.  As  I was  juft  taking  borfe, 
the  commanding  officer  fent  wmrd,  “ I was  wel- 
come to  preach.”  But  it  was  a little  too  late,  I 

had 


[ 3 °5  ] 

had  then  but  juft  time  to  ride  back  to  Inver- 
nefs. 

Sun.  29.  At  feven,  the  benches  being  remov* 
ed,  the  library  contained  us  tolerably  well.-  And 
I am  perfuaded,  God  {hook  the  hearts,  of  many 
outfide  Chriftians.  I preached  in  the  church  at 
five  in  the  afternoon.  Mr.  Helton  defigned  to 
preach  abroad  at  feven  ; but  the  minifters  defired 
he  would  preach  in  the  church  which  he  did,  to 
a large  and  attentive  congregation.  Many  fol- 
lowed us  from  the  church  to  our  lodgings,  with 
whom  I {pent  fome  time  in  prayer,  and  then  ad- 
vifed  them,  as  many  as  could,  to  meet  together, 
and  fpend  an  hour  every  evening  in  prayer  and 
ufeful  converfation. 

Monday  30.  We  fet  out  in  a fine  morning. 
A little  before  we  reached  Nairn,  we  were  met 
by  a meflenger  from  the  minifter  Mr.  Dunbar; 
who  defired,  I would  breakfaft  with  him,  and 
give  them  a fermon  in  his  church.  Afterwards  we 
haftened  to  Elgin  through  a pleafant  and  well 
cultivated  country.  When  we  fet  out  from  hence 
the  rain  began,  and  poured  down  till  we  came 
to  the  Spey,  the  mod  impetuous  river  I ever 
faw.  Finding  the  large  boat,  was  in  no  hafle  to 
move,  I ftepped  into  a fmall  one  juft  going  off. 
It  whirled  us  over  the  ftream  almoft  in  a minute. 
I waited  at  the  inn  at  Fochaber,  (dark  and  dirty 
enough  in  all  reafon)  till  our  friends  overtook 
me  with  the  horfes.  The  outfide  of  the  inn  at 
Keith  was  of  the  fame  hue,  and  promifed  us  no 

great 


[ 306  ] 

great  things.  But  we  were  agreeably  di {appoint- 
ed. We  found  plenty  of  every  thing,  and  fo 
dried  ourfelves  at  lerfure. 

Tuefday,  May  1.  I rode  on  to  Aberdeen,  and 
fpent  the  reft  of  the  week  there.  It  fell  out 
well  ; for  the  weather  was  uncommon  ; we  had 
{forms  of  fnow  or  rain  every  day.  And  it  feems 
the  weather  was  the  fame  as  far  as  London.  So 
general  a {form  has  fear re  been  in  the  memory 
of  man. 

Sunday  6.  I preached  in  the  College-kirk  at 
Old- Aberdeen,  to  a very  ferious  (though  moftly 
genteel)  congregation.  In  the  evening  I preach- 
ed at  our  own  room,  and  early  in  the  morning 
took  my  leave  of  this  loving  people.  We  came 
to  Montrofe  about  noon.  I had  defigned  to 
preach  there  ; but  found  no  notice  had  been 
given.  However  I went  down  to  the  green, 
and  fung  an  hymn.  People  prefently  flocked 
from  all  parts.  And  God  gave  me  great  free- 
dom of  fpeech,  fo  that  I hope  we  did  not  meet 
in  vain. 

At  feven  in  the  evening  I preached  at  Ar- 
broth,  (properl)'  Aberbrothwick.)  The  whole 
town  feems  moved : the  congregation  was  the 
largeft  I have  feen  fince  we  left  Invernefs.  And 
the  fociety,  though  but  of  nine  months  {landing, 
is  the  largeft  in  the  kingdom  next  that  of  Aber- 
deen. 

Tuefday  8.  I took  a view  of  the  fmall  remains 
pf  the  abbey.  I know  nothing  like  it  in  all 

North- 


[ 3°7  3 

North-Britain.  I paced  it,  and  found  it  an 
hundred  yards  long.  The  breadth  is  proporti- 
onable. Part  of  the  weft  end,  which  is  ftill 
ftanding,  fhews  it  was  full  as  high  as  Weftmin* 
fter-abbey.  The  fouth  end  oi  the  crofs  ifte 
likewife  is  ftanding,  near  the  top  of  which 
is  a large  circular  window.  The  zealous  re- 
formers, they  told  us,  burnt  this  down.  God 
deliver  us  from  reforming  mobs ! 

I have  feen  no  town  in  Scotland  which  in- 
creafes  fo  fall:.,  or  which  is  built  with  fo  much 
common  fenfe  as  this.  Two  entire  new-ftreets, 
and  part  of  a third  have  been  built  within  the fe 
two  years.  They  run  parallel  with  each  other, 
and  have  a row  of  gardens  between  them.  So 
that  every  houfe  has  a garden:  and  thus  both 
health  and  convenience  are  confulted. 

Wednefday  9.  I rode  on  to  Dundee.  Th* 
minifters  here,  particularly  Mr.  Small,  are  bitter 
enough:  notwithftanding  which,  the  fociety  is 
well  eftablilhed,  and  the  congregations  exceed- 
ing large.  I dealt  very  plainly  with  them  at  fix, 
and  ftill  more  fo,  the  next  evening.  Yet  none 
appeared  to  be  offended.  Friday  11.  I went 
forward  to  Edinburgh.  Saturday  12.  1 received 
but  a melancholy  account  of  the  ft3te  of  things 
here.  The  congregations  were  nearly  as  ufual : 
but  the  fociety,  which  when  I was  here  before, 
confifted  of  above  an  hundred  and  fixty  mem- 
bers, was  now  fhrunk  to  about  fifty.  Such  is 
the  fruit  of  a fingle  preacher’s  ftaying  a whole 

year 


a 308  ] 

year  in  once  place  ! Together  with  the  labour* 
of  good  Mr.  Townlhend. 

Sunday  13.  At  feven  I preached  in  the  cha- 
pel taken  by  Lady  Glenorchy,  which  ftands  at 
a great  diftance  from  ours,  in  the  molt  honoura- 
ble part  of  the  city.  Between  twelve  and  one 
I preached  in  the  High  School-yard,  it  being 
too  ftormy  to  preach  on  the  Caflle-hill.  A little 
before  fix  I preached  in  our  chapel,  crowded 
above  and  below.  But  I doubt,  with  little  ef* 
fe£l : exceeding  few  feemed  to  feel  what  they 
heard. 

Monday  14.  After  ten  years  enquiry,  I have 
learned,  what  are  the  Highlands  of  Scotland ! 
Some  told  me,  “ The  highlands  begin,  when 
you  crofs  the  Tay others,  “ when  you  crofs 
the  North-Efk:’’  and  others,  “ when  you  crofs 
the  river  Spey  but  all  of  them  miffed  the 
mark.  Tor  the  truth  of  the  matter  is,  the  high- 
lands are  bounded  by  no  river  at  all,  but  by 
Cams,  or  heaps  of  fiones  laid  in  a rosv,  fouth-weft 
and  north- eafi,  from  fea  to  fea  Thefe  former- 
ly divided  the  kingdom  of  the  Pi£ls,  from  that 
of  the  Caledonians,  which  included  all  the 
country,  north  of  the  Cams,  feveral  whereof  are 
Hill  remaining.  It  takes  in  Argylefhire,  moll 
of  Perthfhire,  Murraylhire,  with  all  the  north- 
weft  counties.  This  is  called  the  Highlands, 
becaufe  a confiderable  part  of  it  (though  not  the 
whole)  is  mountainous.  But  it  is  not  more 
mountainous  than  North-Wales,  nor  than  many 

parts 


[ 309  3 

parts  of  England  and  Ireland:  nor  do  I believe 
it  has  any  mountain  higher  than  Snowdon  hill, 
or  the  Skidder  in  Cumberland.  Talking  Erfe 
therefore,  is  not  the  thing  that  diflinguifhes 
thefe  from  the  Low-lands.  Neither  is  this  or 
that  river  ; both  the  Tay,  the  Elk,  and  the  Spey 
running  through  the  highlands,  not  fouth  of 
them. 

Thurfday  17.  At  five  in  the  moning  I took  a 
folemn  leave  of  our  friends  at  Edinburgh.  About 
eight  I preached  .at  MulTelborough,  and  found 
fome  hope,  there  will  be  a blefling  in  the  rem- 
nant. In  the  evening  I preached  in  the  new  houfe 
at  Dumbar,  the  chearfulleft  in  the  kingdom.  Fri- 
day 18.  We  rode  over  to  the  Earl  of  Hadding- 
ton’s feat,  finely  fituated  between  two  woods. 
The  houfe  is  exceeding  large  and  pleafant,  com- 
manding a wide  profpefl  both  ways.  And  the 
earl  is  cutting  walks  through  the  woods,  fmooth- 
ing  the  ground,  and  much  inlarging  and  beauti- 
fying his  garden.  Yet  he  is  to  die  ! In  the  even- 
ing, I trull;  God  broke  fome  of  the  llony  hearts 
of  Dunbar.  A little  increafe  here  is  in  the  fociety 
likewife  : and  all  the  members  walk  unblame- 
ably. 

Satur.  19.  At  noon  I preached  in  the  Town- 
hall  at  Berwick.  Coming  to  Alnwick  in  the  af- 
ternoon, I found  that  wife  and  good  man,  Wil- 
liam Coward,  had  been  buried  two  or  three  days 
before.  I judged  it  right  to  do  honour  to  his 
memory,  by  preaching  a kind  of  funeral  fermon 


on 


[.  3*0  ] 


on,  There  is  no  work,  nor  device,  nor  knowledge, 
nor  wifdom  in  the  grave  whither  thou  goejl. 

Sunday-20.  At  feven  I preached  in  the  houfe; 
at  four  and  at  feven  in  the  market-place.  But 
the  multitude  was  fo  great,  that  I doubt  many 
could  not  hear,  I then  met  the  fociety,  and 
we  feemed  to  breath  the  fame  fpirit  with 
him  that  was  juft  entered  into  the  joy  of  his 
Lord. 

Monday  21.  I preached  at  Morpeth  and  at 
Newcaftle.  On  Wednefday  23.  1 went  over  to 
Sunderland.  Saturday  26.  We  went  by  w’ater 
toNorth-Biddick.  The  preaching  here  had  been 
difoontinued  for  many  years,  as  it  feemed  to  be 
fowing  upon  the  fand.  But  at  length  we  found 
the  fruit  of  our  labour.  Many  are  both  con- 
vinced and  converted  to  God.  In  returning, 
as  we  were  four  large  boats  in  company,  we 
made 

“ The  mountains  and  vales  his  praifes  rebound.” 

So  is  even  the  water -language  now  changed ! 

Sunday  27.  At  eight  I preached  near  the  crofs 
in  Sunderland,  to  fuch  an  affembly  as  was  never 
feen  there  before.  But  I believe  that  at  Gatef- 
head-fell  was  ftill  larger:  as  was  that  at  the  Caf- 
tle-garth  in  Newcaftle.  Monday  28.  I began 
again  the  meeting  of  the  children,  which  had 
been  negle&ed  for  fome  months.  And  we 

had 


[ 311  ] 

had  a token  for  good  : two  or  three  were 
cut  to  the  heart : and  many  feemed  much  af- 
fefted. 

t On  Tuefday  the  29th,  and  the  following  days, 

I took  a little  circuit  through  Weardale,  Teef- 
dale,  and  Swaledale.  The  ten  days  following  I 
fpent  in  and  near  Newcaftle.  Monday,  June  11. 

I took  a chearful  leave  of  that  loving  people; 
about  noon  preached  at  Durham,  and  in  the 
evening,  before  Mr.  Watfon’s  door  to  a nume- 
rous congregation  at  Stockton.  luefday  12.  At 
five  I preached  in  the  new  houfe,  ftrangely  raifed, 
when  the  cafe  appeared  quite  defperate,  by 
God’s  touching  the  heart  of  a man  of  fubffance, 
who  bought  the  ground  and  built  it  without  de- 
lay. I preached  at  Norton  at  noon,  and  after- 
wards met  thofe,  who  can  rejoice  evermore  and 
pray  without  ceafng.  We  bad  another  comforta- 
ble' opportunity  at  Yarm  in  the  evening,  where 
I found  a greater  number  of  thofe  who  believe 
God  has  enabled  them  to  love  him  with  all  their 
heart  and  foul. 

Wednefday  13.  I preached  at  Halfey,  ten 
miles  from  Yarm,  and  in  the  evening  at  Thirfk. 
Thurfday  tq,  about  two  at  Potto,  and  in  the 
evening  at  Hutton.  Plere,  as  well  as  elfewhere, 
thofe  who  believe  they  are  faved  from  fin,  un- 
dergo many  trials  from  their  brethren.  But  fo 
much  the  more  will  the  God  of  all  grace,  after 

they 


[ 312  ] 

they  have fujfered  a while , ejlablijh,jlrengthen  and 
fettle  them. 

Friday  15.  I was  agreeably  furprized,  to  find 
the  whole  road  from  Tliirfk  to  Stokefley,  which 
ufed  to  be  extremely  bad,  better  than  moft  turn* 
pikes.  The  gentlemen  had  exerted  themfelves, 
and  raifed  money  enough  to  mend  it  effeftually. 
So  they  have  done  for  feveral  hundred  miles  in 
Scotland,  and  throughout  all  Connaught  in  Ire- 
land. And  fo  they  undoubtedly  might  do, 
throughout  all  England,  without  fadling  the  poor 
people  with  the  vile  impofition  of  turnpikes  for 
ever. 

In  the  afternoon  we  came  to  Whitby.  Having 
preached  thrice  a day  for  five  days,  I was  willing 
to  preach  in  the  houfe.  But  notice  had  been  gi- 
ven of  my  preaching  in  the  market-place.  So  I 
began  at  fix,  to  a large  congregation,  moft  of 
them  deeply  attentive. 

Saturday  16.  I found  our  preacher,  James 
Brownfield,  had  juft  fet  up  for  himfelf.  The  rea- 
fons  he  gave  for  leaving  the  Methodifts  were,  1. 
That  they  w'ent  to  church  ; 2.  That  they  held 
Perfefiiion.  I earneftly  defired  our  fociety,  to 
leave  him  to  God,  and  fay  nothing  about  him, 
good  or  bad.  In  the  afternoon  I looked  over  Dr. 
Prieftly’s  Englifh  Grammar.  I wonder  he  would 
publifh  it  after  Bifkop  Lowth’s. 

Sunday  17.  I met  the  fele£l  fociety,  confifting 
of  fixty-five  members.  I believe,  all  of  thefe  were 

favpd 


[ S13  ] 

faved  from  fin  : moft  of  them  are  ftill  in  glorious 
liberty.  Many  of  them  fpake  with  admirable 
fimplicity.  And  their  words  were  like  fire.  Im- 
mediately the  flame  kindled,  and  fpread  from 
heart  to  heart.  At  eight  I preached ; at  nine,  met 
the  children,  moft  of  whom  had  known  the  love 
of  God.  And  feveral  of  them  were  able  ft  ill,  to 
rejoice  in  God  their  Saviour.  Almoft  as  foon  as 
I began  to  fpeak,  God  fpoke  to  their  hearts,  and 
they  were  ill  able  to  contain  themfelves.  I ob- 
ferved  one  little  maid  in  particular,  who  heaved 
and  ftrove  for  fome  time,  till  at  length  (lie  was 
conflrained  to  yield,  and  break  out  into  ftrong 
cries  and  tears. 

We  had  a poor  fermon  at  church.  However 
I went  again  in  the  afternoon,  remembering  the 
words  of  Mr.  Philip  Henry,  “ If  the  preacher 
does  not  know  his  duty,  I blefs  God  that  I know 
mine” 

Between  one  and  two  I met  the  bands,  being 
near  two  thirds  of  the  fociety.  Their  opennefs 
was  quite  furprizing,  as  well  as  the  fpirit  with 
which  they  fpoke.  One  plain  woman  cried  and 
fpoke  and  cried  again,  fo  that  they  were  in  tears 
on  every  fide.  I fuppofe,  if  I could  have  flayed  fo 
long,  fome  or  other  would  have  fpoke  till 
night. 

At  five  I preached  in  the  market-place  again, 
to  a far  larger  congregation  than  before.  Our 
Iove-feaft  took  up  the  next  two  hours,  at  which 
many  were  filled  with  folemn  joy.  Afterwards  I 
Vol.  XXXII.  O met 


[ 3*4  ] 

met  a few  of  the  children  again,  all  of  whom  had 
tailed  that  the  Lord  is  gracious.  I alked  her  that 
cried  fo  violently  in  the  morning,  what  was  the 
matter  with  her  ? She  faid,  “ I was  fo  over- 
whelmed with  the  power  and  love  of  God,  that 
I could  not  hide  it-’5  When  I quellioned  her  far- 
ther, fhe  faid,  “ A quarter  of  a year  ago,  one 
Saturday  night,  I was  quite  convinced  I was  a 
finner,  and  afraid  of  dropping  into  hell  ; but  on 
Sunday  I felt  the  pardoning  love  of  God.  Yet  I 
had  many  doubts  till  Monday  evening,  when 
they  were  all  taken  away  in  a moment.  After 
this  I law  and  felt  the  wickednefs  of  my  heart, 
and  longed  to  be  delivered  from  it.  And  on  Sun- 
day I was  delivered,  and  had  as  clear  a witnefs 
of  this,  as  of  my  jullification.  But  I was  fome- 
times  off  my  watch;  then  it  was  not  fo  clear; 
and  people  commended  me,  till  by  little  and  little 
I loll  it.  Indeed  I ftill  feel  the  love  of  God  ; but 
not  as  1 did  before.” 

Monday  18.  I preached  at  Robinhood’s-bay, 
about  noon ; at  Scarborough  in  the  evening. 
WTednefday  20. 1 rode  to  Burlington  and  preach- 
ed on  the  Key,  to  many  plain,  and  many  genteel 
people.  I preached  at  Hull  in  the  evening,  and 
the  next  at  Beverley.  Friday  22.  I went  on  to 
Yrork,  where  there  is  now  more  life  among  the 
people,  than  has  been  for  feveral  years.  We 
found  much  of  the  prefence  of  God  this  evening, 
and  much  more  the  next.  One  young  man  was 

in 


[ 3 *5  ] 

in  a violent  agony,  and  could  not  refrain  from 
crying  aloud.  Several  continued  with  him  in 
prayer  till  ten  o’clock.  He  was  then  filled  with 
joy  unfpeakable. 

Sunday  24.  I met  the  feleft  fociety  at  fix,  and 
had  the  pleafure  to  find,  that  tome  who  had  loft 
the  great  bleffing  for  months  or  years,  had  re- 
covered it  with  large  increafe.  AteightI  preached 
to  a people  ready  prepared  for  the  Lord.  At  nine 
I met  the  children.  At  five,  by  taking  out  the 
benches,  we  made  room  for  the  greateft  part  of 
the  congregation.  Afterwards  I fpent  an  hour 
with  the  fociety,  and  fo  concluded  the  bufy, 
happy  day. 

Monday  25.  I preached  in  Tadcafter  at  noon, 
and  at  Pateley-bridge  in  the  evening.  It  rained, 
as  ufual  all  the  time  : but  the  congregation  flood 
as  ftill  as  the  trees.  And  God  did  fatisfy  the 
hungry  with  good  things,  many  of  whom  have 
given  him  all  thtir  heart. 

Tuefday  26.  It  rained  all  the  time  I was  preach- 
ing at  Otiey,  to  a numerous  congregation.  And 
they  drank  in  the  words  of  life,  juft  as  the  thirft- 
ing  earth  the  fhowers.  The  next  evening  I 
preached  in  houfe  at  Yeadon,  the  rain  not  buf- 
fering us  to  ftand  abroad. 

Thurfday  28. 1 rode  to  Mr.  Sutcliffe’s  at  Hoo- 
,hole,  a lovely  valley,  incompaft  with  high  moun- 
tains. I flood  on  the  frnooth  grabs  before  his 
houfe,  (which  {lands  on  a gently  rifing  ground,) 
and  all  the  people  on  the  flope  before  me.  It 
Oa  was 


[ 3*6  ] 

was  a glorious  opportunity.  I truft,  many  came 
boldly  to  the  throne , and  found  grace  to  help  in 
time  of  need . 

I can  hardly  believe  that  I am  this  day  entered 
into  the  fixty.eighth  year  of  ray  age  ! How  mar- 
vellous are  the  ways  of  God ! How  has  he  kept 
me,  even  from  a child!  From  ten  to  thirteen  or 
fourteen,  I had  little  but  bread  to  eat,  and  not 
great  plenty  of  that.  I believe  this  was  fo  far  from 
hurting  me,  that  it  laid  the  foundation  of  lafling 
health.  When  I grew  up*  in  confequence  of 
reading  Dr.  Cheyne,  I chofe  to  eat  fparingly  and 
drink  water.  This  was  another  great  means  of 
continuing  my  health,  till  I was  about  feven  and 
twenty.  I then  began  fpitting  of  blood,  which 
continued  feveral  years.  A warm  climate  cured 
this.  I was  afterwards  brought  to  the  brink  of 
death  by  a fever  : but  it  left  me  healthier  than 
before.  Eleven  years  after,  I was  in  the  third 
flage  of  a confumption:  in  three  months  it 
pleafed  God  to  remove  this  alfo.  Since  that 
time  I have  known  neither  pain  nor  ficknefs,  and 
am  now  healthier  than  I was  forty  years  ago ! 
This  hath  God  wrought  ! 

On  Friday  and  Saturday  I preached  at  Hepton- 
flall,  Coin, and  Kighley.  Sunday,  July  1.  Being 
much  concerned  for  the  poor  parifhioners  of  Ha- 
worth, who  hear  and  hear,  and  are  no  more  af- 
fefted  than  ftones,  I fpoke  to  them  in  the  mod 
cutting  manner  I could.  May  God  apply  it  to 
their  hearts ! 


On 


t 3^7  3 

On  Monday  andTuefday  I preached  at  Bing- 
ley  and  Bradford,  and  Wednefday  4,  rode  to 
Halifax.  Here  I had  an  opportunity  of  enquir- 
ing throughly  into  a very  extraordinary  cafe.  On 
January  26,  1760,  a young  woman  of  two  and 
twenty,  felt  in  the  evening  an  uncommon  cold- 
nefs  at  her  feet.  Prefently  after,  fhe  was  feized 
with  convulfions.  The  diforder  from  that  time 
attended  her,  more  or  lefs  every  day,  in  fpite  of 
all  the  medicines,  which  were  adminidered  by 
the  moll  fkilful  phyficians.  One  of  her  fits  be- 
gan a little  before  we  went  in.  At  fird  fhe  fell 
back  in  her  chair,  feemingly  fenfelefs,  and 
wrought  (like  one  firangled)  in  her  bread  and 
throat.  In  two  or  three  minutes,  fire  fprung  up, 
turned  round  many  times,  then  dropped  down 
and  began  beating  her  head  againfi  the  done- 
floor.  Quickly  fhe  darted  up,  leaped  right  up- 
wards many  times,  then  ran  to  and  fro  with  an 
hundred  odd  gediculations.  She  beat  herfelf  on 
the  head,  tore  her  hair,  and  attempted  to  run 
into  the  fire.  Being  put  into  a chair,  fhe  fpoke 
a good  deal,  but  not  articulately.  She  was  con- 
vulfed  again  from  head  to  foot ; and  afterwards 
faid  wildly,  “ Where  am  I ? Who  are  thefe  ? I 
want  my  father.  I will  go  to  my  Father.”  In 
about  an  hour  fhe  came  to  her  fenfes. 

I fliould  have  imagined,  the  phyficians  would 
have  fuppofed  all  this  to  be  counterfeit.  But  it 
ieemsone  and  all  thought  that  could  not  be ; as  fhe 
O 3 could- 


[ 3lS  1 

could  have  no  motive  to  feign,  fince  fhe  gained 
nothing  thereby,  living  upon  the  fruit  of  her 
own  and  her  lather’s  labour.  And  many  of  the 
circumllances  could  not  be  accounted  for,  upon 
that  fuppofition.  Such  were  her  tears,  her  foam- 
ing at  the  mouth,  her  tearing  her  hair,  ftriking 
herfelf,  and  beating  her  head  againfl  the  Hones : 
her  flrong  convulfions,  and  what  none  can  well 
conceive  unlefs  he  faw  it,  the  change  of  her 
countenance,  which  was  horrid  and  dreadful, 
yea  diabolical,  as  long  as  the  fits  were  upon 
her,  but  was  remarkably  pretty  and  agreeable,  as 
foon  as  fhe  came  to  herfelf. 

When  old  Dr.  A -r  was  afked,  what  her 

diforder  was  ? He  anfwered,  “ It  is  what  for- 
merly they  would  have  called  being  bewitched .” 
And  why  fhould  they  not  call  it  fo  now  ? Be- 
caufe  the  infidels  have  hooted  witchcraft  out  of 
the  world  : and  the  complaifant  Chriftians  in 
large  numbers,  have  joined  with  them  in  the  cry. 

I do  not  fo  much  wonder  at  this ; that  m3ny  of 
thefe  fhould  herein  talk  like  infidels.  But  I 
have  fometimes  been  inclined  to  wonder,  at  the 
pert,  faucy,  indecent  manner,  wherein  fome  of 
thofe  trample  upon  men  far  wifer  than  them- 
felves : at  their  fpeaking  fo  dogmatically  againfl 
what  not  only  the  whole  world,  Heathen  and 
Chriftian,  believed  in  all  paft  ages,  but  thou- 
fands,  learned  as  well  as  unlearned,  firmly  believe 
at  this  day.  I inftance  in  Dr.  Smollet  and 

Mr. 


[ 3*9  ] 

Mr.  Guthrie,  whofe  manner  of  fpeaking  con- 
cerning  witchcraft,  mufl  be  extremely  offenfive 
to  every  fenfible  man,  who  cannot  give  up  his 
bible. 

Thurfday  5.  1 preached  at  fix  at  Daw-green, 
near  Dewfbnry.  All  things  contributed  to  make 
it  a refrelhing  feafon  : the  gently-declining  fun, 
the  ftillnefs  of  the  evening,  the  beauty  of  the 
meadows  and  fields,  through  which 

The  fmooth  clear  “ river  drew  its  finuous  train 

The  oppofite  hills  and  woods,  and  the  earnefl- 
nefs  of  the  people,  covering  the  top  of  the  hill 
on  which  we  flood : and  above  all,  the  day- 
fpring  from  on  high,  the  confolation  of  the  Holy 
One  ! 

Saturday  7.  I rode  to  Mifs  Bofanquet’s.  Her 
family  is  flill  a pattern,  and  a general  bleffmg  to 
the  country.  Sunday  8.  I preached  at  White- 
chapel, Birflal  and  Leeds ; at  each  to  as  many 
as  my  voice  could  reach,  Monday  9,  about 
noon,  I preached  at  Woodhoufe,  a village  near 
Leeds,  where  a flame  is  fuddenly  broke  out. 
Few  days  pafs  without  frefh  difplays  of  the  grace 
of  God,  converting  finners  to  himfelf : and  a 
fpirit  of  childlike,  Ample  love  runs  through  the 
whole  body  of  the  people.  Tuefday  10.  I rode 
to  Harwood,  and  preached  to  a large  congrega- 
tion of  the  fame  fpirit  with  that  at  Wood- 
houfe. 


[ 32°  ] 

houfe.  Here  too  the  word  of  God  runs  fwifily  ; 
many  are  convinced,  and  many  converted  to 
God. 

Wednefday  n.  I rode  to  Doncafter,  and 
preached  at  noon  at  the  new  houfe;  one  of  the 
neateft  in  England.  It  was  fufficiently  crowded, 
and  (what  is  more  flrange)  with  ferious  and  atten- 
tive hearers.  What  was  more  unlikely,  fome 
years  fince,  than  that  fuch  an  houfe  or  fuch  a 
congregation  fhould  be  feen  here ! In  the  evening 
I preached  at  Finningly.  The  church  was  filled; 
but  I fear  few felt  the  word. 

Thurfday  12.  I preached  at  Epworth.  Friday 
13.  We  rode  through  heavy  rain  to  Newton- 
upon-Trent.  The  weather  clearingup,  I preached 
before  the  houfe  to  an  edrneft  congregation.  A 
people  more  loving,  more  artlefs,  or  more  athirfl 
for  God,  I have  feldom  feen.  Taking  horfe 
about  eleven,  we  rode  broiling  in  the  fun  through 
Lincoln  to  Horncaftle.  Our  brethren  defiant 

O 

me  to  preach  in  the  market-place,  I cried  to  an 
unbroken  multitude,  What  is  a man  profited,  ij 
he fiall  gain  the  tohole  world,  and  lofe  his  own 
foul ? The  power  of  God  wTas  upon  them,  and 
they  all  calmly  attended,  till  I commended  them 
to  God. 

This  was  the  firfl  day  that  I have  been  weary 
(the  violent  heat  drinking  up  my  fpirits)  fince  I 
fet  out  from  London.  Saturday  14.  In  another 
fultry  day  we  rode  to  Lowth,  formerly  another 

den 


[ 321  ] 

den  of  lions.  At  firft  great  part  of  the  congrega- 
tion feemed  to  care  for  none  of  thefe  things.  But 
God  made  them  care  ; the  Lord  looked  down 
from  heaven,  and  his  arrows  went  abroad.  I have 
feldom  feen  perfons  more  fenfibly  ftruck.  They 
gathered  clofer  and  clofer  together,  till  there  was 
not  one  inattentive  hearer,  and  hardly  one  unaf- 
fected. In  riding  hence  the  heat  was  as  intenfe 
as  ever : fo  that  I was  again  tired,  before  we 
reached  Grimfby.  But  I foon  recovered,  and 
preached  to  a congregation  of  good,  old  Metho- 
difts,  on,  Daniel  in  the  den  of  lions. 

Sunday  15.  I preached  at  eight  and  again  at 
two,  and  then  haftened  away  to  Barrow.  The 
people  here  much  refembled  thofe  at  Horncaftle. 
So  I would  not  take  them  out  of  their  depth, 
but  explained  and  inforced  thefe  folemn  words, 
It  is  appointed  unto  men  once  to  die.  Monday  1 6. 
At  nine  I preached  in  Awkborough,  to  a people 
of  quite  another  kind.  So  I fpoke  to  them  di- 
reftly  of  Chrift  crucified;  and  the  lalvation 
which  is  through  him.  About  noon  I preached 
to  a people  of  the  fame  fpirit  at  Amcoats.  In 
the  evening,  the  houfe  at  Swinfleet  not  being 
able  to  contain  a third  of  the  congregation,  I 
preached  on  a fmooth,  green  place,  fheltered 
from  the  wind,  on  Heb.  vii.  25.  Many  rejoiced 
to  hear  of  being  faved  to  the  uttermof , the  very 
thing  which  their  fouls  longed  after. 

Tuefday  17.  I preached  in  the  market-place 

at 


[ 322  ] 

at  Thorn  : all  were  quiet  and  tolerably  atten- 
tive. 

Wednefday  18.  About  noon  I preached  at 
Crowle.  This  is  the  place,  the  former  rector 
of  which,  cotemporary  with  my  father,  or- 
dered thofe  words  to  be  infcribed  upon  his  tomb- 
flone. 


“ Here  lies  the  body  of  Solomon  Afhburn, 
Forty  years  reflor  of  this  parifh. 

All  the  day  long  have  1 Jlr etched  out  my  hands , 
Unto  a difobedient  and gainfaying  people. 

So  I gave  them  up  unto  their  own  hearts  iu/is , 
And  let  them  follow  their  own  imaginations .” 

They  did  follow  them  for  many  years.  But  at 
length  God  hath  vifited  them. 

Friday  and  Saturday  I fpent  at  Epworth. 
Sunday  22,  about  eight,  I preached  at  Mifterton: 
at  one  about  half  a mile  from  Haxey  church  : and 
at  five  onEpworth-crofs  to  the  largeft  congrega- 
tion in  Lincolnfhire,  on,  I am  not  ajhamed  oj  the 
g of  pel  of  Chrift. 

Monday  23.  I preached  at  Doncafter  and  Ro- 
therham : on  Tuefday  and  Wenefday  at  Shef- 
field. On  Wednefday  evening  my  heart  was  fo 
inlarged,  that  I knew  not  how  to  leave  off.  Do 
fome  fay,  “ I preach  longer  than  ufual,  when  I 
am  barren  ?”  It  is  quite  the  contrary  with  me. 
1 never  exceed,  but  when  I am  full  of  matter. 

And 


[ 323  ] 

And  flill  I confider,  it  may  not  be  with  my  au- 
dience as  with  me.  So  that  it  is  flrange,  if  I ex- 
ceed my  time,  above  a quarter  of  an  hour. 

OnThurfday  and  Friday  I preached  at  Creitch, 
Derby,  Burton-upon-Trent  andAfbby.  Saturday 

28.  I rode  to  Caftle-Donnington  ; but  hay-mak- 
ing had  emptied  the  town,  till  a violent  fhower 
brought  all  the  hay-makers  home,  who  received 
the  good  word  with  gladnefs. 

At  feven  I preached  in  Nottingham.  Sunday 

29,  at  Sanjaker,  where  God  was  eminently  pre- 
fent.  At  five  in  the  evening  I went  to  the 
market-place  in  Nottingham.  Thoufands  upon 
thoufands  flocked  together  : and  all  were  ftill  as 
night,  while  I opened  and  applied,  I am  not 
afhamed  of  the  gofpel  of  Chrijl.  We  clofed  the 
day  with  a love-feaft,  during  which  four  mour- 
ners found  peace  with  God;  two  of  them  could 
not  avoid  declaring  it,  in  the  prefence  of  all 
their  brethren. 

Monday  30.  I preached  at  Bingham,  ten  miles 
from  Nottingham.  I really  admired  the  exqui- 
fite  ftupidity  of  the  people.  They  gaped  and 
flared,  while  I was  fpeaking  of  death  and  judg- 
ment, as  if  they  had  never  heard  of  fuch  things 
before.  And  they  were  not  helped  by  twofurly, 
ill-mannered  clergymen,  who  feemed  to  be  juli 
as  wife  as  themfelves.  The  congregation  at 
Hooton  in  the  evening  was  more  noble,  behav- 
ing with  the  utmoft  decency. 

Tuefday  gi.  At  nine  I preached  in  the  Mar- 
ket- 


[ 324  3 

ket-place  at  Loughborough,  to  almoft  as  large  a 
congregation  as  at  Nottingham  ; and  equally  at- 
tentive. Thence  I rode  to  Markfield.  Not- 
withftanding  the  harveft,  the  church  was  quick- 
ly filled.  And  great  was  our  rejoicing  in  our 
great  high-prieft,  through  whom  we  came  boldly 
to  the  throne  of  grace.  In  the  evening  I preach- 
ed in  the  Caflle-yard  at  Leicefter,  to  a multitude 
of  awakened  and  unawakened.  One  feeble  at- 
tempt was  made  to  diflurb  them  : a man  was 
fent  to  cry  frelh  falmon  at  a little  diflance.  But 
he  might  as  well  have  fpared  the  pains;  for  none 
took  the  leaf!  notice  of  him. 

Monday,  Auguft  1.  I rode  to  Northampton. 
It  being  flill  extremely  hot.  I determined  not 
to  be  cooped  up,  but  took  my  Hand  on  the 
fide  of  the  common,  and  cried  aloud  to  a large 
multitude  of  rich  and  poor,  Acquaint  thfelf  now 
with  him,  and  be  at  peace. 

Tuefdav  2.  Some  friends  from  London  met 
us  at  St.  Alban’s.  Before  dinner  we  took  a 
walk  in  the  abbey,  one  of  the  mod  ancient 
buildings  in  the  kingdom,  near  a tboufand  vears 
old  : and  one  of  the  large!!,  being  five  hundred 
and  fixty  feet  in  length  (confiderably  more  than 
Weflminfler  abbey)  and  broad  and  high  in  pro- 
portion. Near  the  eaff-end  is  the  tomb  and 
vault  of  good  Duke  Humphrey.  Some  now 
living  remember  fince  his  body  was  intire.  But 
after  the  coffin  was  opened,  fo  many  were  curi- 
ous to  tafle  the  liquor  in  which  it  was  preferv- 

c-d, 


[ 325  ] 

ed,  that  in  a little  time  the  corpfe  was  left  bare, 
and  then  foon  mouldered  away.  A few  bones 
are  now  all  that  remain.  How  little  is  the  fpirit 
concerned  at  this ! 

Sunday  g.  And  for  five  or  fix  days  this  week, 
the  heat  was  as  great,  as  I remember  in  Georgia. 
Tuefday  7.  Our  conference  began,  and  ended 
on  Friday  10.  On  Sunday  evening  I fet  out  in 
the  machine,  and  the  next  evening  preached  at 
Briftol.  Saturday  18.  I gave  a folemn  warn- 
ing to  a large  congregation  on  Redcliff-hill,  from 
thofe  awful  words,  The.  time  is  come,  that  judg- 
ment muji  begin  at  the  houj'e  oj  God.  Surely  it  will; 
unlefs  a general  repentance  prevent  a general 
vifitation. 

Monday  20.  I rode  to  Charlton.  The  vio- 
lent heat  continuing,  I preached  in  the  evening 
under  a tree,  to  a congregation  who  were  all 
attention.  Tuefday  21.  I rode  on  to  Tiverton 
and  thence  through  Launcefton,  Camelford., 
Port  Ifaac,  St.  Cuthbert,  St.  Agnes,  and  Red- 
ruth to  St.  Ives,  Here  God  has  made  all  our 
enemies  to  be  at  peace  with  us,  fo  that  I might 
have  preached  in  any  part  of  the  town.  But  I 
rather  chofe  a meadow,  where  fuch  as  would 
might  fit  down,  either  on  the  grafs  or  on  the 
hedges,  (So  the  Cornifh  term  their  broad  ffone- 
walls,  which  are  ufually  covered  with  grafs.) 
Here  I inforced,  Fear  God  and  keep  his  command • 
ments  ; for  this  is  the  whole  of  man , 

Vol.  XXXII.  P 


Suridaj 


r 326  ] 

Sunday  26.  Being  defired  to  preach  in  the 
town,  for  the  fake  of  fome  who  could  not  come 
up  the  hill,  I began  near  the  market-place  at 
eight,  on  Without  holinefs  no  man  Jhall  ft  the 
Lord . We  had  an  ufeful  fermon  at  church,  and 
another  in  the  afternoon,  delivered  in  a ftrong 
and  earneft  manner.  At  five  I preached  again. 
Well  nigh  all  the  town  were  prefent,  and  thou- 
fands  from  all  parts  of  the  country.  To  whom 
I explained,  The  Son  of  God  was  manifjied  to 
dejlroy  the  works  of  the  devil. 

Monday  27  I was  furprized  to  find,  that  the 
feleft  fociety  had  been  wholly  neglefted.  I got 
a few  of  them  together ; but  did  not  find  fo 
much  as  one,  who  had  not  given  up  his  confi- 
dence. At  nine  I renewed  ihe  meeting  of  the 
children,-  which  had  alfo  been  given  up  for  a 
long  feafon.  But  fo  dead  a company  have  I 
feldom  feen.  I found  fcarce  one  fpark  of  even 
the  fear  of  God  among  them. 

In  the  evening  I preached  before  the  houfe  at 
St.  Juft,  cn  l Jaw  the  dead  f nail  and  great,  fand 
before  God.  It  was  a glorious  hour.  The  fame 
fpirit  breathed  upon  us,  at  the  meeting  of  the  fo- 
ciety. At  fuch  a feafon,  who  does  not  feel,  that 
nothing  is  too  hard  for  God  ? 

On  Tuefday  and  Wednefday  I preached  at 
Newlin,  Gulzinny  and  St.  John’s.  Thurfday  30. 
I rode  to  Falmouth,  and  preached  at  two  in  the 
afternoon  near  the  church,  to  a greater  number 

of 


E 327  1 

of  people  than  I ever  faw  there  before,  except 
the  mob,  fiveand  twenty  years  ago.  I preached 
at  Penryn  in  the  evening : Friday  noon,  in 
Crowan  : in  the  evening  at  Trevorga  near  Red- 
ruth. 

Here  I met  with  an  ingenious  book,  the  late 
Lord  Lyttleton’s  dialogues  of  the  dead.  A great 
part  of  it  I could  heartily  fubfcribe  to,  though 
not  to  every  word.  I believe  madam  Guion  was 
in  feveral  miftakes,  fpeculative  and  pra&ical  toot 
Yet  I would  no  more  dare  to  call  her  than  her 
friend,  archbifnop  Fenelon,  “ adiftra&ed  Enthu- 
fiaft.”  She  was  undoubtedly  a woman  of  a very 
uncommon  underftanding,  and  of  excellent  piety. 
Nor  was  fhe  any  more  “ a Lunatic,”  than  fhe  was 
an  Heretic. 

Another  of  this  lively  writer’s  affertions  is, 
“ Martin  has  fpawned  a ftrange  brood  of  fellows, 
called  Methodifts,  Moravians,  Hutchinfonians, 
who  are  madder  than  Jack  was  in  his  worft 
days.”  I would  a£k  any  one  who  knows  whatgood 
breeding  means,  is  this  language  for  a nobleman 
or  a porter  ? But  let  the  language  be  as  it  may, 
is  the  fentiment  juft  ? To  fay  nothing  of  the 
Methodifts,  (although  forae  of  them  too  are  not 
quite  out  of  their  fenfes)  Could  his  Lordlhip 
fhew  me  in  England  many  more  fenfible  men 
than  Mr.  Gambold  and  Mr.  Okely?  And  yet 
both  of  thefe  were  called  Moravians.  Or  could 
he  point  out  many  men  of  ftronger  and  deeper 
P 2 underftanding 


C 328  ] 

underdanding,  than  Dr.  Horne  and  Mr.  Wil- 
iam Jones  ? (If  he  could  pardon  them  for  believ- 
ing the  trinity  !)  And  yet  both  ofthofe  are  Hut- 
chinfonians.  What  pity  is  it,  that  fo  ingenious  a 
man  like  many  others  gone  before  him,  fhould 
pafs  fo  peremptory  a fentence  in  a caufe  which 
he  does  not  underftand  ! Indeed  how  could  he 
underhand  it  ? How  much  has  he  read  upon  the 
queftion  ? What  fenfible  Methodift,  Moravian 
or  Hutchinfonian  did  he  ever  calmly  converfe 
with  ? What  does  he  know  of  them,  but  from 
the  Caricature’s  drawn  by  bifhop  Lavington, 
or  bifhop  Warburton  ? And  did  he  ever  give 
himfelfthe  trouble  of  reading  the  anfwers  tothofe 
warm,  lively  men  ? Why  fhould  a good  natured 
and  a thinking  man,  thus  condemn  whole  bodies 
of  men  by  the  lump  ? In  this  I can  neither  read 
the  gentleman,  the  fcholar,  nor  the  Chriftian. 

Since  the  writing  of  this,  Lord  Lyttleton  is  no 
more  ; he  is  mingled  with  common  dull.  But  as 
his  \ book  furvives,  there  Hill  needs  an  anfwer 
to  the  unjuft  reflexions  contained  therein. 

Saturday,  September  the  lft,  I took  a walk  to 
the  top  of  that  celebrated  hill,  Carn-brae.  Here 
are  many  monuments  of  remote  antiquity,  fcarce 
to  be  found  in  any  other  part  of  Europe  : Druid 
altars  of  enormous  fize,  being  only  huge  rocks, 
ftrangely  fufpended  one  upon  the  other  : and 
Rock-bafons,  hollowed  on  the  furface  of  the 
rocks  it  is  fuppofed,  to  contain  the  holy  water. 

It 


C 329  J 


It  is  probable,  thefe  are  at  leafi:  coeval  with  Pom- 
pey’s  Theatre,  if  not  with  the  pyramids  of  Egypt. 
And  what  are  they  the  better  for  this  ? Of  what 
confequence  is  it  either  to  the  dead  or  the  liv- 
ing, whether  they  have  withftood  the  waftes  of 
time  for  three  thoufand,  or  three  hundred 
years  ? 


The  end  of  the  Thirty-Second  Volume; 


THE 


CO  NTENTS 

Of  the  Thirty-second  Volume. 


Page 

An  ExtraR  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  WefleyV 
Journal,  Jrom  May  27,  1765,  to  May 
1 8,  1768.  — — 3 

An  Exlrahl  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Wefley’j 
Journal,  from  May  14,  1768,  to  Sept.  1, 
1770.  — — 178 


* 

... 


An  .EXPLANATION 


OF  THE 


LATIN  SENTENCES. 


Vol.  i.  P.  306. 

7 T jE  C RhaJamanthus  hacret  duriffima  regna, 
Cajligotquc,  audit que  do/os,  fubigitqur  f uteri 
Qua  quit  apud  fupcros,  furto  latatus  inani , 

Dijtulit  in  fcram  commijfa  piacula  mortem. 

O’er  thefe  drear  realms  ftern  Rhadamanthu  s reigns, 
Detedfs  each  artful  villain,  and  conftrains 
To  own  the  crimes,  long  veil'd  from  human  fight  : 
In  vain  ! Now  all  fiand  forth  in  hated  light. 

Vol.  ii.  P.  2gg. 

Ut  lippum  p'tcta  tabula' , fomenta  podagrtim. 

Such  help  as  pictures  to  fore  eyes  afford. 

As  heap’d  up  tables  to  their  gouty  Lord. 

Vol.  iv.  P.  42. 

Ejfodiuntur  opes , irritamenta  malorunj. 


"Wealth  is  dug  up,  incentive  to  all  ill. 

Vol.  x.  P.  18.  Ajfor  'c  lenipus 

Solium  mare , quum  tcllus , excel fc.que  regia  coeli 
Ardcat,  ciT  mundi  moles  eperoja  laboret. 

The  Sea,  the  earth,  the  palace  'of  the  ikies. 

And  all  the  well-  wrought  fabrick  of  the  world, 
Shall  perifh  in  the  all-confuming  flame. 


A 


ii  Latin  Sentences  L’ranflated. 

P.  22. 

Manraf  mentis  gratijfimus  error. 

Let  the  pleafing  dream  remain. 

Vol.  -xiv.  P.  13. 

The  Anima  mundi,  the  Soul  of  the  world,  the 

Valiam 

Mens  agitans  molem  tA  magna  fe  corpore  mifeens. 

The  all-informing  foul 

Which  fpreads  thro’  the  vail  mafs  and  moves  the  whole. 
Vol.  xv.  P.  26. 

IJcircn  Jlolitldm  preebet  tibi  vcllere  barbam  Jupiter  ? 
Thinkeit  thou,  that  God  is  mocked  ? 


P.  10. 

Occidit  miferos  crambe  repel  it  a. 

They  are  furfeited  with  the  dull  repetition. 

AEJluat  infelix  angufto  li'mite  mundi , 

Ut  brevibus  claufus  Gyaris , pareja/jue  Scrip  bo. 

Frets  at  the  narrow  limits  of  the  world, 

As  in  a priion  pent. 

P.  27. 

Jove  fpake,  and  nodded  with  his  fable  brow. 

And  huge  Olympus  to  his  center  (hook. 

P.  1 14. 

Alice  tenditntur  inancs 
Sufpenfte  ad  ventos  : ahts  fub  gurgite  njajlo 
Infe Slum  cluilur  fcelus , ant  exurilur  ig»i ; 

Dtnc. 


' Latin  Sentences  Tranflated.  iil 

Donee  longa  dies , exaHo  temporis  orhe 
Concretam  cxemit  labcm , purumque  reliqnit 
jddtbcrcum  fenfunt  atque  aurai  Jtniplicis  ignern. 

Some  to  the  piercing  winds  are  ftretch’d  abroad  ; 

Some  plunged  beneath  the  watry  gulph  : The  fire 
In  Tome  burns  out  the  deep  imprinted  ftain  : 

Till  the  long  courfe  of  flowly-rolling  years 
Has  purg'd  out  every  fpot*  and  pure  remains 
TIP  ethereal  Spirit,  and  Ample  heavenly  Fire. 

P.  it 6. 

Tantutn  hsec  Religio potuit  fuadere  mahrum . 

So  much  mifehief  this  Religion  does ! 

P.  141. 

Scire  vetim,  verbo  pretium,  quotas  arroget  annus  ? 
Howoldmuftabook  be,  beforeit  is  good  for  anything? 

P.  158, 

7aciiitm  Sylvas  inter  rrptare falubres , 

Queer  entem  quicquid  dignum J'apiente  bonoque. 

Creeping  filent  thro*  the  filVan  lhades 
Exploring  what  is  wife  and  good  in  man. 

Vol.  16.  P.  103. 

Qjialem  commendcs  etieim  atque  etiam  afpice , ne  mox 
Jncutiant  aliena  tibi  pcccata  pudorem . 

Beware  whom  you  commend,  left  Tou  ftioufd  be  bla- 
med for  the  faults  of  another  man. 

P.  30 g.  Solr/tos 

Qui  c apt  at  rifus  hominnm,  famamque  dicacis. 

One  that  affedls  the  Drodl,  and  loves  to  raife  a Horfe- 


IV 


Latin  Sentences  Tranjlated . 

P.  514. 

phiafi  re  lene  ge/Ia. 

As  if  you  had  carried  your  point. 

Vol.  xvii.  P.  3^. 

Tanquam  tutus  & in  cute  nojfes. 

As  if  you  knew  11s  infide  and  out. 

P-  53. 

Tilt  par  villa  res  ejl , 

Metiri  fe  quemque  fuo  modulo  ac  pec/e  verum  cjl. 

You  are  not  upon  a level  with  Bifhop  W-— n ; 
Let  every  man  know  his  own  fize. 

P.  66.  & 89. 

Quas  nut  incuria  fudit 

Jlut  bumana  parum  cavit  natura. 

'i  ■ • « 

Such  as  efcaped  my  notice  ; or  fuch  as  may  be  pla- 
ced to  the  account  of  humaii  Infirmity. 

P.  8;. 

Ecchfue  Seotices  direp  tie  ac  gcmentls  Prejbyter. 

A Prefbyter  of  the  plundered  and  groaning  Church 
of  Scotland. 

Vol.  18.  P.  119. 

Gloria  quantalilet , quid  erit  Ji gloria  tantum  ? 

"What  is  glory,  without  Profit  too  ? 

P.  130. • 

Virgili i in  tumulo , divini  pratmia  <vaiis , 

Exp  lie  at  en  viridem  laurca  Ucta  comam . 


fW 


V 


Latin  Sentences  Tranjlated. 

Quid  te  defun-clum  juvat  bac  ? Fclicior  olim 
Sub  patulie  fagi  tegmine  < vivus  eras  ! 

See,  she  green  Laurel  rears  her  grateful  head 
O’er  Virgil’s  tomb  ! But  can  this  cheat'  the  Dead 
Happier  by  far  thou  watt  of  old,  when  laid 
Beneath  thy  fpreading  Beech’s  ample  ihade. 

P.  268. 

JLab'itur  fsf  labetur  in  omne  vdtilbilis  avum. 

It  flows  on,  and  will  for  e\-er  flow. 

Vol.  xx.  P.  267, 

Ob  patriam pngnando  vulncra  paj/i , 

Spuique  pii  ■vates^ct  Pboebo  dign a locutl , 

Invcntas  aut  qui  vitatn  excolucre  per  artes  : 

Thofe  who  died  in  fighting  for  their  Country,  thofe 
who  confecrated  themfelves  to  the  M-ufes,  and  thofe 
who  invented  wfelul  Arts. 

P.  287. 

Minim  l 

Utneque  cetlce  lupus  qnenquam,  ncque  dente petit  bos  ! 

Stran.ce  ! 

Wolves  do  not  ufe  their  heels,  nor  Bulls  their  fieeth  1 
Vol.  xxii.  P.  27. 

In  Jlipulam  nreluti  cum  fiamma  furcntibus  aujlris 
Incidit , aut  rapidus  montano  jlnmine  torrcns 
JExiit , eppojitafqUe  evicit  gurgite  moles. 

As  flames  thro’  crackling  Hubble  pour  along 
Driven  by  impetuous  winds,  as  rivers  fwohi 
By  mountain  torrents,  bnrft  o’er  all  their  banks. 

P.  130. 

Cui<vis  facilis  rigid. i cenfura  cachinni. 

It  is  eafy  to  laugh  at  our  neighbours. 


vi  Latin  Sentences  T ranjlated. 

P.  22J. 

Si  non  infaniunt  Jatis , infliga. 

If  they  are  not  mad  enough  already,,  pufh  them  on, 

P.  224.. 

Ne  puerum  coram  populo  Medea  trucidet. 

Let  not  Medea  be  introduced  as  killing  her  fon,  in 
the  fight  of  the  people. 

P-  253- 

Sed  nunc  non  crat  his  incus. 

There  was  no  place  for  them  here. 
phto  teneam  no  ul turn  mutattfem  Protea  nodo  ? 

How  fliall  I hold  one  that  is  continually  changing 
his  fl.ape  ? 

Vol.  xxvi.  P.  jo. 

Hci  rnihi , quod  nullis  amor  ejl  mcdicabiiis  her'bis  t 
Ah  me  ! not  all  my  drugs  this  love  can  cure  J 

P.  90. 

Miles  emeritus.  A Soldier  paft  fervice. 

P.  228. 

Shi  a cura  nitentes 

Pajcere  equos,  eadem  fequitur  Jcl/urc  repojios. 

The  fame  Defires  which  they  cherifhed  on  earth 
remain  in  the  world  of  fpirits. 

Vol.  xxvii,  P. 

Jigitur  de  vita  et  f anguine  Tumi.  Life  is  at  flake. 

Veftigin  nulla  rtlrorfnm  There  is  no  going  back. 


Latin  Sentences  Lr {inflated  vli. 

P.  *8- 

Imponire  Pclio  OJfant 

Scilicet,  atqne  OJJce  frondofum  involvcrc  Olympian . 

To  heap  Mountain  upon  Mountain,  like  the  anti* 
ent  Giants,  in  order  to  lcale  heaven. 

| 

P,  254. 

Sire, turn  cantus  et  Circes  pocula  nofti  ? 

Know’ll  thou  th’  enchanted  cup,  and  Siren’s  Seng  ? 

P.  2 $5. 

Ibi  omnis  cjfuf us  labor  ! So  all  the  labour’s  lof!  ! 

P.  507. 

Sincre  munclum  vadere  ut  vult , nant  vult  madcre. 

To  let  the  world  go  as  it  will : for  it  will  go. 

Vol.  xxviii,  P.  27. 

Cui  Pud  or  et  'Juftitia  foror 
Incorrupta  F’des , Nudaque  Veritas 
dhiando  uilum  invenient  parem  ? 

When  will  his  like  be  found,  for  Modelly 
Unblemilh’d  Faithfulnefs,  and  naked  Truth  ? 

P.  62. 

Improvifum  afpris  vcliiti  qui  fentibus  angueni  Prejjit. 

As  one  that  has  unawares  trodden  upon  a inake. 

P.  216. 

Fnrtunati  ambo  ! Si  qu'd  mea pagina poffit 
Nulla  dies  unquam  memo  ri  mos  eximet  cento. 

Long  as  ray  Writings  lhall  your  fame  remain. 


viii  Latin  Sentences  Tranjlated 

Vol.  xxix,  P. 

Cum  frigida.  par-vas 

Pralcrct  fpelunca  demos , tgncmqut,  iaremr.c 
Et  pecus  et  dominos  communi  cluude:  et  umbra. 

The  narrow  cave  a cold  retreat  affords, 

And  beafts  and  men  fereeus  with  one  common  fhadc 

Vol.  XXX.  P. 

Te,  Deus:  intonji  monies , te  faxa  loqucntur 
Summa  Dcum,  dunt  montis  amat  juga  peudulus  birenj, 
Saxorumquc  colit  latcbrofa  cunicuius  antra. 

This  is  a beautiful  Phrafe  on  that  veife  in  th 
104th  Pfalm,  “ The  high  hills  are  a refuge  ror  th> 
wild  goats  and  lb  are  the  ftony  rocks  for  the  conies.' 

P.  54- 

Sett  te,  Profcrpina , canum  : 
Pcrfonam  capiti  detrabet  ilia  tuo. 

Death  will  deprive  thee  of  thy  borrow’d  Hair. 
Vol.  xxxii,  P.  S6. 

O fortunati  nimium , bona  Ji fua  norint  ! 

Too  happy,  if  their  ha-ppinefs  they  knew  ! 

P.  155. 

Projiccre  ampullas  et  fefqu  pcdaUa  verba. 

To  lay  alide  big  words  that  hav.e  no  determinate 
meaning. 

P.  204. 

fhtid  mea  rejert  P What  is  it  to  me  ? 

P,  228. 

Turpe  eft  difficilcs  babere  ttuga t, 

It  is  a lhame  to  take  much  pains  about  trifles. 

INDEX, 


INDEX. 


Vol.  I.  Page. 

GENERAL  Preface  3 

Preface  to  the  Sermons  9 

Sermon  on  Salvation  by  Faith 

The  Almoft  Chriilian  32 

— — — “ Awake  thou  that  deeped/’  4.6 

Scriptural  Chriftianity  67 

Jufrification  by  Faith  94 

• The  Righteoufnefs  of  Faith  1 1.£ 

“ Repent  and  believe  the  Gofpel”  13^ 

• The  Firll  fruits  of  the  Spirit  153 

— 1 The  Spirit  of  Bondage  &of  Adoption  172 

The  Witnefs  of  the  Spirit  195 

The  Witnefs  ot  our  own  Spirit  236 

• On  Sin  in  Believers  257 

The  Repentance  of  Believers  27.3 

The  Great  Affize  298 

— — The  Means  of  Grace  — . 333 


Vol.  II. 

Sermon  011  The  Circumcilion  of  the  heart 
— — The  Great  Priviledgeof  thole  that  are 


born  of  GOD  40 

The  Lord  our  Righteoufnefs  58 

Difcour.es  upon  our  Lords  Sermon  on  the  Mount 

Matt,  v.  i — 4 80 

• 5 — 9 106 

10 — 12  134 

— 13 — 16  162 

17 2Q  I90 


It 


INDEX. 


Difcourfes,  &c. 
Matt.  Chap.  vi. 


Chap.  vii. 


'—VS 

- 

Page. 

220 

16—18 

— 

248 

19—23 

— 

278 

24—54 

— 

308 

I 1 2 

— 

335 

Voi.  III. 


Matt.  Chap.  vii.  13 — j.j. 
1 3 — 10 


3 

18 


21 — 2 7 

Sermon  on  The  Origin,  Nature,  Properties 
Ufe  of  the  Law 

• The  Law  eltablilhed  thro’  Faith 

The  Nature  of  Enrhuiiafm 

. On  Bigotry  

- ■ ■ - Cathoiic  Spirit  

- Chriftian  Perfection  

■ ■ ■ Wandring  Thoughts  

> Satan’s  Devices  

— - The  Scripture  Way  of  Salvation 

-  Original  Sin  

■■■  — - The  New  Birth.  — — 

«»-■  '■  ■ ■ The  Wildernefs  State  ■■■ 

*— — Heavinefs  thro’  temptation 


and 


35 


53 

77 


it  2 

'33 

1-56 

17S 

215 

232 

2$2 

27l 

29O 

377 


Vol.  IV. 


Sermon  on  Self-denial  — . — 3 

- — — The  Cure  of  Evil'-fpeaking  22 

The  Ufe  of  Money  40 

■ The  Good  Steward  — - 6r 

- Preached  before  the  Reformation  Society  84 

- on  the  Death  or  Mr.  Whireneid  116 

Advice  to  the  Methodifts,  with  regard  to  Drefs  144 
The  Duties  of  Hufbands-  and  Waives  — 164 

Directions  ter  Children  218 

Directions  to  Servants  224 


INDEX. 


Hi 


Page. 

An  Extraft  from  Mr.  Law’s  Treatife  on  Chrif- 
tian  Perfedlion 

C H A P.  I. 

Several  important  conliderations  and  directions  241 
Chap.  II. 

Chriftianity  requires  a renouncing  of  the  world, 

and  all  worldly  tempers  264 

Chap.  III. 

Chriftianity  calleth  all  men  to  a Hate  of  felf- 

denial  and  mortification.  287 

Chap.  IV. 

Theneceffityof  divine  grace,  another  general 

ground  of  felf-denial.  313' 

Chap.  V. 

The  neceffity  of  divine  grace,  obligeth  allChrif- 
tians  to  a.  conftant  purity  and  holinefs  of  con- 
verfat-ion  : wherein  is  fhewn  the  great  dan- 
-ger  and  impiety  of  reading  vain  and  imper- 
tinent books.  — ——  335 


Vol.  V. 

Chap.  VI. 

Chriftians  are  called  to  a conftant  flate  of  prayer 
and  devotion  3 

Chap.  VII. 

All  Chriftians  are  required  to  imitate  the  life 
and  example  of  Jefus  Ciirift  — — 1 

Chap.  VIII. 

An  exhortation  to  Chriftian  Petle&ion  59 

An  ExtraCt  from  Mr.  Law’s  Serious  Call  to  a 
Holy  Life 

C H A P.  I. 

Concerning  the  nature  and  extent  of  Chriftian 

devotion  62 

Chap.  II. 

An  enquiry  into  the  reafon  why  the  generality 
of  Chriftians  fall  fo  fliort  of  the  holinefs  and 
devotion  of  Chriftianity  > — - 75 


IV 


INDEX. 


Chap.  III. 

Of  the  great  danger  and  folly  of  not  intending 
to  be  as  eminent  as  we  can,  in  the  practice 
of  all  Chriftian  virtues  


Page. 


81 


Chap.  IV. 

We  can  pleafe  God  in  no  ftate  or  employment, 
but  by  intending  and  devoting  it  all  to  his 

glory  94 

Chap.  V. 

Perfons  that  are  free  from  the  neceffity  of  la- 
bour and  employments,  are  toconfider  t'hem- 
felves  as  devoted  to  God  in  a higher  degree,  iii 
Chap  VI. 

Plow  the  imprudent  ufe  of  an  eftate  corrupts  all 
the  tempers,  and  fills  the  heart  with  poor 
and  ridiculous  pafiions  ; represented  in  the 

character  of  Fiavia.  131 

Chap.  VII. 

How  the  wife  and  pious  ufe  of  an  eftate  carri- 
eth  us  to  all  the  virtues  of  the  Chriftian 
life  ; represented  in  the  character  of  Mi- 
randa   — — J40 

Chap.  VIII. 

Shewing  all  orders  ot  men  and  women,  of  all 
ages,  are  obliged  to  devote  themfelves  to 

God  157 

Chap.  IX. 

Shewing  that  great  devotion  fills  our  lives  with 
the  greateft  peace  and  happinefs  that  can  be 

enjoyed  in  this  world  17^ 

Chap.  X. 

The  happinefs  of  a life  wholly  devoted  unto 
God,  farther  proved,  from  the  vanity,  and 
ridiculous,  poor  enjoyments  which  they  are 
forced  to  take  up  with,  who  live  according 
to  their  own  humours.  This  reprefented  in 

various  characters  196 

Chap. 


INDEX. 


v 


Page. 


Chap.  XI. 

That  not  only  a life  ot  vanity,  or  fenfuality, 
but  even  the  moli  regular  kind  of  life,  that 
is  not  governed  by  great  devotion,  fuffici- 
ently  fheus  its  miferies,  its  wants  and  emp- 
tinefs  to  the  eyes  of  all  the  world.  This  re- 
prefented  in  various  charadters  — 213 

Chap.  XII. 

Concern:ng  that  part  of  devotion  which  relates 
to  times  and  hours  of  prayer.  Ot  daily 
early  prayer  jn  the  morning.  How  we  may 
improve  our  forms  of  prayer,  and  increafe 

the  fpirit  of  devotion  230 

Chap.  XIII. 

Recommending  devotion  at  nine  o’clock  in  the 


morning,  called  in  feripture,  the  third  hour 
of  the  day.  The  fubjedtof  thefe  prayers  may 

be  humility  257 

Chap.  XIV.  - 

Shewing  how  the  education  which  men  gene- 
rally receive,  makes  the  dodtrines  of  humili- 
ty difficult  to  be  pradtifed.  The  fpirit  of  a 
better  education  reprefented  in  the  character 

of  Paternus  278 

Chap.  XV. 

Shewing  how  the  method  of  educating  daugh- 
ters, makes  it  difficult  forthem  to  enter  into 
the  fpirit  ot  Chriftian  humility.  How  mife- 
rably  they  are  injured  and  abufed  by  fuch  an 
education.  The  fpirit  ot  a better  education, 
reprefented  in  the  character  of  Eufebia.  297 
Chap.  XVI. 

Recommending  devotion  at  twelve  o’clock,  cal- 
led, in  feripture,  the  iixth  hour  of  the  day  : 
This  frequency  of  devotion,  equally  defirable 
by  all  orders  of  people.  Universal  love  is 
recommended  to  be  the  fubjedt  of  prayer  at 
this  hour,  Ot  interceffion,  as  an-adt  of  uni- 
verfal  love  — qia 


VI 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Chap.  XVI L 

Of  the  neceffity  and  benefit  of  intercsfiion,  con- 
fidered  as  an  exercife  of  univerlal  love. 

How  all  orders  of  men  are  to  interceed  with 
God  for  one  another  : how  fuch  interceflion 
amends  and  reforms  the  hear t . — 550 


Vol.  VI. 


An  Extract  of  Mr.  Law’s  later  Works. 

The  cafe  of  Reafon  fairly  llated, 

The  Introduction,  firewing  the  llateofcontroverfy  30 
Chap.  I. 

Enquiring,  whether  there  be  any  thing  in  the 
nature  and  condition  of  man,  to  oblige  him 
to  think,  that  he  is  not  to  admit  of  any  doc- 
trines or  inftitutions,  as  revealed  from  God, 
but  fuch  as  his  own  reafon  can  proveto  be 
neceffary  from  the  nature  of  things.  — 32 

Chap.  II. 

Shewing  from  the  relation  between  God  and 
man,  that  human  reafon  cannot  be  a compe- 
tent judge  of  the  fitnefs  and  reafonablenel's  of 
God’s  proceedings  with  mankind,  either  as 
to  the  time,  or  matter,  or  manner  of  an  ex- 
ternal revelation.  — 82 

Chap.  III. 

Shewing  how  far  human  reafon  is  able  to  judge 
of  the  reafonablenefs,  truth,  and  certainty  of 
divine  revelation.  — — 93 

Chap.  IV. 

Of  the  Hate  and  nature  of  reafon,  as  it  is  in  man ; 
and  how  its  perfection  in  matters  of  religion 
is  to  be  known.  ■■  ■ 107 


INDEX.  vit 

Chap.  V.  Page 

Shewing  that  all  the  murability  of  our  tempers, 
the  diforders  of  our  paflions,  the  corruption 
of  our  hearts,  all  the  reveries  of  the  ima- 
gination, all  the  contradictions  and  abfurdi- 
ties  that  are  to  be  found  in  human  life,  and 
human  opinions,  are  in  effeCt  the  mutabili- 
ty, diforders,  corruption,  and  abfurdities  of 

human  reafon.  125 

A ferious  Anfwer  to  Dr.  Trap  138 

Animadverfions  on  his  Reply  206 

A Confutation  of  Bilhop  Warburton’s  Divine 

Legation  259- 

Vol.  VII. 

An  Extract  from  Mr.  Law’s  Spirit  of  Prayer. 

Part  I.  Chap.  I. 

Treating  of  fome  matters  preparatory  to  the 

Spirit  of  Praver  — 2 

Chap.  II. 

Difcovering  the  true  way  of  turning  to  God, 
and  of  finding  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  the 
riches  of  eternity,  in  our  fouls. 

PART  II. 

The  fir  ft  Dialogue  — — 

The  fecond  Dialogue  

The  third  Dialogue  — — 

Spirit  of  Love  — — 

. Mr.  Law’s  Letters  — 

Addrefs  to  the  Clergy  — 

■ — — — The  Chrifiian  Pattern  — 

Vol.  VIII. 

A Treatife  on  Chrifiian  Prudence. 

Chap.  I. 

Of  the  end  propofed  by  Chrifiian  Prudence, 
and  the  general  means  of  obtaining  it.  1 39 

S 2 


37 
5.? 
66 
100 
163 
22  9 
307 


V1U  * 


INDEX. 


Page. 


Chap.  II. 

How  far  Chriftian  Prudence  is  concerned  jn 
the  manner  of  keeping  God’s  commandments  i 74. 
Chap.  HI. 

Of  the  fubordinate  means  that  ferve  to  aflift  us 
in  keeping  the  commandments  of  God  165 
Chap.  IV. 

The  conduft  of  a prudent  Chfiftian,  with  re- 
gard to  the  government  of  himfelt.  169 

Chap.  V. 

A perfuafive  to  the  Rudy  of  Chriflian  Prudence, 
with  fome  advices  relating  to  the  practice 
of  it.  — 176 

Nicodemus  : Or  a Treatife  on  the  Fear  of  Man.  194 

Reflections  on  the  conduct  of  Life,  with  a refe- 
rence to  Learning.  241 

The  Life  of  God  in  the  foul  of  Man  — 291 


Vol.  IX. 


The  manners  of  the  ancient  Chriftians. 

Chap.  I. 

Of  the  life  of  Chrift.  — — 3 

Chap.  II. 

Of  the  church  at  Jerufalem.  9 

Chap.  III. 

The  itate  of  the  Heathens  before  their  conrerfion  13 
Chap.  IV. 

Of  their  prayer  and  ftudy  of  the  fcripture  17 

Chap.  V. 

Of  their  fads,  meals,  modelly,  and  ferioufnefs.  20 
Chap.  VI. 

Of  their  marriages,  their  union,  and  public 
affemblies.  — — — 23 

Chap.  VII. 

Of  their  perfections  — — 28 

Chap.  VIII. 

Of  their  care  of  the  poor  lick,  their  hofpiraliry, 
and  patience.  ' — - — 


5-5 


INDEX.  ix 

Page. 

The  doctrine  of  Salvation,  Faith,  and  Good 
Works  ; extracted  from  the  homilies  of  the 
church  of  England.  — — 37 

An  Abridgement  ot  the  Pilgrim’s  Progrefs  54 
A Word  or  Advice  to  Saints  and  Sinners  130 

Chriftian  Letters  by  Jofeph  Alleine.  14S 

A Word  to  a Sabbath-Breaker  — 276 

• a Swearer  — • — 281 

a Drunkard  — — 283 

an  unhappy  Woman  — rqo 

a Smuggler  — r-  ■* — 295 

a condemned  MalefaCior  — 304 

in  Seafon  : Or  Advice  to  an  Englifh- 

man  — — 310 

a Proteftant  — — 319 

a Freeholder  — 334 

Advice  to  a Soldier  — — 338 


Vol.  X. 


Serious  thoughts  occafioned  by  the  late  Earth- 


at  Lifbon  3 

A Collection  of  Forms  of  Prayer  for  every  Day 

in  the  week,  26 

A Collection  of  Prayers  for  Families  — 83 

An  Addrefs  to  the  Clergy  124 

A fnort  account  of  the  Death  of  Tho.  Hitchens 
A Ihort  Account  of  the  Death  of  Sam.  Hitchens  169 
A fliort  Account  of  the  Life  and  Death  ot  Na- 
thanael Othen.  — 7 • — 1S2 

Some  Account  of  the  Life  and  Death  of  Mat- 
thew Lee.  — • — 1 <58 

ExtraCt  of  the  Life  and  Death  of  Mr.  John 

jane  way  219 

Chap.  I. 

An  account  of  him  from  his  childhood,  to  the 

fb ven teen th  year  of  his  age.  219 

B 3 


INDEX. 


Page. 


Chap.  II. 

Of  his  converfion  and  carriage  when  fellow  of 

the  college.  222 

C^p.  III. 

His  great  love  to  prayer  — — 228 

Chap.  IV. 

His  return  to  King’s-colLege  after  his  father's 
death  and  his  temptations.  — 23 2 

Chap.  V. 

An  account  of  the  later  part  of  his  life.  237 

Chap.  VI. 

His  lalt  {icknefs  and  death  — > — 240 


Extract  of  the  Life  and  Death  of  Mr.  Thomas 


Haliburton  236 

Part  I.  Chap.  I. 

A Ihort  account  of  his  birth  and  life,  till  ten 

years  of  age.  260 

Chap.  II. 

An  account  of  the  next  two  years  of  his  life.  264 
Chap.  III. 

Of  the  revival  of  his  convictions,  and  their  ef- 
fects till  1690.  267 


Chap.  IV. 

Of  the  increafe  of  his  convictions,  from  Au- 
tumn 1690,  till  May  1693.  272 

Chap.  V. 

Of  the  liraits  he  was  in,  and  the  courfe  he  took 
for  relief,  from  May  1693,  to  Auguft  1696.  273 
Part  II.  Chap.  I. 

Of  the  progrefs  of  his  convictions  and  tempta- 


tions.   2S3 

Chap.  II. 

Of  his  deliverance  from  thefe  temptations.  293 
Part  III.  Chap.  I. 

Of  the  pleafure  of  this  date  t the  miltakes  at- 
tending it,  and  the  way  of  their  difcovery.  903 
Chap.  II. 

Of  his  frelh  firugglings  w ith  fin  ; its  victories ; 
and  the  caufe  of  them,  and  God’s  goodnefs 
with  refpeCt  to  this  trial.  • ■ ■»  930 


INDEX. 


xi 


Page. 

An  extraft  of  the  life  and  death  of  Mr.  Thomas 
Haliburton. 

Part  IV.  Chap.  I. 

Of  his  entrance  upon  the  miniitry,  and  beha- 
viour at  Ceres.  . — — 333 

Chap.  II. 

Of  his  marriage,  and  conduit  in  his  family,  341 
Chap.  III. 

Of  his  removal  to  St.  Andrews.  — 348 

Vol.  XI. 

Part  IV.  Chap.  IV. 

Of  his  death  — — — ■ 3 

An  extraft  of  the  life  of  Monfieur  de  Renty 
Chap.  I.  Of  his  marriage,  birth,  and  general 

way  oflife  36 

. II.  His  humility  — — 43 

III.  His  felf-denial  and  mortification  5$ 

IV.  His  patience  • — 63 

V.  His  faith  — — 71 

■ VI.  His  hope  — 7£ 

VII.  His  love  of  God  — 77 

VIII.  Selt.  I.  His  love  of  man  in  general  84 

Sect.  II.  His  charity  to  the  poor  90 

• III.  His  charity  to  the  fick  9^ 

IV.  His  zeal  for  the  falvation  of  his 

neighbour  — — 97 

Chap.  IX.  His  outward  behaviour  and  conduft 
of  bttfinefs.  — — 112 

Chap.  X.  His  death  — — 120 

An  ext  raff  from  the  life  and  death  of  Tho.  Walfh- 
The  introduction  — — 129 

Chap.  I.  Of  his  birth  and  education  132 

* II.  Of  his  religion,  and  the  druggie  which 

he  found  between  nature  and  grace,  till  the 
fifteenth  year  ot  his  age.  - 133 


INDEX. 


xii 


Page. 

Chap.  III.  Giving  a farther  account  of  him  : the 
corruptions  he  ilruggled  againil,  and  the 
means  he  ufed  to  l'ubdue  them.  — 140 

Chap.  IV.  Of  his  forfaking  the  church  of  Rome  143 
— • V.  Some  further  account  of  his  progress 
in  the  way  of  life,  with  other  reafons  of  his 
conduct,  in  regard  of  the  church  of  Rome.  1^7 
Chap.  VI.  Of  fome  particulars  previous  to  his 
Converfion  • — — 161 

Chap.  VII.  Giving  a farther  account  of  his  foul 
particularly  of  his  deep  convictions  166 

Chap.  VIII.  Of  his  finding  reft  to  his  foul  174 

• IX.  Of  the  confirmation  or  his  foul  in  the 

grace  of  God,  and  the  happy  effects  which 


it  produced  in  him 


Chap.  X.  His  employment  among  his  ehriilian 
brethren,  and  the  treatment  he  met  with 


from  the  world 


Chap.  XI.  His  providential  appointment  to  la- 
bour for  the  good  of  his  neighbour,  by 


preaching  the  gofpel. 

Chap.  XII.  He  begins  to  preach. 


PART  II. 


Chap.  I.  Of  his  entire  application  to  the  preach- 
ing the  gofpel  — — 200 

II.  He  goes  into  the  provinces  of  Leinfter 

&Connought,  and  preaches  the  word  tb  re  205 
— — III.  Some  further  account  of  the  troubles 
be  met  with,  on  account  of  preaching  the 
gofpel.  — — — 2cS 

»■  ■ IV.  A fhort  account  of  the  endeavours  of 
the  Romifh  clergy,  to  prevent  his  ufeiulnefs 
among  their  people  — — 214 

• V.  He  goes  to  England  and  labours  there  225 

VI.  His  love  to  fouls,  and  zeal  for  pro- 
moting the  glory  of  God.  ~ 229 

■ VII.  His  application  ro  fiudy.  love  to  the 

holy  Fcriptures,  improvement  which  he 
made  thereof  — — 2 3 : 


I N D E X. 


xui 


Page. 


Chap.  VIII.  His  manner  of  preaching  246 

IX.  Of  his  frequent  ficknefs,  the  exerci- 

les  of  his  mind  therein,  and  the  improvement 

which  he  made  thereof  261 

. X.  Of  his  temptations,  conflicts,  and  ex- 

ercifes  of  foul  — — 272 

XI.  His  communion  with  God  281 

• XII.  Some  further  particulars,  relating  to 

the  head  of  his  communion  with  God.  295 

PART  III. 


Chap.  I.  An  extraH  from  Mr.  Thomas  Wallh’s 
diary,  relating  chiefly,  to  the  experience  of 
his  own  foul,  in  his  courfe  ot  walking  with 

God  307 

II.  The  extraft  from  his  diary  continued  32^ 

III.  The  fame  continued  — 34a 

Vol.  XII. 


An  extraifl  of  the  life  and  death  of  Tho.  Walfli. 
PART  III. 

Chap.  IV.  Of  his  laft  ficknefs  — 3 


Anextra&of  the  life  of  the  Rev.  David  Brainerd. 
Part  I.  From  his  birth  to  the  time  when  he  be- 
gan to  devote  himfelf  to  the  iludy  of  divinity 
Part  II.  From  the  time  that  he  began  to  devote 
himfelf  to  the  lfudy  of  divinity,  till  he  was 
examined  and  licenfed  to  preach. 

Part  III.  From  the  time  of  his  being  licenfed  to 
preach,  till  he  was  appointed  miffionary  to 
the  Indians.  — 

Part  IV.  From  the  time  of  his  being  appointed 
millionary,  to  his  entrance  on  his  million 
among  the  Indians  at  Kaunaumeck. 


27 


45 


“ 59 


70 


1NDE  X. 


xiv 


Page 

Part  V.  From  his  fuA  beginning  to  inftruCt  the 
Indians  at  Kaunaumeck,  to  his  ordination.  79 
Part  VI.  From  his  ordination,  till  he  began  to 
preach  to  the  Indians  at  Crofweekfung  1 20 
Part  VII.  From  his  firfl:  beginning  to  preach  to 
the  Indians  at  Crofweekfung,  till  he  returned 
from  his  laft  journey  to  Sufquahannah  177 
Part  VIII.  After  his  return  from  his  lafljourney 
to  Sufquahannah,  untill  his  death  509 


Vol.  XIII. 


Letters  written  by  Mr.  Brainerd  — 3 

Some  Reflections  and  Obfervations  on  the  pre- 
ceding Memoirs  of  Mr.  Brainerd  20 

An  ExtraCt  from  Mary  Gilbert’s  Journal  37 

An  ExtraCt  from  Elizabeth  Harper’s  Journal  129 
A fhort  Account  of  Ann  Johnfon  — 188 

A fhort  Account  of  Ann  Rogers  — 199 

A fhort  Account  of  Mary  Langfon  — 212 

A fhort  Account  of  Hannah  Richardfon  213 

A Letter  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Wefley,  by  a 
Gentlewoman  — — 234 

An  ExtraCt  of  Mrs.  L * * *’s  Letters  254 


Vol.  XIV. 


ExtraCt  of  Mrs.  L***’s  Letters  (continued)  3 
Meditations  upon  fome  texts  of  Scripture  18 

Letters  written  by  JaneCooper  — 38 

Some  account  of  her  lire  and  death  41 

Some  account  of  the  experience  of  E.  J.  93 

An  earnelt  Appeal  to  Men  of  Reafon  and  Re- 
ligion   104 

A farther  Appeal  to  Men  of  Reafon  and  Reli- 
gion. Part  I.  107 


INDEX. 


xv 


Vol.  XV. 

Page. 

A farther  appeal  to  men  of  reafon  and  religion 
Part  II.  — — — 3 

A plain  account  of  the  people  called  Methodifts  194. 
The  nature,  delign,  and  general  rules  of  the 
United  Societies  — — 231 

Minutes  of  Come  late  converfations  between  the 
Rev.  Mr.  Wefleys  and  others  237 

Minutes  ot  fome  late  converfations,  between  the 
Rev.  Mellieurs  John  and  Charles  Wefley, 
and  others  — — 277 

The  charatfter  of  a Methodift  — 359 

A fhort  hillory  of  Methodifm.  — » 374 


Vol.  XVI. 

Advice  to  the  people  called  Methodifts  — < 3 

The  Principles  of  a Methodift  — — 17 

An  Anfwer  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Church’s  remarks 
on  ihe  Rev.  Mr.  John  Wefley’s  laft  journal, 
in  a letter  to  that  gentleman  — 41 

The  principles  of  a Methodift  farther  explained  ." 
occaftoned  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Church’s  l'econd 
letter  to  Mr.  Wefley  : in  a fecond  letter  to 
that  gentleman  — — 202 

A letter  to  the  Right  Rev.  the  Lord  Biftiop  of 
London  : occaftoned  by  his  Lordfhip’s  late 
charge  to  the  clergy  — 222 

A letter  to  a Clergyman  — 247 

A letter  to  the  Author  of  The  enthufiafm  of  the 
Methodifts  and  Papifts  compared  254 

A fecond  letter  to  the  author  of  the  enthufiafm 
of  the  Methodifts  and  Papifts  compared  277 


XVI 


INDEX. 


Vol.  XVII. 

Page. 

A fecond  Letter  to  the  Lord  Biffiop  of  Exeter.  3 
A letter  to  the  Rev.  Mr-  Potter  — 10 

A letter  to  the  Rev.  Dr.  Free  — 23 

A letter  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Downes,  occnfioued  by 
a late  fradt  intitled,  J1 'Icthodifm  explained,  and 
expofcd.  — — — 31 

A letter  to  the  Rev.  Dr.  Horne,  — 

A letter  to  the  Rev.  Dr.  Rutherford.  87 

A narrative  of  the  late  work  of  God,  at  and  near 
Northampton,  in  Nevv-England.  110 

The  diftinguifring  marks  of  a work  of  the  Spirit 
of  God.  — — — 18S 

Thoughts  concerning  the  revival  of  religion  in 
Netv-England.  — — 24.7 


Vol.  XVIII. 

A brief  account  of  the  trial  at  Glocefter.  — 
Mo  dern  Chriftianity ; exemplified  at  Wednef- 


bury,  and  other  adjacent  places  in  Stafibrd- 
flfire.  — ■ — — — — 16 

The  cafe  of  John  Nelfon.  — — 52 

A letter  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Daily  of  Corke  99 

A letter  to  the  Rev.  Dr.  Conyers  Middleton, 
occafioned  by  his  Free  Enquiry.  140 


A letter  to  the  Right  Rev.  the  Lord  Bilhap  of 
Glocefier : occafioned  by  his  traift  on  the 
office  and  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  276 


Vol.  XIX. 

A letter  to  a Roman  Catholic  — — 3 

A Roman  Catechifm  ; with  a Reply  thereto  15 

A Prefervative  againlt  unfettled  Notions  in  Re- 
ligion — ■ — — 110 


INDEX.  xvii 

Page. 

An  extract  of  a fhort  and  eafy  Method,  with 
the  Deifts.  — — — ut 

A treatife  concerning  the  Godhead  of  Jefus 
Chrilt.  — — — 126 

The  advantage  of  the  members  of  the  church  of 
England,  over  thofe  of  the  church  of  Rome  169 
An  extract  of  a letter  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Law,  oc- 
cafioned  by  his  late  writings  — 182 

A letter  to  aperfon  lately  joined  with  the  Qua- 
kers, in  anfwer  to  a letter  wrote  by  him  256 
A treatife  on  baptifm  — — 27^ 

A letter  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Toogood  of  Exeter, 
occafioned  by  his  dilTent  from  the  church  of 

England,  fully juflified  29S 

Thoughts  upon  Infant  Baptifm  — 307 

Serious  Thoughts  concerning  Godfathers  and 
Godmothers  — — 335 

Vol.  XX. 

The  feripture  dodtrine  ofpredeftination,  election, 
and  reprobation  — — 3 

An  extradi  from  a fhort  view  of  the  difference 
between  the  Moravian  Brethren  (fo  called ) 
and  the  Rev  Mr.  John  and  Charles  Wefley  24 
An  extradi  from  a dialogue  between  an  Antino- 


mian  and  his  Friend.  — — >29 

A dialogue  between  a Predeftinarian  and  his 
Friend  — — — 43 

Free-Grace : a fermon  56 

Seiious  confiderationsconcerningthe  dodlrines  of 
eledtion  and  reprobation  — 83 

Serious  confiderations  on  abfolute  predeftination  97 
Serious  thoughts  upon  the  perfeverance  of  the 
faints  — — lag 

Predeftination  calmly  confidered.  1^4 

The  confequence  proved  251 

Thoughts  on  the  imputed  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift  2 59 


A blow  at  the  root  : or,  Chrift  {tabbed  in  the 
houfe  of  his  friends 


C 


xvm 


INDEX. 


Page. 

A fuflicient  anfwer  to  letters  to  the  author  of 
Theron  and  Afpafio.  — — • 276 

An  extradf  ot  two  difcourfes  on  the  conflagration 
anti  renovation  of  the  world  — 290 

Vol.  XXI. 

The  dodtrine  of  original  fln  Parti.  — ? 

Part  II.  — — — 81 

Part  III.  An  anfwer  to  Dr.  Taylor’s  fupplement  212 
Of  imputed  guilt  — — ■ ii. 

Sedt.  II.  Of  the  nature  and  defign  of  our  afflic- 
tions and  mortality  217 

Sedt.  III.  The  arguments  taken  from  the  cala- 
mities and  finfulnefs  of  mankind  conlidered  221 
Sedl.  IV.  The  confequences  ot  the  doctrine  of 

original  fin  253 

Sedt.  V.  A general  argument  taken  from  what 
God  has  declared  concerning  mankind,  at  the 
relforation  of  the  world  after  the  deluge  236 
Sedt.  VI.  The  notion  of  Adam’s  being  a federal 
head,  or  reprelentative  of  mankind,  con- 

fidered  24.2 

Sedt.  VII.  Of  the  formation  of  our  nature  in  the 

womb  247 

Sedt.  VIII.  Of  original  Righteoufnefs  254 

Part  IV.  Extradt  from  Dr.  Watts  and  Mr.  Heb- 

den.  277 

Part  V.  354 

The  dodtrine  of  imputed  fin  and  righteoufnefs.  374 
Part  VI.  The  dodtrine  of  original  fin  explained 
and  vindicated  — . — 3S^ 

Part  VII. An  Evtradt  from  Mr.  Boftan.  417 

Vol.  XXII. 

Free  thoughts  on  the  prefent  flate  of  public  affairs  3 

Thoughts  upon  liberty  38 

Thoughts  concerning  the  origin  of  power  59 


INDEX, 


xix 

Page. 

Some  remarks  on  Mr.  Hill’s  review  of  all  the  doc- 
trines taught  by  Mr.  John  Wefley  72 

Extract  of  Mr.  Baxter’s  aphorifms  of  j unification  13 1 
A treatife  on  j unification  ; extracted  from  Mr. 

John  Goodwin  — *—  193 

Vol.  XXIII. 

A treatife  on  juftification.  Part  II.  — 3 

Reafons  againft  a reparation  from  the  Church 
of  England  — • — — 116 

The  Chriltian  facrament  and  facrifice  — 14.1 

ExtraCt  from  a treatife  concerning  religious 

affections  — — — 177 

Some  Remarks  on  Mr.  Hill’s  Farrago  Double- 
diftilled  — — — 280 

A fhort  account  of  John  Diilon  — 334 

Vol.  XXIV. 

•A  plain  account  of  Chrifiian  Perfection  — 3 

InftruCtions  for  Chrilliaus  — — 123 

Chrifiian  Reflections,  tranflated  from  the 
French  — — — 172 

InftruCtions  for  members  of  religious  focieties, 
tranflated  from  the  French  — 233 

Thoughts  on  a Angle  Life  — ~ 232 

A letter  to  a friend  concerning  Tea  264 

The  Defideratum  ; or  EleClricity  made  eafy  283 

Vol.  XXV. 

Primitive  Phyfic  ; or,  an  eafy  and  natural  way 
of  curing  moll  difcafes  — 3 

Advices  with  refpeCt  to  health,  extracted  from  a 

late  author  ■ 130 

Chap.  I.  Of  the  ufualcaufes  of  popular  maladies  137 


XX  INDEX. 

Page. 

Chap.  II.  Of  the  caufes  which  aggravate  dif- 

eafes  i6z 

III.  Of  the  means  that  ought  to  be  ufed 

at  the  beginning  of  difeafes  ; and  of  the  diet 
in  acute  difeafes  — — • J70  \ 

Chap.  IV.  Of  an  inflammation  of  the  lungs  180  ■ 

V.  Of  the  pleurify  19S  j 

VI.  Of  the  difeafes  of  the  throat  202- 

VII.  Of  colds  — — 209 

VIII.  Of  the  difeafes  of  the  teeth  214 

IX.  Of  the  apoplexy  — 218 

X.  Of  the  violent  influence,  or  ftroke  of 

the  fun  22^ 

XI.  Of  the  rheumatifm  — > 230 

XII.  Of  the  bite  of  a mad  dog  240 

XIII.  Of  the  fmall-pox  247 

XIV.  Or'themeafles  260 

XV.  Of  the  burning  fever  — 265 

XVI.  Of  putrid  fevers  — 270 

XVII.  Of  malignant  fevers  277 

XVIII.  Of  intermitting  fevers  283 

XIX.  Of  the  Erifipelas,  and  bites  of  ani- 
mals   292, 

XX.  Of  inflammations  of  the  breafl,  and 

of  falfe  and  bilious  pleurifies  — 298 

XXL  Of  colics  . 303 

XXII.  Of  the  iliac  paflion,  and  the  chole- 
ra morbus  — 31$ 

. XXIII.  Of  the  diarrhoea  — 320 

XXIV.  Of  the  dyfentery  — 322 

. * XXV.  The  treatment  of  difeafes  peculiar 

to  women  — ; — 328 

XXVI.  Direct ions  concerning  children  343 

• XXVII.  Directions  with  refpedf  to  drown- 
ed perfons  357 

XXVIII.  Of  fubftances  flopt  between 

the  mouth  and  the  ftomach  — 362 

XXIX.  Of  external  diforders,  and  fuch  as 
require  chirurgical  applications.  — 3T* 

— — XXX.  Of  fwoonings  — 399 


INDEX. 


xxi 


Page. 

XXXI.  Of  remedies  by  way  of  prevention  427 

Table  of  the  prefcriptions  and  remedies  referred 
to  in  this  treatii'e.  — — - 436 

Vol.  XXVI. 

An  extraCt  from  Dr.  Cadogan’s  difiertation  on 
the  gout,  and  all  chronic  difeafes  — 3. 

A Ihort  Englifh  grammar  — — 53 

Directions  concerning  pronunciation  and  gelture  67 

Journal  I. — An  extraCt  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  John 
Wefley’s  Journal  from  his  embarking  for 
Georgia,  061.  14,  17 3$,  to  his  return  to 
London,  Feb.  1,  1737-8.  — 83 

Journal  II. — An  extract  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  John 
Weiley’s  Journal,  from  Feb.  1,  1 737-8,  to  his 
ieturn  from  Germany  — 2.42 

Vol.  XXVIL 

An  extraCt  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Wefley’s  jour- 
nal, from  Aug.  12,  1738,  to  Nov.  1,  1739.  3 

Au  extraCt  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Welley's  jour- 
nal, from  Nov.  1,  1739,  to  Sept.  3,  1741.  162 

Vol.  XXVIII. 

An  extraCt  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Wefley’s  jour- 
nal, from  Sept.  3,  1741.  to  OCt.  27,  1743.  3 

An  extraCt  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Wefley’s  jour- 
nal, from  OCt.  27,  1743,  to  Nov.  17,  1746.  189 

Vol.  XXIX. 

ExtraCt  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Wefley’s  Journal, 
from  Nov.  25,  1746,  to  July  20,  1749.  3 

ExtraCt  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Wefley’s  Journal, 
from  July  20,  1751,  to  October  28,  1754.  184 


INDEX. 


sudi 


Vol.  XXX. 

Page. 

Extra&of  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Wefley’s  Journal, 
from  Feb.  16,  1755,  to  June  16,  1758.  3 

Extract  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Wefley’s  Journal, 
from  June  17,  1758,  to  May  5,  1760.  222 

Vol.  XXXI. 

Extract  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Wefley’s  Journal, 
from  May  6.  1760,  to  0>ff.  28,  1762.  3 

Extract  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Wefley’s  Journal, 
from  Oft.  29,  1762,  to  May  25,  176J.  205 

Vol.  XXXII. 

Extract  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Wefley’s  Journal, 
from  May  27,  1765,  to  May  18,  1768.  3 

Extratt  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Wefley’s  Journal, 
fromMayj8,  1768,  to  Sept,  x,  1770.  178 


FINIS, 


DATE  DUE 

J 

1 

DEMCO  38-297 

