| 3 


Ty 


THE GENESIS OF 
A iar . : ee | 
ZLMERICAN 2 a 


Antt-Missionisy, 


ned, GG. 6 PG Boake Zt 3 
Baptist ee Cbitegtion 
" 


Colgate University, Nex 


Beside the main topic, this book also treats of 
Subject No. On page Subject No. On page 


PRESENTED BY 


SAMUEL COLGATE. 


The books in this department are not to be taken 
from the building. 


Be Bases SAT t) hig 
, Vs \ Y ts fy 2 Mg ays Bx 
i Stay ie y <a : Vat Sy 
j Se y * p ay \ 
PAULI eiges < ty 
i a Dee i oe LA (a 
: $ hood ee ae * e Me, b of dl wi : 
eat oS a 2 e 
sae yr Pe ea sXe f Sp yi 
: ; 
x ay PIA : - 
,. se aa 


PRINTED IN U.S.A. 


iy S 
te 
\y yee 
” . \ a 35 
‘ X 
d } 


DATE DUE 


ee eet Sere: ye Talay aS ave Ty es =e “ite = 
pe Vi eee ve " iy NO Be: pe % ’ 
re aM a ¥ YS. re 7, ) 
re x ii a: Bu; ed 5 
1 he ‘ AL . & 
} he < ee 


THE GENESIS OF 


American Anti-Missionism 


B. H. CARROLL, Jr., B. A., LL. B., Th. D, 


UBLISHED FOR 
THE BApTist seein LD iat 
OUISVILLE, 
1902. 


Gateway Seminary Library 


INTRODUCTION. 


A connected and somewhat exhaustive ac- 
count of the anti-missionary movement that re- 
sulted from the pressing of foreign mission, 
home mission, Sunday school, educational, and 
other forms of organized denominational work 
under the auspices of the Triennial Convention, 
with Luther Rice as its chief agent, and Jud- 
son’s work in Burma as its chief inspiration, 
has long been a desideratum. The strength of 
the opposition throughout the South and the 
Southwest to the work of the Triennial Con- 
vention during the third and fourth decades of 
the nineteenth century may be illustrated by 
the following facts: During the first four or five 
years after the organization of the Triennial 
Convention (1814), the Baptist churches of 
Tennessee were nearly all friendly to the for- 
eign mission cause and contributed toward its 
funds. Within a few years all the missionary 
societies that had been formed for co-operation 
with the Triennial Convention were dissolved 
and the association rescinded the resolutions 
that had been passed in favor of missions and 
related departments of denominational work. 
In Georgia and Alabama a life-and-death 
struggle between the friends of missions and 
co-operative work and the malignant enemies of 
missions raged for years, and the issue, apart 
from firm faith in the God of missions, might 
well have seemed doubtful. As late as Bam 

(3) 


4 INTRODUCTION. 


twelve of the thirty-four Virginia associations, 
including the old Ketokton, were aggressively 
anti-missionary. Equally successful was the 
anti-missionary propaganda in Kentucky. Ohio, 
where Alexander Campbell’s influence was 
great, and the writings of Daniel Parker and 
John Taylor were circulated, was an equally 
fruitful field for the anti-missionary propa- 
ganda. In 1820 the Ohio Baptist churches had 
contributed $547.09 for foreign missions. From 
1821 to 1828 contributions ceased entirely, 
while the contributions in 1829 and 1830 were 
$10 and $5 respectively. The wonderful suc- 
cess of the opponents of missions from 1820 to 
1840 needs to be explained, and Dr. Carroll 
has performed a service of great value in bring- 
ing together from rare sources a large amount 
of material illustrative of the spirit and the 
methods of the opposition to organized mission- 
ary work. He has made effective use of the 
scarce writings of Daniel Parker and John 
Taylor, and has demonstrated more fully than 
any earlier writer the contribution of Alexan- 
der Campbell to the anti-missionary movement. 

It is a source of satisfaction to me that this 
fine piece of research work ona topic that is 
still of vital interest to the denomination is to 
be published in book form, and I trust that it 
will be widely circulated throughout the de- 
nomination, and especially in those parts of the 
South where war is still being waged against 
the organized work of the denomination. 


ALBERT Henry Newman. 
Baylor University, Waco, Texas. 


Lovingly Dedicated 
to 
B. H, CARROLL Iii. 


With the eternal prayer that by the Grace of God 
: and the calling of the Holy Spirit, 
he may some day he, either 
at home or abroad, a 
Consecrated Missionary 
of the Gospel of our 
Lord, JESUS CHRIST. 


[This work was originally done asa Thesis, and presented to the 
Faculty of the Southern Baptist Theological Seminary in applying 
for the Degree of Doctor of Theology, with the following.] 


PREFACE. 


Worcester gives as the primary definition ofa 
Thesis, that it is ‘‘a position or proposition af- 
firmative or negative, advanced or laid down, to 
be supported by argument.” The proposition, 
then, which I lay down asa thesis, and which I 
will endeavor to prove in the following pages, is 
that under God the Foreign Mission movement 
among American Baptists has been the great- 
est factor in our denominational development. 
My purpose is to show how great a work /or- 
eign missions has done at home. ‘There is no 
book covering just this ground, nor do I think 
our people realize how great is our debt to for- 
eign missions. We look upon our contributions 
to that cause as bread cast upon the waters, 
never to return to our own shores. Many re- 
gard a gift to foreign missions as a dead loss. 
Many more have regard only to the results 
abroad. Mary books have been written to show 
sts successes abroad. May there not be a place 
for one to show what have been its trials and 
what are its trophies in our own land? I be- 
lieve the foreign mission movement has fur- 
nished the centripetal force which holds our 
denomination together and which counteracts 
the centrifugal force of church sovereignty 
and independence; which if it operated without 
the check of fraternal sympathy, comity and 
co-operation, would cause us to fly off at oe 


8 PREFACE. 


gent into chaos. I believe its results to be so 
great that they would cause us to support it 
from considerations of self interest, if there were 
no higher motive. Not that I want such acon- 
sideration to hecome paramount, for as in 
prayer, although the reflex benefit is great, 
every one ceases to pray as soon as he believes 
in only a reflex effect; so I believe the same re- 
sults would follow in the case of foreign mis- 
sions. One reason it has so greatly blessed us 
is that we did not expect the blessing. As 
Eben Holden says, ‘‘Folks that takes care of 
other folks will get taken care of, unless they 
do it on purpose.’’? But it is only fair that we 
should know the benefits we have derived in 
order that we may answer the doubter and the 
gainsaying. 

In addition to the main thesis of the book, 
other theses which I regard as of importance 
will be defended. The most prominent of these 
are: First, that American Baptist missionary 
activity is not due, save indirectly or in a 
very minor degree, to Carey or to the develop- 
ment of missions in district associations, but is 
directly traceable to Judson and Rice. Second, 
that Alexander Campbell was the greatest and 
most influential of the anti-missionaries. To 
many this will be exhibiting Mr. Campbell in 
anew role. Third, that foreign missions is 
the mother of education, organization, home 
missions and other denominational activities. 
There is necessarily much of history given, al- 
though the aim has not been to give an exhaust- 
ive history of this period, but to give enough to 
Prove my positions. 'These positions were taken 


PREFACE. 9 


from a study of that history and enough of the 
evidence is cited to show that they are neither 
fanciful, forced nor arbitrary. ‘The facts pre- 
sented have all been obtained from reliable 
sources; I have neither invented nor deduced 
them. The merit of this thesis is in show- 
ing what these facts frove. Wherever I have 
been able to carry on the argument directly 
by means of quotations, I have done so, even 
at the cost of introducing some irrelevant 
matter and of making the style a trifle jerky. 
I have tried to cite my authorites fully, but 
lest I should fail todo them justice, I hereby 
make a general and grateful acknowledgment 
to the many authors from whose works I have 
drawn. I desire to extend special thanks to 
Mrs. B. D. Spencer for her great kindness in 
putting at my disposal certain rare pamphlets. 
So far as I know, she has the only copies of 
the Taylor and Parker pamphlets procurable 
in the South. ‘The first chapter of this work 
is condensed as much as possible, and is chiefly 
intended as a background to what follows. A 
recent book on missions, issued by the Amert- 
can Baptist Publication Society, since this 
chapter was typewritten, has the same chap- 
ter heading to its second chapter. My highest 
hope for this effort is that it may prove of some 
value to the man who shall some day write the 
glorious history of the Baptist denomination in 
the United States of America. 
Respectfully submitted, 
B. H. Carrouu, JR. 


Done at the Library of the Southern Baptist Theological 
Seminary this 14th day of February, A. D., 1901. 


CHAPTER I, 
18a 


WAT; 


VII. 


GL 


CONTENTS. 


THE AMERICAN BAPTISTS IN 1812....... 


CONNECTION OF JUDSON AND RICE WITH 
THE AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSIONARY 
INE OWE MIE IVE chel sw eneteretin eos sche locsaieeneles 


THE RISE OF THE ‘‘ HARDSHELLS’’..... 
OUTLINE OF JOHN TAYLOR'S ARGUMENT. 


OUTLINE OF DANIEL PARKER'S ATTACK 
ON THE MISSIONARY SYSTEM......... 


ALEXANDER CAMPBELL’S ATTACK ON 
INTTSSTON Get anee cis Ot erie atcecheel ave ccna taaa challays 


PROGRESS AND SPIRIT OF OPPOSITION TO 
VETS SONG apME py tere iere cle re arte ginal eur oon cucrehe™? 


RELATION OF THE FOREIGN MISSION 
MOVEMENT TO EDUCATION....-..8.26. 


RELATION OF THE FOREIGN MISSION 
MOVEMENT TO ORGANIZATION........ 


RELATION OF FOREIGN MISSIONS TO 
HomgE MISsIONS, BIBLE AND OTHER 
SOCIETIES AND THE SOUTHERN Bap- 
PETG O NV IGINL EO NG Nare,/oleie 6, ovane7o ans: esol ocararens 


THE LIGHT SHED BY THE LESSONS OF 
THE PAST ON THK DUTIES OF THE 
RCS ON ee erties cap asr ns eucie ee, oes ece th Oe whe 


108 


124 


156 


LOT 


201 


212 


THE GENESIS OF 
AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 


CHAr Lert 


THE AMERICAN BAPTISTS IN 1812. 


1. THE POLITICAL SITUATION. 


The year 1812 isa pivotal one in American 
history. Great men were guiding the ship of 
state. Madison, who had been Secretary of 
State under Jefferson, was President; Henry 
Clay of Kentucky was Speaker of the House ; 
John C. Calhoun of South Carolina had made 
his first appearance in the House of Represent- 
atives the preceding year. Thelaurels of Tip- 
pecanoe were yet fresh on General Harrison’s 
brow. Thetrialof Aaron Burr, the Lewis and 
Clark exploration, and the defeat of the British 
Sloop of war, ‘‘Little Belt,’’ by the American 
vessel, ‘‘President,’’ were recent and vivid mem- 
ories. Buta few years since and the United 
States had expanded to take in the vast Louis- 
jana territory ceded by Napoleon the Great of 
France. Thecharter of the Bank of the United 
States had just expired. The only Vege: 

13 


14 THE GENESIS OF 


in the world, Fulton’s ‘‘Clermont,’’ had been 
plying the waters of the Hudson since 1807. 
The American Ambassador had been recalled 
from the Court of St. James and Mr. Madison 
had given the British Minister his passports. 
The popular slogan of free trade and sailors’ 
rights was sweeping like wildfire through the 
land. 

So dawned the year 1812. Early in the year 
Louisiana was admitted as the seventeenth State 
of the Union aud the Territory of Missouri was 
organized with St. Louis as itscapital. On the 
eighteenth of June, after receiving the arrogant 
answer of the British Minister that they would 
abandon no measures however injurious or offen- 
sive to the United States, which the war with 
France made it to their interest to employ, 
President Madison signed the bill that declared 
this country to be for the second time at war 
with Great Britain. Thus was the young Re- 
public with its attempt at self-government still 
a problem, with depleted exchequerand steeped 
in debt, put where, with its miniature navy, 
it had to oppose the ‘‘Mistress of the Seas,”’ 
and with its unpaid army, to defend the long 
line of its frontier against the British and their 
thoroughly organized allies, the Indians, led by 
the greatest of chiefs, Tecumseh. ‘Tecumseh’s 
followers, it is true, had been defeated by Gen- 
eral Harrison, but when Tecumseh himself was 
absent, and then only after having inflicted a 
loss on the whites of nearly two to one. ‘The 
story of that war is not to be retold here. Its 
story is one of disaster after disaster on land, 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. ks 


and victory after victory on sea. The Fort 
Dearborn massacre, the loss of Macenac, and 
the disgraceful surrender of Detroit by Gener- 
al Bull followed in swift succession. ‘Tecum- 
seh, for tactical skilland personal bravery, was 
girded by the British commander’s own sash 
and made a General inthe Britisharmy. Soon 
after Captain Isaac Hull washed away the 
stain from that name, (put there by the Gen- 
eral’s cowardice) when he evaded the entire 
British squadron by superior seamanship and 
blew the frigate ‘‘Guerriere’’ out of the water. 
But time would fail to tell of Porter and Jones 
and Bainbridge and our other naval heroes in 
that war, or of the bravery displayed by the 
Americans in the attack on Queenstown, in 
which attack Scott, then a Lieutenant-colonel 
of volunteers, figured heroically. The year 
closed with the war party still in the ascendant 
and with the doctrine of sailor’s rights being 
gloriously maintained by the sailors them- 
selves. 

In Europe, the heroic igure of Napoleon Bo- 
naparte loomed like a Titan against the hori- 
zon, but the early winter of 1812 and the burn- 
ing of Moscow marked the beginning of his 
end. His offenses against American ships and 
commerce had really been greater than those of 
England, and more real cause existed for war 
with France than with the mother country, but 
the sentiment engendered by the aid of Lafa- 
yetteand other French officers in the war of 
1776 was too great in America to permit her to 
side against a country which, inspired by the 


16 THE GENESIS OF 


American example and success, had so recently 
gone through the throes of the French Revolu- 
tion. 


2. RELIGIOUS STATUS OF THE BAPTISTS 
IN 1812. 
(71) As to Number and Characteristics. 


The year 1800 found the Baptists with about 
180,000 members, divided among forty-eight as- 
sociations. Under the influence, largely, of 
Welsh Baptists, the Arminian Baptists, who up 
to 1742 had decided advantages in members and 
enterprise, were routed, and by 1800 Calvinistic 
Baptists had everywhere ascendency. * This 
turn to Calvinism was largely accentuated by 
the Whitfield revival and by the growing op- 
position between the Baptists and the Armin- 
ian followersof John Wesley. ‘The close of 
the Revolutionary War left the country flooded 
with all the attendant evils that war brings in 
its train. French infidelity, made popular by 
the French officers who assisted the patriot 
cause, the infidelity of Voltaire, Rousseau, and 
D’Alembert—brilliant, shallow, witty, caus- 
tic, sneering—had been sowed wide cast in 
this country. Thomas Payne used the popu- 
larity of his patriotism to spread his ‘‘Age 
of Reason” and other attacks on the Bible. 
Thomas Jefferson was thought by some to be 
a free-thinker. This infidelity shaded off into 
Socinianism, Universalism anda state of gtn- 


* Vedder: ‘History of the Baptists of the Middle 
States,” pp. 92, 93. 


AMERICAN AN’TI-MISSIONISM. 17 


eral religious apathy. It reached even into the 
churches and pulpits. A theory of restoration- 
ism, called by its opposers, ‘‘Hell-Redemption- 
ism,’’ became quite popular, especially in the 
Middle States. Among the unconverted, par- 
ticularly on the frontier, the grossest ribaldry 
and blasphemy were quitecommon. A reaction 
set in and a great religious awakening swept 
the country like a tidal wave. Where sin was 
SO gross, conviction of sin became very deep ; 
sometimes men labored for months under a load 
of sin withont getting relief. John Taylor, in 
his ‘‘History of Ten Churches,”’ describes him- 
self as being accustomed to kneel and pray 
every day for days while under such a convic- 
tion, acknowledging God’s justice in damning 
him and sending his soul to hell. He also tells 
of having seen the floor wet with the tears of 
the penitents.* In the great revivals between 
1800 and 1812, especially in Kentucky, most 
marked mental and spiritual phenomena ap- 
peared, suchas ‘‘the falling exercise.’’ The 
first instance noted occurred under the ministry 
of McGready and McGee in1779. From thence 
it spread rapidly all over Kentucky and Middle 
Tennessee and soon became inseparable from 
the religious camp meetings. 


Some fell suddenly as if struck by lightning, while 
others were seized with a universal tremor the moment be- 
fore, and fell shrieking. Piercing shrieks were uttered by 
many during the whole period of prostration, intermingled 
with groans, cries for mercy, and exclamations of ‘‘ Glory 
to God!’’ In general there was no complaint of pain, but 


*History of Ten Churches, by John Taylor, p.23, 
2 


18 THE GENESIS OF 


of great weakness during and after the paroxysms. Women 
would fall while walking to and from the meeting- 
house, engaged in narrating past exercises, or drop 
from their horses on the road. In this condition the sub- 
ject would lie fifteen minutes or two or three hours; and we 
are even told of a woman’s lying, without eating or speak- 
ing, for nine days and nights. Some were more or less 
convulsed, and wrought hard in frightful nervous ago- 
nies, the eyes rolling widely. But the greater number were 
quite motionless, as if dead or about to expire in a few 
moments. Some were capable of conversing, others were 
not. During the syncope, and even when conscious, and 
talking on religious topics, the subject was insensible of 
pain. Vinegar and hartshorn were applied with no per- 
ceptible effects. ... During the great camp meeting at 
Cane Ridge, August 6th, 1801, three thousand were com- 
puted to have fallen. * 


A similar affection to this was ‘‘ the jerking 
exercise,’ or, as it was commonly called, ‘*the 
jerks.’’ In this exercise, 

The subject was instantaneously seized with spasms or 
convulsions in every muscle, nerve and tendon. His head 
was jerked from side to side with such rapidity that it was 
impossible to distinguish his visage, and the most lively 
fears were entertained lest he should dislocate his neck, or 
dash out his brains. His body partook of the same im- 
pulse, and was hurried on by jerks over every obstacle, 
fallen trunks of trees, or, in a church, over pews and 
benches, apparently to the most imminent danger of being 
bruised and mangled. It was useless to attempt to re- 
strain or hold him, and the paroxysm was permitted grad- 
ually to exhaust itself. + 


* History of the Presbyterian Church, p. 143 et seq., 
as quoted in Spencer’s History of Kentucky Baptists, 
p- 515. 

+ History of the Presbyterian Church, pp. 145, 146, as 
quotedin Spencer’s History, of Kentucky Baptists, p. 516 


AMERICAN AN'TI-MISSIONISM. 19 


Wicked men were often taken with these strange exer- 
cises, and many would eurse the jerks while they were 
under their singular operation. Some were taken at-the 
tavern with a glass of liquor in their hands, which they 
would suddenly toss over their heads or toa distant part 
oftheroom. Others were taken with them at the card 
table, and at other place of dissipation, and would by a 
violent and unaffected jerk, throw a hand fullof cards all 
over the room. * 


The rolling exercise, the running exercise, 
the dancing exercise, the barking exercise, the 
laughing exercise and visions and trances were 
frequent concomitants of camp meetings in 
Kentucky and Tennessee during the great re- 
vival.t ‘These exercises were simply such var- 
iations of the foregoing as their names would 
naturally suggest. Frequent earthquakes oc- 
curred during the year 1811 which, taken in 
conjunction with the ‘‘shakes’’ and the fact 
that the next year Congress declared war with 
Great Britain, confirmed the superstitious in 
their belief that the ‘‘shakes’’ betokened some 
great calamity.t The Baptists declined to 
join in general camp meetings, and were but 
little affected by these strange phenomena. In 
1800, in Kentucky, the statistics compared with 
those of 1790 show a falling off of one hundred 
per cent in Baptist membership in proportion 
to increase in population. Their revival in 


A more extended description is given by McNemar, pp. 
51, 52, and is quoted by many authors. 

* History of Baptists. Vol. 11, p. 255, as quoted by 
Spencer, p. 517. 

+ Spencer: History of Kents Baptists, pp. 517-520. 

; 66 6¢ 66 p- 667, 


20 THE GENESIS OF 


Kentucky was more gradual and moderate. 
They joined in only one union meeting. Pro- 
tracted meetings were as yet unknown. In 
1803 there were in Kentucky ten associations, 
219 churches and 15,295 members.* In 1810-12 
there were in Kentucky 15 associations, 286 
churches and 16,250 members,t showing that 
the increase in Kentucky had been but slight 
and gradual. In Kentucky in 1812 the first 
number of the ‘‘ Kentucky Missionary and 
Theological Magazine’? was published at 
Frankfort, with Stark Dupuy as editor. { 
About the same time the Boston Association 
was formed from the old Warren Association. § 


(2) As to Doctrine and Customs. 


By 1812 the Baptists nearly everywhere 
were strongly Calvinistic. The Philadelphia, 
Charleston and Warren Associations were the 
three most influential. Great care was taken 
in ordaining ministers. Ministers asked no 
pay for their services, but the Church felt obli- 
gation to support.| Baptist ministers in 
preaching discarded all written preparations, 
but all of them were by no means ignorant. A 
strict church discipline was maintained. Dr. 
Spencer says that one of the best Churches in 
Kentucky received only one person by baptism 


* Spencer: History Kentucky Baptists, p. 541. 
+ 4é “ce oe cé p- 565. 


“cc 66 66 66 


§ Vedder: History of the Baptist in New England, p. 
97. 
|| Taylor: History of Ten Churches, p. 34. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 2a 


during five long years and he was excluded 
two months after baptism. Prayer for new 
converts sometimes continued for an hour. The 
practice of the laying on of hands after bap- 
tism was common.* 


The rite of the laying on of hands on the newly bap- 
tized was practiced by the Baptists of those days; this 
practice was performed as follows: those upwards of fifty 
stood up in one solemn line on the bank of the river, taking 
up about as many yards as there were individuals—the 
males first in the line; about four ministers went together, 
each one laid his hand on the head of the dedicated person, 
and one prayed for him, and after praying for three or 
four of them another proceeded until they went through. 
It would appear as if that solemn dedication might besome 
barrier to future apostasy ; for the prayers were of great 
solemnity and fervor, and for that particular person ac- 
cording to their age and circumstances,+ 


The churches were almost to a unit indiffer- 
ent to missions. ‘The frontier churches had 
only monthly meetings, but there as elsewhere 
the preaching was noted for its scripturalness, 
fervor and deep feeling. Ruling elders were 
nominal officers in many churches. ‘They were 
introduced into Kentucky by zealous Separate 
Baptists from Virginia, who obtained the usage 
from the Puritans. It was a practice that 
ceased soon after this time.{ Foot-washing 
as an ordinance was somewhat in vogue, but 
mainly among Separates. It has survived 
only among them and some of the anti-mission- 


-* Spencer: History of Kentucky Baptists, p. 486. 
+ Taylor: History of Ten Churches, p. 10. 
¢ Spencer: History of Kentucky Baptists, p. 486, 


yi "so HF) GENESIS OF 


ary Baptists.* Quarterly or union meetings 
were customary. ‘These two terms describe 
the same meeting, which was not a business 
meeting, but one for worship. A great deal of 
significance was attached to dreams and 
visions t and some remarkable and well-authen- 
ticated stories are told concerning them. { 
There are instances where men traveled two 
hundred miles to be baptized, thus emulating 
the example of the Saviour, who walked sixty 
miles from Galilee to where John was baptiz- 
ing on the Judean border in Jordan. 


(3) Religious Liberty. 


By 1812 the struggle for religious liberty 
was practically won, although persecution 
still continued in Massachusetts, Connecticut, 
Virginia, and possibly some other States, in the 
form of unjust taxation and sometimes restric- 
tions as to worship and personal penalties in- 
flicted on the preacher, with the connivance, at 
least, of the law. Opposition to negro slavery 
was felt even at this early day,.and was more 
outspoken at the South than in the North. 


(4) Education. 


In educational work the only Baptist institu- 
tion was Brown University, whose story will 
be told in a subsequent chapter, and even this 
did not offer ministerial education. But the 


* Spencer: History of Kentucky Baptists, p. 486. 
+ 6é 6 66 66 512. 
{ Taylor: History of Ten Churches, p. 35, 36, 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 93 


Baptists were far from being an ignorant and 
unlettered folk. Their young ministers sat at 
the feet of older and wiser brethren, and re- 
ceived with apostolic simplicity the faith once 
for all delivered to the saints. 


* At this time also there are nota few among us in the 
sacred office of distinguished worth, not so much for their 
literary acquirements as for what is infinitely of more 
value in promoting pure undefiled religion before God, 
namely: true piety, ardent zeal, ministerial gifts and inde- 
fatigable diligence, and faithfulness in saving the souls of 
men and promoting the kingdom of our Redeemer. Some are 
Boanerges, sons of thunder, qualified to lay the axe at the 
root of the trees; to awaken alarm, and strip sinners of 
their carnal hopes and self-dependence; while others are 
sons of consolation, fitted to apply the healing balm of gos- 
pel grace and mercy, to excite faith in the merits and medi- 
tation of Christ, and lead the subject of grace to rejoice 
in hope; fitted to build up, comfort, establish and edify the 
faithful, leading them on asa peculiar people, zealous of 
good works; while all have a measure of all gifts, as God 
has distributed to all by the same Spirit. Of these there 
are not a few, especially Southward and Eastward of us, 
the force of whose natural genius has raised them far 
above the common level, whose names, for obvious rea- 
sons, we for the present suppress, and 


“‘ Hail the suns of glory when they set.’’ 


A footnote to the above states the following 
facts : 

The Baptists, as a society, have never considered the 
higher branches of learning as essential to the gospel min- 
istry, and there is no doubt but that the sentiment is per- 


* Quoted from Centennial sermon of Philadelphia Bap- 
tist, Association, preached in 1807. Minutes of Philadel- 
phia Association, pp. 464-5, 


24 THE GENESIS OF 


fectly correct. They have, nevertheless, held education in 
high esteem, as a handmaid to grace, and have always had 
not a few among them that ranked pretty high for literary 
improvement and extensive reading. (Here follows an 
account of the founding of Brown University.) The 
writer kept a boarding school between twenty-nine and 
thirty years at Lower Dublin, in which many were edu- 
cated that are now useful to the different learned profes- 
sions. One of them, the Rey. Dr. Allison, kept a large 
academy under his sole direction, at Bordentown in New 
Jersey, from whence issued many useful characters. 

The Philadelphia Baptist Association havea fu nd for 
the education of young men promising for the gospel min- 
istry, as have also the Charleston Association. The Bap- 
tists in Georgia have in contemplation to erect a college in 
that State on Mount Enon, at the distance of one hundred 
and forty miles from the Atlantic, in latitude 33 north, on 
an elevation of 200 feet perpendicular, accommodated with 
salubrious air, and two fine springs that issue out of roeks 
on the west and north sides. The business is in some for- 
wardness, as unsolicited donations already amount to 
about five thousand dollars. This account of Enon Col- 
lege bears date of December, 1806.* 


The arrogance and godlessness of the Epis- 
copalians, the persecution by the Congregation- 
alists and the small success of the Presbyterian 
ministers led some of the stalwart and rugged 
brethren on the borders to despise an education 
whose chief exponents belonged to these three 
classes; especially, when they contrasted it with 
the self-sacrificing, earnest, hardship-enduring 
and patient efforts of the pioneer Baptist and 
Methodist ministers. The Episcopalians and 


* The footnote to the quotation, is presumably, by the 
editor, A. D. Gillette, A. M. pp. 464-5. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 25 


Methodists had lost much by their Tory sym- 
pathies during the Revointion, which they 
were wisely regaining by warmly espousing 
the cause of the States in the War of 1812. 
The feeling against the Episcopalians was so 
strong as to cause the Baptist churches to neg- 
lect the New Testament title for ministers 
having congregations in charge, namely, 
‘‘ bishop.’”’ It was thus neglected on account of 
its prelatical associations. All the causes set 
forth above combined to create the prejudices 
against paying stated salaries to ministers and 
reading of sermons. It was the inevitable re- 
action of the pendulum to the furthest extreme 
from the abuses of the politico-religious bodies 
with whom they had come in contact. ° 


(5) Missionary Activity among Baptists 
Prior to the Conversion of Judson and Fice. 


It is unquestionable that missionary activity 
in the United States, among all denominations, 
was, in a sense, a direct growth of William 
Carey’s work. This great Baptist was the 
founder of missionary activity in two continents 
and was the father of American, as well as 
English missions. . 

In particular, the Baptists of this country were eager 
watchers. Dr. Staughton, later a pastor in Philadelphia, 
had heard Carey’s famous sermon, and like all the au- 
ditors was stirred to the depths; he was present, too, at the 
organization in Kettering and into the collection cast a 
half guinea borrowed for the purpose, ever after declaring 
that he ‘“‘rejoiced more over it than any other sum he ever 
gave in his life.” Letters and missionary reports sent 
py English Baptists were quite extensively circulated, 


26 HE GENESIS OF 


And since Carey, with all his stalwart faith in God, was 
also a stanch believer in the efficacy of vigorous and un- 
interrupted good works, and hence among the rest was a 
most indefatigable letter writer, information and exhorta- 
tion were poured forth inall directions from his prolific 
pen. Thus communications not a few reached New Eng- 
land and the Middle States, were read with interest and 
as a result, considerable sums of money were forwarded 
toSerampore. In 1806-7 he acknowledged receipt of $6,000 
and says: ‘‘The Lord has wonderfully stirred the whole 
religious world of every denomination to favor our work 
and contribute to a large amount; and our American 
friends have special claims on our gratitude in this re- 
spect.”? And further, in 1811, through the action of the 
Boston Baptist Association, $4,650 were contributed by 
persons of different denominations in eastern Massachu- 
setts, toaidin carrying forward his numerous transla- 
tions of the Scriptures into Asiatic languages. Hence the 
assertion is abundantly justified that ‘“‘weare indebted to 
those pioneers for the example which gave a powerful im- 
pulse to missions by arousing the interest and embodying 
the efforts of all denominations.’’* 


In 1796 a society had been organized in New 
York in which Presbyterians, Baptists, and Re- 
formed (Dutch) were united, and monthly meet- 
ings were held to pray that the ‘‘God of grace 
would pour out his spirit on his church and 
send the gospel to all nations.’’ During the 
first five years of the nineteenth century the 
Massachusetts Baptist Missionary Magazine 
was started, along with four other missionary 
periodicals of various denominations. t 

During this early period it is impossible al- 
ways to discriminate and. distinguish closely 


* Leonard: ‘‘A hundred Years of Missions, p. 102. 
t 66 &¢ ¢$ 46 66 $e p. 102 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. OF 


between the various kinds of missions, especial- 
ly in view of the difficulty of classifying the 
work done among the American Indians, and 
the fact that, part at least of the nomencla- 
ture specifying the various divisions of mission- 
ary activity came into existence at a later date. 
In 1807 Rev. S. Jones, D. D., preached the 
Century Anniversary sermon of the Philadel- 
phia Association from Isaiah 54: 2-3 “‘Anlarge 
the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth 
the curtains of thine habitations: spare not, 
lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes ; 
for thou shalt break forth on the right hand and 
on the left; and thy seed shall inherit the Gen- 
tiles, and make the desolate cities to be inhabit- 
ed.’ In that sermon he pays this tribute to 
the missionary spirit: 


What shall we say of the missionary spirit that has 
for some years and especially of late prevailed in many 
places, and among many different societies, with a view 
to spread the knowledge of the gospel and the way of 
salvation among the heathen in various parts, as well 
as among Christians in places destitute of the means. It 
would seem that knowledge, civil and religious liberty and 
with them Religion itself are tending westward. With 
the sun they rose in the East, after a course of ages, 
crossed the Atlantic, and itis likely will progress west- 
ward uutil they reach the Pacific Ocean, civilizing and 
making happy this Western Hemisphere in their course.” 


The missionary work done by the Philadel- 
phia Association, especially in the South, has 
‘been great. 


*Minutes of Philadelphia Association, p,. 464, 


28 THE GENESIS OF 


The Philadelphia Association, from the first, has en- 
gaged earnestly in efforts forthe proper education of its 
_ ministers and the spread of the gospel in the world, 

Rhode Island College, now Brown University, received 
its patronage and contributions from its origin, as the 
subsequent minutes show. It will be seen also that. from 
the first, it has been an effective missionary body. Hun- 
dreds of churches have been gathered by the able and 
self-denying men, sent out at its expense to regions where 
no religious privileges had before been enjoyed. The 
aborigines were not overlooked in this labor of love. 
Among other efforts, the Rev. David Jones, before the 
American Revolution, made a missionary excursion, at 
his own expense, to the Indians of what was then ‘‘the 
Far West.’’* 

This was the first Baptist Association formed in the 
United States. From its earliest history it has been for- 
ward in the work of Domestic Missions. The pastors 
were requested, and the churches urged, to be liberal in 
aiding them to visit destitute churches and settlements. 
Morgan Edwards, in 1771, and John Gano, afterwards, 
were appointed ‘‘Evangelists,’? and sent into remote re- 
gions, especially South, to preach the gospel and coun- 
sel the feeble churches, and instruct the scattered disci- 
ples of Christ. The design of founding Rhode Island 
College originated in this body.} 


This Association was the mightiest power for ~ 
missionary activity up to the formation of what 
was afterwards called the Triennial Conven- 
tion. Its confession of faith was printed for 
the Association by Benjamin Franklin,t and 
has left its stamp ineradicably on the Baptists 
of the United States, especially in the South. 


*Preface to Minutes of Philadelphia Association, p. 5. 
+ “eo cé 66 66 6é ¢ 
| Pp. 6. 


66 66 & 66 66 
t 6 p. 4, 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 29 


The Charleston Association was operated on 
the same principles. The minutes of 1809 
show that a proposal was received from the 
Philadelphia and Warren Associations, recom- 
mending their missionary plans and making a 
suggestion as to their adoption and extension, 
to which the Association makes the following 
reply: 

The proposal for extending the plan of operations 
respecting Missions, being taken up, it was agreed that 
the contributions hitherto made by the Churches, and 
perhaps their real ability to contribute, together with 
the magnitude of those objects on which we have already 
fixed our attention, and which ought not to be lost sight 
of, make it improper for this Association to attempt any- 
thing farther of that kind at present; unless individuals, 
who have the subject at heart, and ability to contribute 
with effect, would by generous donations put it in the 
power of this body to undertake it with consistency. A 
hope was however expressed that such assistance will be 
afforded; and that intime a plana may be adopted to unite 
all the Associations in this State in common efforts 
to attain this, and other important objects.” 


This quotation reveals a distinct tendency to 
co-operation in mission work. The Charleston 
Association also shows at this time a students’ 
and. education fund,t and it had been since 
1802 conducting a mission to the Catawba In- 
dians. In 1809, its mission fund amounted to 
$140.00; in 1810, to $249,32; and in 1811 to 
$298.643. [he minutes of 1811, show this As- 
sociation to be in correspondence with the 
Ee a EIN AC A PEL 
* Minutes of Charleston Association of 1809, p. 2. 

+ Compare page 5 of same Minutes. 


30 THE GENESIS OF 


Philadelphia, Warren, Georgia, Cook, Bethel, 
Hephzibah, Edgefield, Neuse, Sandy Creek, 
and Cape Fear Associations. 

In Maine, although the other denominations 
were Arminian and the Baptists were charged 
with being hyper-Calvinistic, yet, ‘‘the first 
efforts made by Baptist ministers in the State 
were characterized by a missionary spirit,’ and 
they taught a practical as well as an experimen- 
tal piety. In 1789 York Association adopted the 
plan of ‘‘ voluntary supplies to the destitute.”’ 
Lincoln and Cumberland Associations followed 
her example; but the labor was too vast, and 
both the labor and expense were borne by min- 
isters alone without the aid of co-operative 
churches, thus leaving the churches undevel- 
oped.* In 1789 Bowdenheim Association, and 
in 1800 York Association, started a “‘gosfel mis- 
ston’’ plan. 


This plan consisted in the appointment of a Commtttee 
“to employ a suitable ordained elder as a missionary to 
travel into the eastern parts to preach and adiminister 
the ordinances of the gospel” and the churches were re- 
quested to sustain by their liberalities the missionary thus - 
appointed. This planinterfered not with the plan of volun- 
tary supplies. It contemplated a wider range of mission- 
ary effort. It was designed tocarry the gospel not only 
to the destitute churches, dut to the new and distant settle- 
ments, where Christ was not preached to those who sat in 
darkness.t 


-* The information as to missionary affairs in Maine 
is mainly taken from a History of the Baptists in Maine 
by Rev. J, Millett. 

{ Above, p. 425. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 31 


Both of these proving insufficient to meet 
growing needs and new settlements, the Bow- 
denheim Association in 1804 formed the Maine 
Baptist Missionary Society, with the same ob- 
jects and general plan, nearly the whole de- 
nomination co-operating. This led to the or- 
ganization of the Baptist State Convention at 
Winthrop, June 23, 1824. 

In New England the Warren Association 
early made arrangements for the supply of 7n- 
Sant churches. In 1778 it sent missionaries to 
visit ‘“‘the northern parts of our country.’’ 
These were successful. The Massachusetts 
churches contributed eighty-one pounds and 
ten shillings for a similar work. In Con- 
necticut the Stonington Association, 1784, and 
Danbury Association, 1790, made arrangements 
for the supply of destitute churches. In Ver- 
mont the Woodstock Association in 1791 sent 
four missionaries to ‘‘a great number of infant 
settlements of Connecticut River, in the Upper 
Coos country, also to journey through the nor th 
part of the State of Vermont even.... within 
the Canada lines.’’* 

Churches were requested to defray charges 
by contribution. As a result it was voted in 
1804 that a committee of three be appointed to 
form a plan for a missionary society, so that in 
1806 the Woodstock Baptist Missionary Asso- 
ciation was organized. Inthe Shaftesbury As- 
sociation, 1801, a proposition was made for 
raising a fund by contribution, ‘*for the purposes 
of sending missionaries to preach the gospel in 


ee ee ee 
* Burrage: History of New England Baptists, p. 135, 


32 THE GENESIS OF 


distant parts of our frontier settlements, and as 
far as we may have opportunity, among the 
nations of the wilderness.”’ This plan was 
carried out in 1802 and the Vermont Associa- 
tion did the same thing.* 

On May 26, 1802, the Massachusetts Baptist 
Missionary Society held its first meeting at 
the First Baptist Church in Boston. Article 
1V. of their Constitution was as follows: 

“The object of this society shall be to fur- 
nish occasional preaching and to promote the 
knowledge of evangelical truth in the new set- 
tlements of the United States; or farther, if 
circumstances should render it proper.”’ 

In September, 1803, the Society commenced 
the publication of the ‘‘ Massachusetts Bap- 
tist Missionary Magazine,’’ except one, the 
earliest Baptist periodical published in this 
country. In Connecticut the Danbury Associa- 
tion perfected a plan begun in 1806, by which 
missionaries were in charge of a committee 
and the churches contributed to their support. 
Action was anticipated by the organization in 
1811 of the Connecticut Baptist Missionary 
Society, which did a thorough work in the 
State and even beyond. The following is the 
report of the Baptist Missionary Society in 
Massachusetts in 1812: 

The northwesterly part of the State of Pennsylvania 
and the westerly part of the State of New York, have been 
visited by several of our missionaries and the solitary 
places cheered by the glad sound of the gospel. Nova Sco- 


* Burrage: History of the Baptists in New England, 
p. 136, 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 33 


tia and New Brunswick, with some parts of Lower Cana- 
da, have been visited; and the precious seed of the king- 
dom sown among them by the labors of our brethren, Nor 
have the destitute in Rhode Island, Vermont, New Hamp- 
shire and the District of Maine been overlooked.* 


The genesis of more distinctly foreign mis- 
sionary work in New England is thus described 
by Burrage: 


Interest in foreign missions on the part of Baptists in 
New Eagland was first awakened by the work which Ca- 
rey and his associates beganin India. Carey corresponded 
with some of his American brethren, and his letters 
were published in the ‘‘Massachusetts Baptist Missionary 
Magazine.’’ There were those in this country who desired 
to engage in the foreign work, but Carey, writing July 30, 
1807, said: ‘‘It has always been my opinion that all in 
America, whose hearts the Lord stirs up to this work 
shouldeither go tothe Indians, or to the back part of 
their own country, or to the neighboring islands, Cuba, 
St. Domingo, etc. I hope these fields will be soon occu- 
pied with laborers in the harvest of the Lord.’’ Contri- 
butions were early secured for the translation of the 
Scriptures by Dr. Carey and his associates; and in the 
“‘Massachusetts Baptist Missionary Magazine,’’ for March, 
1812, there is a reference to the collections for this pur- 
pose made in some of the churches. The collection at Dr. 
Baldwin’s church in Boston, amounted to one hundred and 
forty-five dollars, and that of “Baptist Friends,” in Mid- 
dleboro, to seventy dollars. + 

The Salem Bible Translation and Foreign Missionary 
Society, was organized in January, 1812, ‘‘to raise money 


* Burrage. History of the Baptists in New England, 
p- 145. [Most of the statistics asto missionary affairs in 
New England prior to 1812 are taken from Burrage. ] 

+ Burrage: History of Baptists in New England, p, 150, 

3 


34 THE GENESIS OF 


to aid the translation of the Scriptures into the Eastern 
languages, at present going on at Serampore, under the 
superintendence of Dr. Wm. Carey, or if deemed advisa- 
ble at any time to assist in sending a missionary or mis- 
sionaries from this country to India.* 


Dr. Burrage alse gives the following synop- 
sis as to the beginning of Woman’s Work in 
foreign missions : 

Boston Female Society for missionary pur- 
poses, organized 1800. 

Baptist Missionary Magazine, for May, 1804, 
contains letter of a young lady sending $10.00 
for missionary work. 

Woman’s Mite Society, at Charlestown, Mas- 
sachusetts, organized 1809. 

Woman’s Mite Society, at Warren, Rhode Is- 
land, organized 1808. 

Female Mite Society, of Portland, Maine, or- 
ganized 1810. 

Female Donary Society, of North Yarmouth, 
organized 1811. 

In 1812, the first fruits of the Female Bene- 
volent Society of Livermore, Me., where George 
Dana Boardman, the sainted missionary, was 
born in 1801, amounted to fourteen dollars and 
eight cents. In 1811, the Boston Female So- 
ciety for Missionary Purposes, appropriated all 
its subscriptions for the year to the translation 
of the Scriptures, carried on so successfully and 
extensively by the missionaries at Serampore, 
in Bengal. After Judson, there were many 
spinning, weaving, knitting and other feminine 
societies to promote the mission cause. 


* Burrage: History of Baptists in New England, p. 151, 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 35 


So we see by the year 1812 the Baptists of 
the United States, having already thrown out 
feelers and grown somewhat in touch with each 
other, were ready to be fused into an organic 
whole by the warm glow of fraternal sympathy 
and missionary zeal. ‘Two hundred thousand 
strong they stood, but when the missionary 
test came it was to divide them exactly in twain 
one hundred thousand falling in with the mis- 
sionary spirit, and an equal number destined to 
dash themselves vainly against the thick bosses 
of Jehovah’s buckler. 

In February of 1812, on two ships widely 
separated, starting the one from Salem, the 
“City of Peace,’ and the other from Philadel- 
phia, the ‘‘City of Brotherly Love,’’ sailed two 
of the first missionaries of the gospel that the 
Occident sent back to the Orient, Adoniram 
Judson and Luther Rice. These men without 
collusion and each without knowledge that the 
mind of the other was disturbed, became con- 
vinced by a study of the New Testament that 
only the zmmersion of the belzever constituted 
baptism, and on reaching India they were so 
baptized. 

On February 12th, of the same year, in Penn- 
sylvania, Alexander Campbell and other mem- 
bers of his family, without collusion or either 
knowing that the mind of the other was dis- 
turbed, all came to the conclusion from a care- 
ful study of the New Testament, that only the 
‘mmersion in water of a believer constituted 
Christian baptism, and they were so baptized 
and received into the fellowship of the Brush 
Run Baptist Church, 


36 THE GENESIS OF 


The first group thus undergoing this re- 
markable experience by preaching a// of the 
Great Commission, madethe Baptist name glo- 
rious at home and renowned abroad. The prin- 
cipal one of the other group—Mr Campbell— 
became the greatest foe this missionary move- 
ment ever had. Truly— 


“God moves in a mysterious way 
His wonders to perform.” 


The lesson we may learn is: It takes more 
than baptism to make a Baptist. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 37 


CHAPTER: IF. 


CONNECTION OF JUDSON AND RICE 
WITH THE AMERICAN BAPTIST 
MISSIONARY MOVEMENT. 


The real awakening of the Baptists of 
_ America to missionary activity and the mighti- 
est impulses to missionary success, will be de- 
veloped in relating some events in the lives of 
two men—Luther Rice and Adoniram Judson. 
We will first take into consideration the biog- 
raphy of 
LUTHER RICE. 

He was born in the town of Northborough, 
Worcester County, Massachusetts, March Oth: 
1783. His father was a captain in the patriot 
army during the Revolution. His mother was 
a woman of vigorous mind, which she improved 
with all the educational means at her com- 
mand. Both parents were members of the 
Congregational Church, although it is doubt- 
ful if either was at that time a Christian. Asa 
child, Luther was of a sweet and winning dispo- 
sition, though ever thoughtfully and seriously 
disposed. He was taught the Westminster 
Catechism; while still a boy he labored under 


38 THE GENESIS OF 


intense and awful conviction of sin. For many 
months he alternately endeavored, by the ad- 
vice of the minister, or the minister’s wife, to 
find peace in works, merit, and in formal con- 
nection with the church, or to forget his de- 
spair in worldly gaiety. On surrendering his 
whole life to Christ he found wonderful peace, 
and became a vigorous church worker, much to 
the astonishment of some and the disgust of 
others of his fellow church members. His 
father persecuted and ridiculed him, and he 
was refused a place to hold church prayer 
meetings by the members of the church. His 
brother, Asaph, and a Baptist who lived in the 
community were the only two who would open 
their houses for his prayer meetings. Yet with — 
all his enthusiasm he did not depart from 
the path of discretion, and he met the rage of 
his foes with the meekness and mildness of a 
lamb; though serious, he was not morose; 
though religious, he was not austere. His 
righteous soul was constrained to dispute with 
the prevalent Arminianism and Universalism, 
although he did so in the sweetest Christian 
spirit. 

The continued persecution by his father, the 
suggestion of an evangelic Calvinistic minister, 
and the call of God pressing upon his soul led 
him to determine to be a minister. Having 
spent three years in preparatory work at the 
Leicester Academy, he entered the sophomore 
class of Williams College in the early part of 
October, 1807. His life, while at college, was 
marked by a high ideal of purity, Christian 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 39 


deportment and religious zeal. Especially did 
he cherish the hope of a revival in his home 
town of Newborongh and among the uncon- 
verted members of his own family. He was 
able to see thoroughly the shallowness and the 
desolating moral influence of the prevalent 
French infidelity, and to turn from it in loath- 
ing. 

Mr. Rice was licensed to preach by the 
Mountain Association, Berkshire County, Mass- 
achusetts, and went to the Andover Theolog- 
ical Seminary during the last year of his col- 
lege course. He was a hard student, and made 
a brilliant record both at college and seminary. 
He helped to pay his way by teaching school 
during the vacation periods. He received a 
regular dismission from the Seminary in 1811. 
The story of the band of youug men at Williams 
College and Andover Seminary is known to all 
the world. Enthusiastically missionary in 
spirit from the time of his conversion, always 
doing with all his might and all his heart the 
duty nearest at hand, Luther Rice felt when 
he entered Williams College in 1807, that he 
must give himself to the foreign mission work. 
Samuel J. Mills, James Richards, and one or 
two others were impressed with the same con- 
viction in regard to themselves. In which of 
these hearts the fire first flamed will, perhaps, 
never be definitely known, although the honor 
is usually ascribed to Samuel J. Mills. These 
young men formed themselves into a secret so- 
ciety for inquiry on the subject of missions. They 


discussed missionary obligations, consecration, 


40 THE GENESIS OF 


needs and fields. While at Williams College 
they were accustomed to meet under a hay- 
stack. At the same time, unknown to them, 
the same deep impression had been made on the 
heart of Adoniram Judson, at Andover Theo- 
logical Seminary. Nott, who soon after en- 
tered the Seminary, became Judson’s first mis- 
sionary associate, and when a few months later 
the little group from Williams College came to 
Andover, the circle was complete. Rice had 
early felt impulses toward Asia and Judson’s 
mind had been turned that way by reading 
Buchanan’s ‘‘ Star in the East.” 

At a meeting of the General Association of 
Ministers at Bradford, in the summer of 1810, 
this little band, being further encouraged by a 
visit from Gordon Hall, who opportunely arrived 
at that time, presented to the assembled minis- 
ters a memorial written by Judson, expressing 
the desire of these young men to go tothe foreign 
field. At first, the names of Adoniran Judson, 
Jr., Samuel Nott, Jr., Samuel J. Mills, Sam- 
uel Newell, James Richards and Luther Rice 
were all subscribed to it. The last two names 
were, however, erased from the fear that the 
unexpected appearance of so many desiring to 
go, when zone were anticipated, might injure 
the chances of a/7. On receipt of the memorial, 
the Association appointed a committee, to 
whom the petition was referred, and who fin- 
ally reported favorably. In consequence, nine 
commissioners were appointed by the body, 
who in September of the same year, formed the 
the American Board of Commissioners of For- 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 41 


eign Missions. This Board, after vainly try- 
ing to get the London Missionary Society to 
assume or share the responsibility (sending 
Judson to England for that purpose),decided to 
send out the four missionaries. As the tim 
approached for them to start, Rice could no 
longer restrain himself, and insisted on being 
allowed to go with them. The Board gave 
him leave on condition that he would occasion 
them no additional expense, but provide for his 
own outfit and raise the money for his passage. 
He cheerfully complied, and traveled on horse- 
back day and night, in the depths of winter, to 
raise the needful sum. He and his associates, 
Nott and Hall, were ordained at the Taber- 
nacle Church, Salem, Massachusetts, Febru- 
ary 6, 1812. They left Philadelphia on Feb- 
ruary 18, inthe ‘‘Harmony,’’ and arrived at 
Calcutta, August 10th, where they were re- 
ceived by Judson and Newell, who had sailed 
from Salem on the 19th of February, but had 
made a quicker voyage. On that voyage began 
the study that led Mr. Rice into the Baptist 
ranks. While Mr. Judson was practically 
convinced before he reached Calcutta, it seems 
that Mr. Rice had not by the time of his ar- 
rival reached a definite conclusion. The fol- 
lowing account, I think, fairly shows his men- 
tal processes and progresses in the matter. 
Mr. Rice was early troubled with scruples 
on the subject of Baptism. In a discussion 
with a Baptist friend of inferior intellectual 
qualifications, he felt himself to be bested, but 
resolved to dismiss tHe matter as a non-essential. 


42 THE GENESIS OF 


On the voyage over he discussed the subject 
with two English Baptist missionaries, Messrs. 
Johns and Lawson. Judson and his wife were 
baptized by Dr. Ward in September, 1812. On 
the 17th of September, Mr. Rice heard Mr. 
Judson preach on this theme, from Matthew 
28:19. On the 11th of October, he discussed 
the matter with Hall and Nott. On November 
Ist, 1812, he was baptized by Mr. Ward. The 
following seems to bea true summary of the 
facts: He had early been concerned, but had 
dismissed the idea. He had renewed the inves- 
tigation on the voyage over, and had heard the 
matter discussed by Baptist missionaries and by 
Judson himself, but according to his own testi- 
mony, his decision was based on his own ear- 
nest searching of the New Testament. Judson 
was convinced on the ocean; Rice, not until he 
had been some weeks in Calcutta. This is his 
own account of the matter: 

To the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign 

Missions: 

VENERABLE AND BELOVED:—Since the important mo- 
ment which placed me under the protection and control of 
your venerated patronage, a change of sentiment, in rela- 
tion to the sacred rite of baptism, having put it out of my 
power to render obedience to a particular article of your 
very valuable instructions, (*) I deem it my duty, and beg 
leave to make the following communication relative to 
this change: 

During my passage to India, in the ship ‘‘ Harmony,” 
some authorities were brought to my notice respecting the 
signification of the word daptiso; particularly, some re- 


*This was Article X. of his instructions, which com- 
manded him to baptize believers and their households, 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 43 


marks from the pen of Dr. Campbell, which had not before 
met my observation, were of a nature that induced me to 
suspect sprinkling not to be a proper mode of baptizing ; 
at least, not so proper a mode as immersion. A wish also 
existed in my mind to possess more clear and decisive proof 
in favor of baptizing infants than I fourd myself able, 
readily, to produce; and though I had previously censid- 
ered the subject at large with attention, I felt something 
like a necessity of refreshing my mind with its evidences, 
and determined to give it a careful reconsideration, as cir- 
cumstances should be favorable to the purpose. The at- 
tention, however, which I actually bestowed upon it, pur- 
suant to this determination, previously to landing in 
India, neither destroyed my suspicions respecting the pro- 
priety of sprinkling as a mode of baptism, nor gave that 
entire satisfaction, or rather, that ready command of de- 
cisive proof in favor of infants, as proper subjects of the 
rite, which I so much wished to possess, and had deter- 
mined, if possible, to obtain. 

On reaching Calcutta I was surprised and sorry to 
learn, that Brother Judson, asI immediately apprehended 
from his conversation, and as proved true, in fact, was 
nearly prepared to declare himself a Baptist ; and though 
this of itself, could neither augment nor diminish the diffi- 
culty which was forming in my own mind, yet it contrib- 
uted, perhaps, to make that difficulty more distinctly and 
painfully perceptible to myself, and to strengthen the 
purpose of bestowing upon the subject, a serious reconsid- 
eration, as soon as circumstances should allow. But as 
my health had been considerably reduced during the latter 
part of my voyage, and was kept low and precarious by re- 
peated attacks of illness, in Bengal; and as the concerns 
of the mission demanded all the attention which a state of 
threatening debility would permit me to exert, it was una- 
voidable to postpone this purpose for a while, though the 
subject began to create some degree of uneasiness in my 
mind..... 

At length, having been hindered from leaving Bengal, 


44 THE GENESIS OF 


things assumed stch an aspect as exhibited little proba- 
bility of being able to get away for aconsiderable time 
longer; and about the same time my physician, in a meas- 
ure, restricted me from venturing abroad, though under- 
going, meanwhile, a process of salivation, I felt comfort- 
ably well day after day, and week after week. In this sit- 
uation, no longer greatly occupied with other concerns, it 
appeared to be a duty equally clear and important, to take 
up the consideration of baptism with very great serious- 
ness and deliberation, and to endeavor to become fully per- 
suaded in my own mind, both respecting the proper sub- 
jects and the proper mode of the sacred ordinance; and 
the result was a conviction, that those persons only who ap- 
pear to be pious, are proper subjects; and that immersion 
is the only proper mode of Christian baptism. ... . 
[The rest of the letter is occupied with an account of his 
immediate endeavors to communicate his change of senti- 
ments to the Board and his reasons for leaving India, and 
is signed, ‘‘Venerable and beloved, your missionary, 
Luther Rice.’’] 


Mr. Rice, in writing to his brother on the 
Same topic, gives a more complete statement 
of the reason for his change of views: 


To me, the subject appears so perfectly clear, that Iam 
entirely at a loss to attempt making it, in any measure, 
more so. 

When in Calcutta, I felt it my duty to endeavor to 
ascertain and practice simply what the Savior required; I 
soon discovered that it was proper to baptize such as 
made acreditable profession of repentance toward God, 
and faith im our Lord Jesus Christ, and that immer- 
sion is baptism, according to the Scriptures. In the 
days of the apostles, ‘they that believed were baptized. 
This fact is expressly stated, and comports with the ex 
plicit command of the Saviour. 


* Taylor’s Memoir of Luther Rice, pp. 109-112. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 45 


That zmmersion is baptism, appears evident to me, be- 
cause the apostle says of the believers in his time, that 
they were éduried by baptism. All the efforts to do 
away the obvious, common sense meaning of this pas- 
sage, appear to me, to be mere quibbles. Certainly, I 
should think him unacquainted with language, who should 
speak of being buried by sprinkling. ‘These things, with 
many others, coinciding in the same view, came into my 
mind, and I could not, for my life, find anything in the 
Bible of an opposite character. I dared not resist the light 
any longer, for I feared the Lord would not bless my la- 
bors, if Irefused obedience to what was to my mind, so 
perfectly clear in the Bible.* 

The difficulties experienced by the mission- 
aries on account of the attitude of the British 
Government and the East India Company, and 
the complications caused by America and Eng- 
land being ina state of war, belong rather to the 
story of foreign missions abroad than of foreign 
missions at home. Mr. Rice’s resignation was 
very discourteously accepted by the Board, al- 
though he was not aware of it until his return. 
He left India on March the 15th, 1813, and ar- 
rived in New York September 7th. 

The most significant incident of his return 
for our purposes was a funeral sermon over the 
body of a sailor, which led to the conversion of 
two of the sailor’s comrades, one of whom, 
Elder Thompson, became quite useful in the 
United States as a Baptist preacher. The 
first two objects of his return are set forth by 
him as follows: 

1st. To communicate information to the Board of Com- 
missioners, and to have my interesting connection with 
that body, adjusted in a regular and proper manner. 


* Taylor’s Memoir of Luther Rice, pp. 115-116. 


46 THE GENESIS OF 


2d. To contribute towards engaging the Baptist 
churches of America, in the missionary eause, and to ob- 
tain for ourselves, if practicable, their patronage, in case 
the Board should, on account of our change of sentiment, 
in relation to baptism release us from their service. 


Rice earnestly cherished the hope of an im- 
mediate returnas missionary, either to India or 
to South America, but Providence had other 
designs as tohis future in the missionary field. 

The great problem immediately confronting 
Mr. Rice, was to awaken American Baptists to 
their responsibilities and opportunities in Asia. 
Judson and Rice, immediately after their con- 
version, had written to prominent Baptists in 
America on this subject, their letters reaching 
America in February, 1813. In fact, Judson, 
before he had any idea of being a Baptist, had 
suggested to Dr. Bolles, of Salem, the forma- 
tion of a Baptist Society.* But nothing then 
came of the suggestion. As soon as Rice had 
severed his connection with the American Board 
of Commissioners, he set about his work. 


Accordingly, several of the towns contiguous to Boston 
were visited for the purpose of conferring with such be- 
nevolent individuals as might be supposed to take an 
interest in this subject. There were then in existence 
four or five Baptist Foreign Mission Societies in New 
England. The oldest was located in Salem, it having been 
organized shortly after the sailing of the missionaries 
from this country. Besides this, may be mentioned the 
societies formed in Boston, Providence, and Haverhill. 


* Leonard: A Hundred Years of Missions, p. 121. Com- 
pare also Burrage: History of Baptists in New England, 
in loco, 


AMERICAN AN’TI-MISSIONISM. 47 


In the month of September, a few days after the decision 
of the Board of Commissioners, a conference of discreet 
brethren in Boston, was held, to consult on the course 
proper to be pursued in the exigencies of the case. 

It was thought necessary to proceed at once to the 
adoption of measures, which might excite the Baptists of 
this country, to combine their energies in the mission 
cause. They concluded to issue acircular, which should 
be sent to prominent individuals in different parts of 
the United States. This circular proposed a general co- 
operation of the churches. At first, it was thought ad- 
visable to make the Boston Society, which had been 
formed in consequence of Mr. Judson’s change of senti- 
ment, and which had already assumed the responsibility 
for his support, the parent institution. But at the sug- 
gestion of Mr. Rice, they coneluded, as soon as practi- 
cable, to call a meeting of delegates from different parts 
of the country, at which time, some organization might 
be formed to conduct these operations on a more enlarged 
scale.* 


His next step was a tour of the Southern 
States. He left Boston September 9th, 1813, 
and after a short visit to his home, proceeded to 
New York, where he found the brethren ready 
to co-operate. Leaving New York, he arrived 
in Philadelphia the same day the Philadelphia 
Association commenced its annual meeting. His 
visit here resulted in the subsequent formation 
of the Philadelphia Baptist Missionary Society. 
From Philadelphia he went to Baltimore, Wash- 
ington and Richmond, meeting encouragement 
all along the Atlantic seaboard, and especially 
at Charleston Association, which Association 
Rice visited again in 1819 and 1820. His manner 


* Taylor: Memoir of Luther Rice, pp. 136, 137. 


48 THE GENESIS OF 


of work and thesuccess met with may be illus- 
trated by the following extract from the min- 
utes of that Association for the year 1813: 


Dr. Furman introduced the Rev. Luther Rice, as a 
member of the church at Serampore in India; and as a Mis- 
sionary who had com nunications to make to the Associa- 
tion. He was accordingly invited to a seat, which he ac- 
cepted, and delivered to the Moderator a written address, 
on the subject of Foreign Missions; together with letters 
of Recommendations and other Documents; and was re- 
ceived with great affection. * re * * “ = 

Finished reading the Documents which accompanied 
Mr. Rice’s address: when he, at the Association’s request, 
made verbal communications on the state of religion in 
India; and concerning his views of the openings for mis- 
sions at other places; particularly at the Isle of France, 
Madagascar and the Brasils. His account of the state of re- 
ligion in India, corroborated those before given in the Bap- 
tist Missionary Magazine; in the writings of Dr. Buch- 
anan, etc., especially the former, with respect to the 
interests of the Baptist Mission at Serampore. On these 
he stated, that the excellent Dr. Carey and his pious, able 
Associates, were proceeding with indefatigable zeal and 
constancy in translating and printing the Scriptures in 18 
languages of theeastern nations, comprehending hun- 
dreds of millions of human beings, now held ina state of 
idolatry of gross superstition. That many Hindoos, some 
of whom were Brahmins, had embraced the gospel, appar- 
ently with an unfeigned faith. That a considerable num- 
ber of churches were formed in that extensive country ; 
one, in a flourishing state, at Calcutta; and that Mission- 
ary establishments are effected at various places there, to 
the extent of two thousand miles—that about 40 Min- 
isters are now employed, in connection with the Mission in 
preaching the gospel; many of them natives, who were 
lately idolaters—and that the call for ministers is great and 
urgent.—He also confirmed the acceunt contained in the 


AMERICAN AN‘TI-MISSIONISM. 49 


Mawyazine before referred to and mentioned in his recom- 
mendation.—That, Mr. Judson and himself, who had been 
sent as Missionaries to India, by our Congregational breth- 
ren in New England, had, from the conviction of their own 
minds, in consequence of searching the Scriptures, em- 
braced Baptist principles, and had been, together with Mr. 
Judson’s wife, baptized in India. To which he added, that 
he had left Mr. Judson and his wife at the Isle of France; 
and had returned to the United States to see, whether the 
Baptist churches here will do anything toward sending 
Missionaries among these Heathen Nations, to which the 
providence of God seems so directly to point.—These com- 
munications were received with much satisfaction. The 
documents referred to containing the outline of a plan for 
directing missionary efforts extensively on the plan of 
concert; and being recommended by respectable ministers 
in Boston, Philadelphia, etc.—Therefore, agreed, that the 
following brethren, Dr. Furman, General ’Thomas, and the 
Moderator, be a committee to consider the subject, and, if 
in their judgment it be found expedient, to report a plan 
for this Association to act upon, founded on that general 
scheme. * OK % * * * % OK OK 

The committee on the subject of Missions reported— 
that they had considered the subject with seriousness, and 
were of the opinion that a common united effort among the 
Baptist churches in the United States to send the gospel 
among the Heathen, and Nations destitute of pure gospel 
light, is both laudable and expedient. They, therefore, 
submitted a plan for this Association, by which their 
ability might be called forth into operation. in concert 
with that of their brethren in other parts of the National 
Union. 

The proposed plan was then read, and on putting 
the question for its adoption it passed, unanimously, in 
the affirmative.—In consequence of which, agreed, that the 
plan be published, separately from the Minutes of the Asso- 
ciation, and be sent with them to the respective churches. 


—It contemplates the formation of Societies by voluntary 
4 


50 THE GENESIS OF 


associations, in the bounds of the churches, or in any part 
of the State; making the incorporated General Committee 
the center of their union, and medium of communication 
with other bodies formed on a similar plan, and for simi- 
lar purposes. It enlarges the special committee, and pro- 


vides for their having a Corresponding Secretary. * * * * 
* %* * * KOK KX * 


Agreed that the next circular letter bean answer to this 
question:—What obligations are Christians under to con- 
tribute their aid in support of gospel missions? Also ap- 
pointed our brother J. M. Roberts to write the letter.* 


The circular letter on missions which was 
printed the following year was a model in its 
way. Similar letters would do great good at 
the present day. + After visiting most of the 
prominent towns and churches in the South, 
Rice returned to Philadelphia. Everywhere 
the expediency of general consultation and the 
power of organization and education were urged. 
Judson had written to Dr. Bolles, reminding 
him of the conversation he had had with him 
concerning a Baptist Society; this led to the 
organization of ‘‘The Baptist Society for Prop- 
agating the Gospel in India and other Foreign 
Parts,’’ at Dr. Baldwin’s house in Boston, on 
receipt of Judson’s letter. This society had 
made provision for co-operation. A similar 
society was also formed in Rhode Island. 
About this time the Philadelphia Society 
formed by Rice sent out a circular to prominent 
brethren and churches, inviting them to a gen- 


* Minutes of Charleston Baptist Association, Nov. 6th, 
1813, sections 5, 12, 16 and 21. 

+ Compare circular letter of Charleston Association for 
1814. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 51 


eral conference to lay plans for co-operation. 
Consequently, on May 18th, 1814, ministers 
and delegates from all parts of the United 
States met in Philadelphia, with Richard Fur- 
man as Chairman and Dr. Thomas Baldwin as 
secretary. It was unanimously decided to form 
the ‘‘General Convention of the Baptist De- 
nomination in the United States for Foreign 
Missions.’’ The support of Judson was enthu- 
siastically undertaken, and Rice was prevailed 
on to continue his agency among the American 
churches. The following year was spent by 
him among the northern and eastern churches. 


In 1814, by invitation of the First Baptist Church of 
Hartford, a convention was held for the purpose of consid- 
ering the subject of ‘‘ aiding the missionary operations in 
the Kast.’’ Rev. Luther Rice was present, and at that 
time, Aug. 31, 1814, the Connecticut Auxiliary to the Bap- 
tist Board of Foreign Missions was organized. Withits 
work in behalf of foreign missions the Society soon began 
to combine work in behalf of domestic missions, and the 
constitution was accordingly modified. This organiza- 
tion, afterwards known as the Connecticut Baptist Mission- 
ary Society, continued to prosecute its work for both for- 
eign and home missions until the organization of the Con- 
necticut Baptist Convention in 1823.* 


_ Rice visited Kentucky for the first time in 
1815. The same year he made his first re- 
port, showing 70 auxiliary societies organized; 
7,800 miles traveled; $3,700 raised. t 


*Burrage: History of Baptists of New England, p. 144. 
+ Spencer: History of Kentucky Baptists, p. 569. 
t Vedder: History of Baptists in the Middle States, 


52 THE GENESIS OF 


When the Rev. Luther Rice first visited the churches 
in Kentucky and Tennessee, and brought before them the 
subject of foreign missions, the contributions were larger 
than in any other States. We have attended camp meet- 
ings and associations in this Valley, where members of the 
church and other persons in the settlement would expend 
five hundred dollars in providing for the accommodation 
and entertainment of all who came froma distance. We 
must look for some other cause than want of liberality in 
western people for the origin of their prejudices.* 


During this period Mr. Rice sometimes rode 
more than four hundred miles in less than six 
days. About 1817 Mr. Rice suggested the 
issuing under the patronage of the Board of a 
quarterly publication to diffuse information on 
the subject of missions. So originated the 
‘‘Latter Day Luminary.’’ The anti-mission 
spirit which now began to rear its slimy head 
is treated fully in another chapter. Mr. Rice’s 
connection with the educational movement will 
aiso be set forth in another chapter, especially 
the nature of his relation to Columbian Col- 
lege. Suffice it to say that he first of all rec- 
ognized the great truth that organization and 
education are a sine gua non of missionary en- 
deavor. After a few years the twin interest of 
education usurped to a great extent his efforts. 
To it he gave his life, and dying, he left to it 
all he had—a few papers and the horse and 
sulky by means of which he had traversed so 


*Spencer: History of Kentucky Baptists, p. 570. Pos- 
sibly the same people who exercised this liberality did not 
show the anti-missionary spirit. Spencer quotes from 
‘Christian Review,” V. XVIL., pp: 490, 491, 


AMERICAN AN’TI-MISSIONISM. 53 


many thousand miles in the interest of his be- 
loved ‘‘ College.’” He died on Saturday, Sep- 
tember 25th, 1836. During all his life foreign 
missions was the object nearest his heart, and 
that in later years he became absorbed in edu- 
cational work was only because he perceived 
its vital relationship to the success of his first 
love. 

Iam aware that in this synopsis of facts and 
figures I have done but scant justice to the 
goodness, greatness and power of Luther Rice. 
I see him as a boy, when the missionary dream 
first found a lodgement in his heart. For har- 
boring it he was reviled and cursed, as was 
Joseph the dreamer. He had a home, but be- 
cause of that dream his foes became those of his 
own household. He had a father, who drove 
him forth as a visionary young fool. He had 
church membership, but his pastor endeavored 
to discourage him; his pastor’s wife tried to 
put out the fires of his soul by inducing him to 
plunge into the pomps and gaieties of a vain 
world; and his fellow-members closed the 
doors of their homes against his prayer meet- 
ings. I see him as he stood with the little 
band of his fellow-students in the shadow of a 
haystack and planned the evangelization of the 
world. Isee his frail figure as he rides in the 
depth of winter to collect the means to carry 
him with these young wise men of the West who 
have once again seen ‘‘ His Star in the EKast,”’ 
and who goto worship Him. I see him as he 
stands by the young girl to whom he has given 
his heart, and listens to her pleadings to for- 


54 THE GENESIS OF 


sake, for her sake, this idle dream. But with 
breaking heart, he snaps the chain that binds 
him to her who was unworthy of his love, and 
for Christ’s sake, denies himself forever the 
love of wife or child. I see him on shipboard, 
racked with long sickness or poring over the 
records of the baptism of Jesus. I see him as he 
stands in the far Kast, with his foot pressed on 
virgin missionary soil. Before him are the Pa- 
gan and idolatrous abominations of the heatben 
which he has come to destroy. From out the 
gloom, come their sighs of despair, their groans 
of anguish, their wails for help. Behind him are 
the hopes and aspirations of the denomination 
to whom he had given his allegiance, and who 
had sent him forth. But in his hand there is 
the plain record of the Word of God, and the 
example and command of his Lord. And in his 
ear there rings the warning, ‘‘ Whoso shall 
break the least of these commandments and 
shall teach men so, the same shall be least in 
the kingdom of God.” » 

I see the sad farewell between him and Jud- 
son, as he starts once more for his native land 
to preach at home the gospel of foreign mis- 
sions. I see his rude reception by the Congre- 
gationa) Board and his warm welcome by 
American Baptists. I see him like a firebrand, 
kindling the Atlantic slope, and like a brilliant 
meteor blazing into the West. Everywhere 
before him, unintegrated and apathetic atoms 
—everywhere behind him blazing and enthusi- 
astic organizations. I see the icy-hearted mon- 
ster of Hardshellism drag its slimy length 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 55 


across his path, and strike at him with its 
antinomian and Arminian fangs. I see his 
struggle for Christian education; his trials, his 

.failures, his buoyant hope painting the dark 
future with faith’s brilliant colors; while those 
who walk by sight alone call the picture exag- 
eration and even falsehood. I see him emerge 
from the cloud of suspicion and reproach once 
‘more into the light. I count his long years of 
unremunerated toil. I watch him as he comes 
to die, leaving his sole assets, his horse and 
sulky, to the college—all for the College. I 
realize, standing beside his couch, that 


“Jesus can make a dying bed 
Feel soft as downy pillows are.’’ 


Quietly he passes to his long home, this hero 
of the cross. I see the last scene of earth, 
when before a crowded assembly Dr. J. B. 
Jeter preaches a commemorative sermon from 
Matthew 19:29, ‘‘And every one that hath for- 
saken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, 
or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my 
name’s sake, shall recetve an hundredfold, and 
shall inhertt everlasting life.’ WReverently I 
bow my head and say, Amen, even so, Lord 
Jesus. . 

Over his lonely grave in the churchyard of 
the Pine Pleasant Church, Edgefield District, 
South Carolina, the Baptist Convention of 
that State, in 1837, erected a monument with 
the inscription; 


56 


THE GENESIS OF 


“BORN BENEATH THIS MARBLE DIED 
Mareh 25th, Are deposited the Remains of Elder Sept. 25th, 
A. D.1783. LUTHER RICE, A.D. 1836, 


A minister of Christ, of the Baptist Denomination, 
He was a native of Northboro, Massachusetts, 
And departed this life in Edgefield District, S.C, 
In the death of this distinguished servant of the Lord, ‘‘is a 
great man fallen in Israel.” 


“THAN HE 


Perhaps no American has done 
more for the great Missionary En- 
terprise. It is thought the first 
American foreign mission, on which 
he went to India, associated with 
Judson and others, originated with 
him. And if the Burman’s have 
cause of gratitude toward Judson, 
for a faithful version of God’s Word; 
so they will thro’ generations to 
come ‘arise up and call Rice blessed,’ 
for it was his eloquent appeals for 
the heathen, on his return to Amer- 
ica, which raised our Baptist 
ehurches to adopt the Burman Mis- 
sion, and sustain Judson in his 
arduons toils. 


No Baptist has done more for the 
cause of education. He founded 
‘The Columbian College in the 
District of Columbia,’ which he 
beneyolently intended, by its cen- 
tral position, to diffuse knowledge, 
both literary and religious, through 
these United States. And if, for 
want of deserved patronage, that 
unfortunate Institution, which was 
the special subject of his prayers 
and toils, for the last fifteen years 
of his life, fail to fulfill the high 
purpose of its founder; yet, the 
spirit of education, awakened by 
his labors, shall accomplish his 
noble aim. 


LUTHER RICE, 


With a portly person and commanding presence, 
Combined a strong and brilliant intellect, 
As a theologian he was orthodox; 
A scholar, his education was liberal. 
He was an eloquent and powerful preacher; 

A self-denying and indefatigable philanthropist. 
His frailties with his dust are entombed; 
And upon the walls of Zion, his virtues engraven. 
By order of the Baptist Convention for the State of South 
Carolina This monument is erected 
To His Memory.’ * 


* * * * 


* * * * 


The following lines suggested by the dying 
words of Luther Rice and written by Charles 


* Taylor’s Memoir of Luther Rice, p. 265, 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 57 


W. Denison, form another monument to the 
memory of him who, as a factor in our present 
denominational development, was facile prin- 
ceps :* 


‘‘Ave, take them to the College! let them be 

My dying testament. I shall be dead 

To-night. And now my heart untwines its ties 
On earth, and gives its treasures back again 

To heayen—the heart of all the universe. 

Come near, my friends, ye need not fear to breathe 
Beside me now. O would my mounting: soul 
Had ever soared in atmosphere like this! 

*Tis heayen’s own air that floats around me here, 
And ye should joy to drink it freely in! 

Come nearer. I have much to say—and I 

Am passing like a shadow on the face 

Of time. My destiny has been to point 

To the meridian of the church—and now 

My spirit points to that of endless day. 

O how it soars! and longs to bathe its wings 

In the full sunshine of the face of God! 

But, ere I mount, grant me this one request! 
Take all, and give the College. Let the wealth 
Which some might bring to gild my coffin with 
Be consecrated where was my poor life. 

Nothing for me—but everything for God! 

And let me die, as I have lived, all armed 

For battle on the tented field. Let the sounds 
Of rushing host—of flashing banner free 

Along the breeze—and clash of sword with sword 
In spiritual fray—and cheers and shouts 

Of ‘ Victory! Victory!’ greet me as I die— 

O, ’tis glorious thus to fall asleep. 


* * * * * 


Hark! Did you speak of India? or did I? 

Or was I dreaming of it? Yetmethought, 

I heard the voice of Newell—was it thine, 

My Judson? Thou panoplied of God! 

Ah Boardman! is it thou that speaks? I hear! 
Thear! And Wheelock! art thou there? 
These river damps have loaded me with chills 


* Taylor’s Memoir of Luther Rice, pp. 342, 344. 


58. THE GENESIS OF 


So I but illy hear thee! Bring ye news? 

Have dying pagans turned to Christ to-day? 

Oh! Ihave walked the weary round! And yet 

It was not wearying—for I had rod 

And staff in all the promises—and there 

Were some in whom the word did strike its roots. 
Shout! For the harvest reapers and our arms 
Shall bring their loads of sheaves and cast them in 
The granary of God. ButJudson! See! 

Thy wife is falling there! She falls! what she, 
The good—the brave—the fair! and Boardman, too! 
Yonder, within the jungle where he toiled, 

They dug his grave. How heavy is the air 

I breathe from this low place of death! I faint 

I sink! 

Ah!no!itwasadream! Methought 

I was in India— but I see, friends, 

Are all beside me! Heard ye my request! 

Aye, take them to the College! Let me die 

With their departed spirits hovering 

Around me, and their benison shall drop 

Like dew upon my soul. Hail! Staughton, hail! 

I see thee now—I hear thy welcome song! 

Icome! I come! and as I mount to fly 

I catch a glimpse of those I seek, beyond! 

Karens! My Burmans! ye are with them there. 
Your hands, good friends—’Tis sweet to part as now 
For that which wings me on, wings you. Aye, take 
All to the College! Iam heaven’s and God’s.” 


ADONIRAM JUDSON, Jr. 


The conversion of this man to Baptist views, 
and his missionary labors and successes sever- 
ally, contained the genesis and stimulus of 
American Baptist Missions. But we propose 
to study only the reflex effect of his work, i. e. 
the influence of the story of his work on Amer- 
ican Baptists. We cannot, therefore, take up 
his life in detail. 

Adoniram Judson, Jr., the son of a Congre- 
gational minister, was born in Malden, Massa- 
chusetts, August 9th, 1788, In 1809, he read 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 59. 


Claudius Buchanan’s ‘“‘Star in the East.’’ 
This sermon, preached by an ex-chaplain of the 
British East India Company, from Matthew 
2: 2, told thestory of the missionary labors of 
the venerable German Schwartz. Itset hissoul 
aflame and six months later, February, 1810, 
he resolved to become a missionary to the hea- 
then. Whether he, Rice or Samuel Mills, Jr., 
was the first to feel the divine afflatus, we can- 
not surely say. The story of the little band 
at Andover, when he and Samuel Nott, Jr., 
had been joined by the four young men from 
Williams College, has been already narrated. 
Judson fully appreciated the grave dangers of 
a missionary career, and had counted the cost 
before he put his shoulder to the wheel. This 
is forcibly seen ina letter to Ann Hasseltine, 
his betrothed, in which he reminds her that 
one of their trials must needs be, that one of 
them must stand bythe lonely grave of the 
other and say with literal truth: 


“By foreign hands thy dying eyes were closed: 
By foreign hands thy decent limbs composed ; 
By foreign bands thy humble grave adorned;”’ * 


But his sweetheart, too, had counted the 
cost, and on February 5th, 1812, she was united 
with him in marriage, at Bradford, on the eve 
of his departure for Asia. She embarked with 
‘him on February 19th, to sail for that foreign 
land in which she was to find that lonely grave 
of which he had written. On the voyage over 
occurred their conversion to Baptist beliefs. 
This is how it occurred: 


* Life of Adoniram Judson by his son Edward Judson 
p. 21, 


60 THE GENESIS OF 


(1) Article 10 of the instructions given to 
the five missionaries directed them to baptize 
‘credible believers and their households.’’* 
But it forbade them to admit any but the first- 
named class to church membership.t 

(2) Judson knew that when he reached In- 
dia he would have to meet Dr. Carey and the 
Baptist missionaries there, and feared he 
would be called upon to give a reason for the 
faith that was within him. In fact, he bore a 
letter of introduction to these men from the cor- 
responding secretary of the American Board.t 
Asa matter of fact, however, the gentlemen 
at Serampore refrained on the principle of 
courtesy from introducing the subject of their 
peculiar belief in the presence of brethren 
of other denominations who might be their 
guests.§ Indeed they were quite surprised to 
learn of Judson’s changed views. || 

(3) The first point of difficulty was in ap- 
plying the analogy of the Abrahamic covenant 
to the Christian church. According to this 
theory, and to his instructions, he must bap- 
tize the still idolatrous servants and children, 
young or old, of those who believed. He thus 
describes his investigation and its result: 

When I proceeded to consider certain passages, which 
are thought to favor the Pedobaptist system, I found noth- 
ing satisfactory. The sanctification which St. Paul 


* Wayland’s Memoir of Rev. Dr. Judson, vol. 1p. 110: 

+ H.C. Conant: The Earnest Man. 

} H.C. Conant: The Earnest Man, p. 90. 

§ Wayland’s Memoir of Dr. Judson, vol. 1, p. 95. 

|J. D. Knowles’ Memoirs of Ann Hasseltine Judson, 
Pp 79. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 61 


ascribes to the children of a believer, (1. Cor. 7: 14) I found 
that he ascribed to the unbelieving tyrant also; and there- 
fore, whatever be the meaning of the passage, it could 
have no respect to church membership, or a right to church 
ordinances. 

The declaration of St. Peter ‘‘the promise is unto you, 
and to your children, and to allthat are afar off, even as 
many as the Lord our God shall call,’’ (Acts 2:39) appeared 
not to bear at all on the point at hand, because the apos- 
tle does not command his hearers to have their children 
baptized or acknowledged members of the church, but to 
repent and be baptized themselves. There is, indeed, a 
promise made to their children, and to all others that God 
shall call; but it does not follow that they were to pro- 
eure the baptism of their children, or of those that were 
afar off until they gave evidence that God had called them. 

When Christ said, concerning little children, that, ‘‘of 
such isthe kingdom of heaven,’’ (Matthew 19:14) it ap- 
peared to me that his comparison had respect, not to the 
age or size of little children, but to the humility and do- 
eility which distinguished them from adults. This seemed 
to be put beyond a doubt by his own explanation, in a 
similar passage, in whichhe says, ‘‘Except ye be convert- 
ed and become as little children, ye shall not enter intothe 
kingdom of heaven.’’ (Matthew 18: 3.) 

The baptism of households, which is mentioned in three 
instances, I could not consider as affording any evidence 
one way orthe other, because in a household there may 
be infants and unbelieving domestics, and there may not. 
Besides, I discovered some circumstances in each of the 
eases which led me to conclude, that the members of the 
households were real believers. They are expressly said to 
be so in the case of the jailer, (Acts 16: 34) and the same is 
evidently implied in the case of Stephanas, when it is said 
that they addicted themselves to the ministry of the 
saints. (1 Cor. 1: 16.) 

In a word, I could not find a single intimation in the 
New Testament that the children and domestics of be- 


62 THE GENESIS OF 


lievers were members of the church, or entitled to any 
church ordinance, in consequence of the protession of 
the head oftheir family. Everything discountenanced 
this idea. When baptism was spoken of, it was always in 
connection with believing. None but believers were com- 
manded to be baptized; and it did not appear to my mind 
that any others were baptized. 


Here, then, appeared a striking difference between the 
Abrahamic and the Christian svstems. The one recog- 
nized the membership of children, domestics, and re- 
mote descendants of professors, ard tended directly to 
the establishment of a national religicn. The other ap- 
peared to bea selective system, acknowledging none as 
members of the church but such as gave credible evidence 
of believing in Christ. 


This led me to suspect that these two systems, so evi- 
dently different, could not be one and the same. And now 
the hght began todawn. The moreI read, and the more 
I meditated on the subject, the more clearly it occurred 
to me that all my errors and difficulties had originated in 
confounding these two systems. 


I began to see that sincethe very nature and constitu- 
tion of the church of Christ excluded infants and unre- 
generate domestics, repentance and faith being repre- 
sented as always necessary to constitute a disciple, we had 
no right to expect any directions for, or any examples of, 
the initiation of such unqualified persons into the church. 
To search for such directions and examples inthe New 
Testament, would be as if the citizen of a republic 
should go to search his national code for laws concerning 
theroyal family, which, by the very nature and constitu- 
tion of a republic, is excluded. Suppose that such a cit- 
izen disappointed in his search, should have recourse to 
the constitution and laws of a neighboring monarchy for 
the desired information. This, it appeared tome, would 
aptly represent the proceeding of those who, unable to 
find in the New Testament satisfactory proof of the right 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 63 


of infants or unregenerate domestics, should have recourse 
to the Abrahamic and Jewish codes... ee: 


(4) But this left him unbaptized, as uot 
being at the time of his christening a proper 
subject. What was he to do? Lagain let him 
state his difficulty: 


If, thought I, this system is the true one; if the Chris- 
tian church is not a continuation of the Jewish; if the 
covenant of circumcision is not precisely the covenant in 
which Christians now stand, the whole foundation of 
Pedo-baptism is gone; there is no remaining grownd for 
the administration of any church ordinance to the children 
and domestics of professors; and it follows inevitably, 
that I, who was christened in infancy, on the faith of my 
parents, have never yet received Christian baptism. 
Must I, then, forsake my parents, the church with which 
I stand connected, the society under whose patronage I 
have come out, the companions of my missionary under- 
taking? MustI forfeit the good opinion of all my friends 
in my native land, occasioning grief to some, and pro- 
voking others to anger, and be regarded henceforth, by 
all my former dear acquaintances, asa weak, despicable 
Baptist, who has not sense enough to comprehend the 
connection between the Abrahamic and the Christian 
system? All this was mortifying; it was hard to flesh 
and blood. But I thought again, it is better to be guided 
by the opinion of Christ. who is the truth, than by the 
opinion of men however good, whom I know to be in 
error. The praise of Christis better than the praise of 
men. Let me cleave to Christ at all events and prefer his 
favor above my chief joy. - ay 
i ina 

* Wayland'’s Memoirs of the Rev. Dr. Judson, p. 100. 

+ Wayland’s Memoirs of the Rev. Dr. Judson, Vol. 1, 
p. 102. Wayland quotes from a letter of Dr. Judson to 
the Third Church in Plymouth, of which he had been tn- 


til lately a member. 


SS SS SS at 


64 THE GENESIS OF 


(5) The questions then arose as to the mode 
of Baptism, and the meaning of the Greek word 
which the King James translators anglicized 
into ‘‘baptize.”’ 

His conclusion on these points was equally 
decisive. 


But throughout the whole New Testament I could find 
nothing that looked like sprinkling, in connection withthe 
ordinance of baptism. It appeared to me, that if a plain 
person should, without any previous information on the 
subject, read through the New Testament, he would 
never get the idea, that baptism consisted in sprinkling. 
He would find that baptism, in all the cases particularly 
described, was administered in rivers, and that the par- 
ties are represented as going down into the water, and 
coming up out of the water, which they would not have 
been so foolish as to do for the purpose of sprinkling. 

In regard to the word itself which is translated bap- 
tism a very little search convinced me that its plain, 
appropr ate meaning was immersion or dipping; and 
though I read extensively on the subject, I could not find 
that any learned Pedobaptist had ever been able to pro- 
duce an instance, from any Greek writer, in which it 
meant sprinkling, or anything but immersion, except in 
some figurative applications, which could not be fairly 
brought into the question. ‘The Rev. Prof. Campbell, 
D. D., of Scotland, the most learned Greek scholar and 
biblical critic of modern times, has the candor to declare, 
(though he was no Baptist, and, therefore, not to be sus- 
pected of partiality to the Baptist system) that the word 
was never, so far as he knew, employed in the sense of 
sprinkling, in any use, sacred or classical. (See his note 
on Matthew 3: 11). * 


* Wayland: Memoir of Rey. Dr. Judson, pp. 102, 103. 
Wayland still quotes from Judson’s letter to the Plymouth 
Church, 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 65 


(6) Inthese researches his devoted wife took 
the Pedobaptist side and she was a champion 
not to be despised.* At first she endeavored 
to dissuade him from pursuing the investiga- 
tion.t Ina letter to her parents, she says, ‘‘I 
tried to have him give it up, and rest satisfied 
in his old sentiments, and frequently told him, 
if he became a Baptist, I would not.”t She 
then depicted to him the consequence of a 
changeof views on his part, but when he had 
made a decision, she herself carefully exam- 
ined the evidences and came to the same con- 
clusion—a conclusion unmarred by the shadow 
of a doubt. She so expresses her conviction 
ina letter to a friend, dated September 7th, 
1812: 


Thus my dear Nancy, we are confirmed Baptists, not 
because we wish to be, but because truth compelled us to 
be. We have endeavored to count the cost, and be pre- 
pared forthe many severe trials resulting from this 
change of sentiment. We anticipate loss of reputation, 
and of the affection and esteem of many of our American 
friends. But the most trying circumstance attending this 
change, and that which has caused most pain, is the sep- 
aration which must take place between us and our dear 
missionary associates § 


(7) Mr. Judson remained true to his con- 
science, his Bible and his God. He did not 


* Wayland: Memoir of Rev. Dr. Judson, vol. 1, p. 
106. 

}+Conant: The Earnest Man, p. 91. 

+ Wayland: Memoir of Rev. Dr. Judson, vol. 1, p. 107. 

§ Life of Adoniram Judson by his son, Edward Judson, 
p- 39. 


66 THE GENESIS OF 


allow himself to be swerved by his affection 
for his wife, his own temporal interests or a 
false sentimentality. 


Reduced to this extremity, what, dear brethren, could 
I do? I sawthat, in a double sense, I was unbaptized, 
and I felt the command of Christ press on my conscience.... 
Now, if I quieted my conscience in regard to my own 
personal baptism, and concluded that, on account cf my 
peculiar circumstances, it was best toconsult my own 
convenience, rather than the command of Christ, stillthe 
question would return, with redoubled force, How am I 
to treat the children and domestics of converted hea- 
then?* 


He and his wife were baptized on September 
6, in Calcutta, by Rev. Mr. Ward of the Eng- 
lish Baptist Mission. 

I have dwelt on this change of views thus 
at length, because had Judson been successful 
in his effort to sustain his Pedobaptist views, 
it might have delayed the missionary movement 
among the Baptists in America for a quarter 
or evena half of acentury. ‘The accounts of 
this event in letters sent by Mr. and Mrs. 
Judson and others started the leaven to working. 
The Boston Baptist Missionary Society was 
among its first fruits. Inaletter toDr. Bald- 
win, Judson says, ‘‘Should there be formed a 
Baptist Society for the support of a mission 
in these parts, I shall be ready to consider 
myself their missionary.’’t One of the most 


* Wayland’s Memoir of the Rev. Dr. Judson, p. 103. 
(vol. 1.) 

+ Life of Adoniram Judson by his son, Edward Judson, 
p- 43. 


AMERICAN AN'TI-MISSIONISM. 67 


effective of these letters was written to the 
Rev. Dr. Bolles, of Salem, Massachusetts: 


Carcurra, September 1st, 1812. 


Rev. Srr: Irecollect that, during a short interview 
I had with you in Salem, I suggested the formation of 
a society among the Baptists in America for the support 
of foreign missions, in imitation of the exertions of your 
English brethren. Little did I then expect to be person- 
ally concerned in such an attempt. 

Within a few months, I have experienced an entire 
change of sentiments on the subject of baptism. My 
doubts concerning the correctness of my former system 
of belief commenced during my passage from America 
to this country; and after many painful trials, which none 
can know but those who are taught to relinquish a system 
in which they have been educated, Isettled down in the 
full persuasion that the immersion of a professing believer 
in Christ is the only Christian baptism. 

Mrs. Judson is united with me in this persuasion. 
We have signified our views and wishes to the Baptist 
missionaries of Serampore, and expect to be baptized in 
this city next Lord’s day. 

A separation from my missionary brethren, and a dis- 
solution of my connection with the Board of Commission- 
ers, seem to be necessary consequences. The missionaries 
at Serampore are exerted to the utmost of their ability 
in managing and supporting their extensive and complica- 
ted mission. Under these circumstances I look to you. 
Alone, inthis foreign heathen land, I make my appeal 
to those whom, with their permission I will call my Bap- 
tist brethren in the United States. 

With the advice of the brethren at Serampore, lam con- 
templating a mission on one of the eastern islands. They 
have lately sent their brother Chater to Ceylon, and their 
brother Robinson to Java. At present, Amboyna seems 
to present the most favorable opening. Fifty thousand 
souls are there perishing without the means of life; and - 


68 THE GENESIS OF 


the situation of the island is such that a mission there 
established might, with the blessing of God, be extended 
to the neighboring islands in those seas. 

But should I go thither, it isa most painful reflection 
that I must go alone, and also uncertain of the means 
of support. But I willtrpst in God. He has frequently 
enabled meto praise his divine goodness, and will never 
forsake those who put their trust in him. I am, dear sir, 

Yours, in the Lord Jesus, 
ADONIRAM JUDSON, Jr.* 


Such letters as these thrilled the hearts of 
the Baptists. God’s finger had put at their 
disposal three enthusiastic and thoroughly 
trained missionaries—the enthusiasm began to 
kindle, and the way was prepared for Luther 
Rice. During all the years of the mission these 
letters continued to come. They produced a 
flow of zeal, hope and liberality as rich and 
generous as the flow of an oil wellin which 
dynamite cartridges are periodically exploded. 

Mrs. H. C. Conant gives this account of the 
ardor of those days: 


I recall, from my own childhood, vivid recollections 
of the enthusiasm which the topic of missions always 
awakened in the family circle; of the ‘‘Mission Box” in 
the parlor, through whose lid many an offering to the 
cause was dropped by Christian visitors; of the jubilee 
in the house, when a letter arrived from Mrs. Judson, 
or the Missionary Magazine arrived, withthe joyful ti- 
dings of some new triumph of the gospel in far off Bur- 
mah. Nor was this a mere denominational feeling, em- 


*Life of Adoniram Judson by his son, Edward Jud- 
son, pp. 43, 44, 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 69 


bracing only our own mission; it was a true Catholic 
love for all in every land and of every name, who are 
laboring for the evangelization of the world.* 


Another source of influence was the ordain- 
ing and sending out from America of other 
missionaries. On October 15, 1816, Rev. Mr. 
Hough and family landed at Rangoon in re- 
sponse to the urgent plea for reinforcements. 
Again and again the missionaries urged Ca- 
rey’s famous plea, ‘‘We are,”’ said they, “‘like 
men going down into a well; you stand at the 
top and hold the ropes. Do not.let us fall.”’ 
On September 19, 1818, Messrs. Coleman and 
Wheelock, with their wives, joined the mission 
at Rangoon. About 1826, George Dana Board- 
man and his beautiful wife arrived at Calcut- 
ta. Every missionary who came out meant 
more friends at home, more letters to cross the 
ocean to America, more laborers in the field, 
and consequently better reports and greater 
results to be told to the Baptists of America. 
Among those who joined the Judsons and the 
Wades in 1831, were Mr. and Mrs. Mason, 
Mr. and Mrs. Kincaidt and Mr. and Mrs. 
Jones. Still others arrived in 1832, and others 
yet later. Mr. Judson urged Americans not to 
leave the British to evangelize India alone, on 
the grounds that India was as accessible to 
America as it was to Great Britain; that 
American missionaries were received with far 
less suspicion than the Emglish, who were sus- 
pected and feared; and finally, that whereas 


*H. C. Conant: The Earnest Man, pp. 169, 170. 
+ Mr, Kincaid felt the call under Mr, Rice’s preaching, 


70 THE GENESIS OF 


there were in Great Britain about five hundred 
Baptist churches which averaged about a hun- 
dred members each, in America there were 
about two thousand which averaged that 
number. Furthermore, all the North American 
Indians and all the native population of South 
America which was accessible would hardly 
equal in number the single empire of Burmah.* 

On June 27th, 1819, about seven years and 
four months after Mr. Judson left America, 
and about six years from his arrival in Burmah, 
he baptized his first Burman convert, Moung 
Nan. The next two native converts were 
Moung Byaa and Moung Thallah. It required 
great courage on the part of the first convert 
to come out for Christ. By doing so, he an- 
tagonized his ruler, an absolute monarch, who 
styled himself the ‘‘Lord of Life and Death 
and Owner of the Sword.” But Moung 
Nan declared his determination of adhering to 
Christ, though no Burman should ever join 
him. His courage and his beautiful saying— 
‘‘When I meditate on this religion, I know not 
what it is to love my own life’’—made him fa- 
mous in America. In 1820 the Burman con- 
verts sent this letter to their brethren in Amer- 
ica. 

Brethren all, who live in America! The brethren who 
live in Burmah address you. 

We inform you, brethren, that, trusting in the grace 
of the eternal God, the divine Spirit and the excellent 
Son, the Lord Jesus Christ, we remain happy; and see- 


* Life of Adoniram Judson, by his son, Edward Judson, 
p. 104. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. je 


ing our real state and circumstances, we have repentance 
of soul, and an anticipation of the happiness of heaven. 

God, the sum of all perfection, without beginning and 
without end, subsists through successive ages; and this 
world, the earth and sky, and all things therein, which 
He has created, are according as He created them. 

God, the Creator is replete with goodness and purity, 
and is exempt from old age, sickness, death, and anni- 
hilation; and thus there is none that can compare 
with Him. 

It is contained in the Scriptures, that God, in his own 
nature, unites three, the Father, the Son and the Holy 
Spirit,and is (yet) mysteriously one God; that He is in 
all places, but dwells in heaven, by the clearer mani- 
festation of His glory; that His power and wisdom are 
unrivalled; and that he enjoys happiness incomprehensi- 
ble to creatures. 

But the Burmans know not the true God; they know 
not the true religion; they worship a false God; they 
practice a false religion; and (thus) they transgress the 
divine law, and sin against the most estimable Benefac- 
tor, and therefore they neither expiate their sins nor 
acquire merit. And by excessively loving themselves and 
the filth of this world, they love not nor worship the eter- 
nal God, nor believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, but regard 
the good things of this world merely. 

That the Burmans, who know not the way to eternal 
happiness, might become acquainted with it; that they 
might be renewed; and that they might escape everlasting 
punishment, the American teachers, Judson and wife, 
have both come to Burmah and proclaimed the gospel 
of the Divine Son, the Lord Jesus Christ; on which some 
Burmans have become disciples. And on these accounts, 
the disciple Moung Shwa-Ba says that your favor is very 
great (or he gives you very many thanks). 

Those who love divine grace, who believe, who hear 
and consider the gospel, who trust in the Lord Jesus 
Christ, who repent of their sins, attain the state of dig- 


42 THE GENESIS OF 


ciple. And that this religion may spread everywhere, 
Moung Shwa-Bais making endeavors, and constantly pray- 
ing, to proclaimthe gospel. And he prays thus: O Eter- 
nal God, graciously grant the favor whichI desire. Gra- 
ciously grant that I may have regard to thy divine will, 
and beconformed thereto. Be pleased to take notice of 
my supplication, O God. I desire not to seek my own 
profit; 1 desire constantly to seek the profit of others. 
Thou art the Creator of all things, and if thou art pleased 
to be gracious, O, grant that I may be enabled to pro- 
mote the good of others. Open thou the eyes of my 
mind and give me light. And when I shall preach in 
various places, evermore send forth the divine Spirit that 
multitudes may become disciples. That thou wilt grant 
these things, I beseech thee, O God. 

The disciple, Moung Shwa-Ba has composed this writ- 
ing, and committed it to the hand of the teacher;. (even) 
inthe Burman year 1182, onthe 7th of the waxing of 
the moon Wah-goung, he has written this, and delivered 
it to the teacher and his wife. 

P. S. Brethren, there are in the country of Burmah 
nine persons who have become disciples.* 


Mrs. Judson’s visit to America also served to 
rekindle the subsiding fires of zeal. Although 
her first object and most imperative need in 
coming to this country was to build up her 
shattered health, the purpose of creating and 
stimulating interest in foreign missions was 
not her least. Her courage, devotion and suffer- 
ings had already made her a host of friends, and 
her fascinating presence and firm faith in the 
cause she represented made her many more. - 
She reached America September 25th, 1822, 
and remained until the 22nd of June 1823. She 


*Life of Adoniram Judson by his son, Edward Judson, 
pp. 179, 180. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. Ts 


was accompanied on her return trip to India 
by the two newly appointed missionaries, Mr. 
and Mrs. Wade. 

In 1824-25, when the war between England 
and Burmah was raging, the terrible persecu- 
tion and horrible sufferings endured by Mr. 
Judson drew to him once again the eyes of the 
civilized world. For nine months he was confined 
in three pairs of fetters; for two months in five 
pairs; for six months in one pair; for two 
months longer he was a prisoner at large, and 
was kept under restraint for yet two months 
more; so that he wasa prisoner for twenty- 
one months. ‘The five pairs of irons which for 
two months of the time he wore, weighed four- 
teen pounds, and in each pair of fetters the 
two iron rings were connected by chains so 
short that the heel of one foot could hardly be 
advanced to the toe of the other. He wore the 
scars of those irons to the day of his death. It 
is not my purpose to describe his prison, its 
tortures, or its loathsomeness. The point to 
which I desire to call attention is, that from 
henceforth when be pleaded with his brethren 
in America, he spoke as ‘‘a prisoner in chains,”’ 
and as one ‘‘bearing in his body the marks of 
the Lord Jesus.”” Those who can endure to 
read about its horrors may find a terribly 
eraphic description in his Life, written by his 
son, pages 217-261. Every one who reads the 
record of those scenes will see that Mrs. Jud- 
son endured no less than he, and will under- 
stand how Oung-pen-la and Ava became names 
to conjure with. Mrs. Judson wrote the story 
of those terrible days. 


74 THE GENESIS OF 


There was nota Baptist home in which her vivid re- 
cital was not read, and many a heart was stirred with 
a desire toengage in a service where even such sufferings 
were possible.* 


Not only sufferings, but death of mission- 
aries sent their silent pleas across the seas. In 
1823 the news came that Ward had died at 
Serampore. On page 62, volume I, of the 
‘Christian Baptist,’’ there is an article indulg- 
ing in unstinted ridicule of missionary expense; 
on the opposite page is the two line annonnce- 
ment of the death of Mr. Ward at Serampore, 
March 27th, 1823, after an illness of one day. 
The accidental juxtaposition of the brief an- 
nouncement to the vitriolic article makes it an 
eloquent rejoinder. The minutes of the 
Charleston Association for 1823 record a pa- 
thetic lament for the death of Ward. Then 
the news came that Coleman had died in Ara- 
can, and the cry went up, ‘‘ Who will go to 
take his place?’’ George Dana Boardman, 
who had graduated at Waterville College in 
1822, promptly answered, ‘I will go.” But 
while he was on the way, Ann Hasseltine Jud- 
son, exhausted by the long agony at Ava, died 
from the effect of the suffering endured by her 
husband and herself. She was speedily fol- 
lowed by her little Maria. Dr. Boardman 
arrived just in time to lay the child in a grave 
beside the mother. The manner of Mrs. Jud- 
son’s death was most pathetic. Her husband 
had returned to Ava to try and secure better 
Beseih tere Sb ioeiasio sar trad ab eecear mn Soe Sah YS Oe Ss 

* Burrage: History of Baptists of New England, p. 
156. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. a 


terms from the British government for the 
conquered rebels who had so tortured him. 
While he was absent his wife was smitten 
with a strong fever, and died on October 24th, 
1826, in the 37th year of her age. Judson 
wrote to her mother this description of her 
death, which he had gathered from the native 
Christians: 

It seems that she was much affected during her last days, 
and she said but little. She sometimes complained thus: 
‘© The teacher* is long in coming; and the new missionaries 
are long in coming; I must die alone, and leave my little 
one; but it is the will of God, I acquiesce in His will. Iam 
not afraid of death, but Iam afraid I shall not be able to 
bear these pains. Tell the teacher that the disease was 
most violent, and I could not write; tell him howI suffered 
and died; tell him all that you see; and take care of the 
house and things until he returns.’’ When she was un- 
able to notice anything else, she would still call the child 
to her, and charge the nurse to be kind to it; and indulge 
it in everything until its father shall return. The last day 
or two she lay almost senseless and imotionless, on one 
side, her head reclining on her arm, her eyes closed; and 
at eight in the evening, with one exclamation of distress 
in the Burman language, she ceased to breathe.{ 

They buried her ina lonely spot beneath a 
hopia tree, with a rude fence about the grave 
to protect it from the wild beats of the jungle: 
and thus was the prophecy in the love-letter 
long ago to the sweet faced Ann Hasseltine 
brought to a literal fulfillment: 

“ By foreign hands thy dying eyes were closed; 


By foreign hands thy decent limbs composed; 
By foreign hands thy humble grave adorned.” 


* So she called Mr. Judson. 
} Life of Adoniram Judson by his son, Edward Judson 
pp. 295, 296, 


76 THE GENESIS OF 


She died apart from him whom she had given her heart 
and her girlhood, whose footsteps she had faithfully fol- 
lowed for fourteen years, over land and sea, through track 
less jungles and strange, crowded cities, sharing his studies 
and his privations, illumining his hours of gloom with her 
beaming presence, and with a heroism and fidelity unparal- 
lelled in the annals of missions, soothing the sufferings of 
his imprisonment. He whom she had thus loved, and who, 
from his experience of Indian fever, might have been able to 
avert the fatal stroke, was far away in Ava. No mission- 
ary was with her when she died, to speak words of Chris- 
tian consolation. The Burman converts, like children 
gathered helplessly and broken-heartedly about their white 
mama, The hands of strangers smoothed her dying pillow 
and their ears received her last faint wandering utter- 
ances. Under such auspices as these, her white-winged 
Spirit took its flight to the brighter scenes of the New Jeru- 
salem.* 


In 1829, we find an account of her memoirs 
being advertised in the Charleston Association. 
Soon after her death Mr. Judson wrote to the 
Rev. Mr. Grow, of Thompson, Connecticut, 
who had sent him fifty dollars: 


The fact is, that we are very weak, and have to com- 
plain that hitherto we have not been well supported from 
home. It is most distressing to find when we are almost 
worn out, and are sinking, one after another, intothe grave, 
that many of our brethren in Christ at home are just as hard 
and immovable as rocks; just as cold and repulsive as the 
mountains of ice in the polar seas. But whatever they do, 
we cannot sit still and see the dear Burmans, flesh and 
blood like ourselves, and like ourselves possessed of im- 
mortal souls, that will shine forever in heaven, or burn 


*Life of Adoniram Judson by his son, Edward Judson, 
p. 290, 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. i 


forever in hell—we cannot see them go down to perdition 
without doing our very utmost tosave them. And thanks 
be to God, our labors are not in vain. We have three 
lovely churches, and about two hundred baptized converts, 
and some are in glory. A spirit of religious inquiry is 
extensively spreading throughout the country, and the 
signs of the times indicate that the great renovation of 
Burmais drawing near. O, if we had about twenty more 
versed in the language and means to spread schools, and 
tracts, and Bibles, to any extent, how happy I should be! 
But those rocks and those icy mountains have crushed us 
down for many years..... May God forgive all those who 
desert us in our extremity. May he savethemall. But 
surely, if any sin will lie with crushing weight on the trem- 
bling shrinking soul, when grim death draws near; if any sin 
will clothe the face of the final judge with an angry frown, 
withering up the last hope of the condemned, in irremedi- 
able, everlasting despair, it is the sin of turning a deaf ear 
to the plaintive cry of ten millions of immortal beings, 
who by their darkness and misery, cry, day and night, 
“COME to our rescue, ye bright sons and daughters of 
America, COME AND SAVE US, FOR WE ARE SINK- 
ING INTO HELL.’’* 

In 1831, Judson is still pleading, still trying 
to awaken the people of America. The letter 
that follows was written to a minister in Con- 
necticut; it shows something of the difficulties, 
progress and encouraging interest in his work. 

RANGOON, March 4th, 1831. 

The great annual festival has just passed, during which 
multitudes come from the remotest parts of the country to 
worship at the great Shway-Da-gong pagoda in this place, 
where it is believed that several real hairs of Gaudama are 
énshrined. During the festival I have given away nearly ten 


* Life of Adoniram Judson by his son, Edward Judson, 
pp. 309, 310. 


78 THE GENESIS OF 


thousand tracts, giving to none but those who ask. I pre- 
sume there have been six thousand applications at the 
house; some come two or three months’ journey from the 
borders of Siam and China—‘‘Sir, we hear that thereis an 
eternal hell. We are afraid of it. Do give us a writing that 
will tell us how to escape it.’’ Others come from the 
frontiers of Kathay, a hundred miles north of Ava—‘'Sir, 
we have seen a writing that tells about an eternal God. 
Are you the man that gives away such writings? If so, 
pray give us one, for we want to know the truth before we 
die.’? Others come from the interior of the country, where 
the name of Jesus Christ is a little known—‘‘Are you Jesus 
Christ's man? Give us a writing that tells about Jesus 
Christ.’? Brother Bennett works day and night at the 
press, but he is unable to supply us, for the call is great 
at Maulmain and Tavoy, as well as here, and his types are 
very poor, and he has no efficient help.* 


In 1830, Judson was invited to visit America. 
How mightily would he have stirred the people 
had he come! But who will say that the heroic 
refusal of the man ‘‘who never saw a ship sail 
from Maulmain bound for England or America 
without an almost irrepressible inclination to 
get on board and visit again the home of his 
boyhood,”’ was without effect? Or who will 
affirm that his denial of himself was of no avail 
over here? He thus describes his heimweh: 


I must confess that in meditating on the subject, I have 
felt almost unconquerable desire to become acquainted 
with my beloved patrons and correspondents, the members 
of the Board, as well as to rove once more over the hills 
and valleys of my own native land, to recognize the still 
surviving companions of my youth, and to witness the 


* Life of Adoniram Judson by his son, Edward Judson, 
p. 362, . 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM, 79 


widespread and daily increasing glories of Immanuel’s 
kingdom in that land of liberty, blessed of heaven with 
temporal and spiritual blessings above all others.* 


In June, 1831, Boardman, after being carried 
ina chair to the waterside to see thirty-four 
converts baptized, slowly faded away from 
earth. His faithful wife took up his work and 
carried it on to success. Hight years after the 
death of Mrs. Judson and three years after that 
of Mr. Boardman, Judson married Mrs. Board- 
man. ‘This match was also made in heaven. 
She was a faithful helpmate and helpmeet to 
him, and a blessed co-laborer in the gospel 
until, on September Ist, 1845, she was buried 
on the lonely rock of St. Helena. On that 
Island the remains of the great Napoleon 
rested in an uninscribed sepulchre; but on her 
tomb loving hands, after giving her name and 
services, wrote the epitaph: 

“She sleeps sweetly here on this rock of the ocean, 
Away from the home of her youth, 


And far from the land where, with heartfelt emotion, 
She scattered the bright beams of truth,” 


On October 15th, 1845, Mr. Judson and his 
three orphaned children arrived in Boston. He 
was in delicate health and barely able to speak 
above a whisper, but his reception was an 
ovation, and his progress a triumphal march. 
His approach was heralded and his sayings 
and doings chronicled by both the secular and 
religious press. In his speeches he did not 
describe his own adventures nor pander to the 


* Life of Adoniram Judson by his son, Edward Judson, 
p. 365, 


80 THE GENESIS OF 


idle curiosity of mere sensation hunters. His 
heart was in Burmah. His plea was for her, 
his theme was pleasing Jesus by carrying the 
gospel to every creature. In Boston he met 
Samuel Nott, Jr., for the first time in thirty- 
three years. In November he was present at 
the meeting of the Triennial Convention. He 
visited many institutions of learning, among 
them Brown University, his own Alma Mater. 
He was the honored guest at many missionary 
societies. In a meeting at Richmond, Virginia, 
in response to a speech of welcome by Dr. Jeter, 
he made this address to Southern Baptists, 
who had organized their Convention the year 
before: 


I congratulate the Southern and Southwestern churches 
on the formation of the Southern Baptist Convention for 
Foreign Missions. I congratulate the citizens of Richmond 
that the Board of that Convention is located here. Such an 
organization should have been formed several years ago. 
Besides other circumstances, the extent of the country 
called for a separate organization. I have read with much 
pleasure the proceedings of the Convention at Augusta, 
Georgia, and commend the dignified and courteous tone of 
the address sent forth by that body. Iam only an humble 
missionary of the heathen, and do not aspire to be a 
teacher of Christians in this enlighted country; but if I 
may be indulged a remark, I would say, that if hereafter 
the more violent spirits of the North should persist in the 
use of irritating language, I hope they will be met, on the 
part of the South, with dignified silence.* 


While in America he married Miss Emily 
Chubbuck, whose sympathies had been enlisted 


* Life of Adoniram Judson by his son, Edward Judson, 
pp. 475, 475, 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 81 


in missionary work as a child, by reading a 
memoir of the first Mrs. Judson. She had at- 
tained some reputation in light literature and 
newspaper articles under the om de plume of 
‘Fanny Forrester.’? There was opposition to 
the marriage on the part of both his admirers 
and hers, but future events showed they had 
both chosen well. She proved herself a not 
unworthy successor to Ann Hasseltine and 
Sarah B. Judson. 

On this trip to America, Judson found this 
country a land of organized societies. ‘The 
organization of all the missionary societies in 
America was due, to some extent, to the group 
of five boys who at Andover Seminary had 
pledged themselves to the work of carrying the 
Gospel abroad. Judson’s influence was felt in 
other places than America. He had been deeply 
desirous of establishing a mission among the 
Jews in Palestine, but the enterprise had 
failed. 

It, however, pleased an All-wise Providence to render 
his servant useful to the children of Abraham in a manner 
which he little expected. Two or three days before he 
embarked on his last voyage, not a fortnight before his 
death, Mrs. Judson read to him the following paragraph 
from the ‘‘ Watchman and Reflector”’: 

“There (at the house of Mr. Goodell, in Constantinople) 
we first learned the interesting fact, which was mentioned 
by Mr. Schauffler, that a tract had been published in Ger- 
many, giving some account of Dr. Judson’s labors at Ava; 
that it had fallen into the hands of some Jews, and had 
been the means of their conversion; that it had reached 
Trebizond, where a Jew had translated it for the Jews of 
that place; thatit had awakened a deep interest among 
them; that a candid spirit of inquiry had been manifested; 


82 THE GENESIS OF 


and that a request had been made for a missionary to be 
sent to Constantinople. Such a fact is full of meaning, a 
comment on the word of inspiration: ‘In the morning sow 
thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thine hand; thou 
knowest not which shall prosper, this or that.’’’* 


Dr. Jessup, the eminent Presbyterian mis- 
sionary to Syria, said at a session of the Bap- 
tist Convention convened in Saratoga, that the 
first person whose hand he desired to grasp 
when he reached heaven, next to the Apostle 
Paul, would be Adoniram Judson. Many 
others have been incited and nerved to com- 
plete consecration and strenuous missionary 
effort, at home and abroad, by the example of 
Adoniram Judson. The published lives, and 
memoirs of Mr. Judson and the sainted women 
who labored with him in the Gospel have had 
a vast influence in silencing opposers and cavil- 
lers, and in inspiring the fainthearted, and in 
increasing the zeal of the lukewarm, and in en- 
couraging his missionary successors to make a 
success of the work which had been so nobly 
begun.t 


* Life of Adoniram Judson by his son, Kdward Judson, 
pp. 557, 558. 


+I have had access to the following in preparing this 
sketch of Judson: ‘The life-of Adoniram Judson by his 
son, Edward Judson.’? This have used most freely and 
my only regret is that scarcity of time and space have pre- 
vented me from making even more copious quotations. 
Dr. Wayland’s ‘‘Memors of Rev. Dr. Judson,’”’ in two vol- 
umes, have also been of great value. The other books 
consulted were: ‘‘The Earnest Man, or Life and Labors 
of Dr.Judson,’’ by Mrs. H. C.Conant; ‘*The Judson Offer- 
ing,’’ by John Dowling, D. D.; ‘‘The Apostle of Burmah: 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 83 


Judson’s death at sea on April 13th, 1850, 
after a long illness, and his burial in the sea 
the same day, rounded out his life’s influence, 
and left it as an ever living, ever working force 
in that world from which his spirit had flown. 
The saddest events of his life, his imprisonment, 
his sufferings, his bereavements, his death ; the 
events that seemed to clog the wheels of mis- 
sionary effort in India, became, in the hand of 
God, the most potent factors for advancing 
missionary effort in America. We cannot 
regret the life of Judson. It is still true that 
it is expedient for one man to die and not for a 
whole nation to perish. Let a son's tribute to 
his father close our story of Adoniram Judson. 


It is God’s taw that progress should be along the lineof 
suffering. The world’s benefactors have been its suffer- 
ers. They “have been from time immemorial crucified and 
burned.”’ It seems to be a divine law that those who 
bestow roses must feel thorns. 


The sufferings of Mr. Judson’s life wereas fruitful of 
blessings as the toils. 


a Missionary Epic,” by Wm. C. Richards; ‘“‘Memoir of Ann 
Hasseltine Judson,” by D. K. Knowles; “Missionary Me- 
morials,’’ of Ann H. Judson, Sarah B. Judson and Emily 
C. Judson, by Walter N. Wyeth, D. D., in three separate 
volumes. The only life of Rice I have been able to obtain 
is the oneby James B. Taylor, published in 1840. I have 
been dependent for my information on this, and on several 
sketches in Baptist state histories and on encyclopedic arti- 
cles. There is at present time in this country no life of 
Rice on sale by any publisher, Taylor’s Memoir having 
long since gone out of print. 


84 THE GENESIS OF 


The graves of the sainted dead forbid retreat from the 
ramparts of heathenism. It is saidthat the heart of the 
Scottish hero Bruce was embalmed after his death and pre- 
servedin a silver casket. When his descendants were 
making the last desperate charge upon the serried columns 
of the Saracens, their leader threw this sacred heart far out 
into the ranks of the enemy. The Scots charged with ir- 
resistible fury in order to regain the relic. Christianity 
will never-retreat from the graves of its dead on heathen 
shores. Englandis pressing into Africa with redoubled 
energy since she saw placed on the pavement of her own 
Westminster Abbey the marble tablet in memory of him 
who was brought by faithful hands, over land andsea, 
David Livingstone, missionary, traveler, philanthropist. 
Until that day shall come when every knee shall bow and 
every tongue shall confess the name of Jesus, Christian 
hearts will not cease todraw inspiration from the memory 
of those who found their last resting place tunder the hopia- 
tree at Amherst, ou the rocky shore of St. Helena, and be- 
neath the waves of the Indian Ocean.* 


Judson’s monument shall be : 


“Burmah redeemed! the Budh by Christ replaced ; 
His proud pagodas ruined and overthrown. 

His sun-clad priests to history only known, 

And the rude scripts on palm-leaves all effaced.” 


His influence shall be to make us: 


“Mark how he lived and labored, loved and lost ; 

His life, loves, labors, losses, all were spent, 

From youth to age, with one supreme intent,— 

To share with Christ the World’s redemption cost.’’ + 


— 


® Life of Adoniram Judson by his son, Edward Judson, p. 
560. 


+ Richard’s ‘‘The Apostle of Burmah,”’ pp. 102, 101. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 85 


CHAPTER III 


THE RISE OF THE ““HARDSHELLS.” 


In studying the history of any great move- 
ment it is necessary to take a view point. I 
choose to take my stand in Kentucky in studying 
the Hardshell split in the Baptist denomination. 
This State has ever been, in theological as well 
as profane history, a ‘‘dark and bloody ground,”’ 
the storm center of controversy, the battlefield 
of jarring religious opinions. Her preachers have 
ever been men of war from their youth upward. 
They have been trainedin a sternschool. ‘‘In- 
fidelity,’’ ‘‘Deism,’’ ‘‘Hell-Redemptionism,”’ 
‘‘Parkerism,”’ or ‘‘T’'wo-Seedism,’’ ‘‘Campbell- 
ism,’’ ‘‘Hardshellism,’’ ‘‘Old Landmarkism,”’ 
‘*Gosp2l Missionism,”’ and ‘*Whitsittism,’’ suc- 
ceeding and overlapping each other, have for a 
hundred years divided her forces and shorn her of 
her power. ‘There is scarcely an Association in 
her borders that has not been riven on one 
or more of these stones of stumbling and rocks 
of offence. Not that all of these issues have 
been born here, or that any of them were con- 
fined to this State, but here they were cradled 
and nurtured. Controversy has always flour- 


86 THE GENESIS OF 


ished in Kentucky’s fruitful soil. It is a place 
where two seas meet and where the Baptist 
ship has been like, time and again, to have per- 
ished. Here Greek has met Greek with the in- 
evitable tug-of-war. One cannot but mourn 
when contemplating all the fierce virility 
wasted in combat when heresy-hunter and 
heresy-monger have joined in the rigid grip of 
internecine strife. How terrible the loss of 
energy when an irresistible force meets an im- 
movable body! When Kentucky’s two extremes 
shall have tempered each other and the fierce 
fires of battle have been moderated to the warm 
glow of fraternal love, and all her exhaustless 
fund of energy shall be directed no longer to 
the uprooting of ‘‘every plant which our heaven- 
ly Father hath not planted,’’ but to watering 
with tears and tending and cultivating with 
devotion the one he has planted, how speedy and 
magnificent will be its growth. May God 
hasten that time! But at present our object is to 
look at the mistakes, the follies and the sins of 
the past that constitute history. 

The leaders against missions have been many. 
The opposition against missions has been one, 
in origin, progress, argument, and spirit, 
although hydra-headed in its various forms of 
manifestation. Itis the purpose of this chap- 
ter to ascertain its genesis and trace and demon- 
strate its unity through its varying forms. 
Every great movement is toa large extent iden- 
tified with its leaders. The biographical 
methodis the true one by which to study his- 
tory. We therefore present some accounts of 
the three great leaders in the anti mission cru- 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 87 


sade, together with an outline of their argu- 
ment, from which by an inductive process we 
hope to show the spiritual genealogy of all anti- 
missionaries, whose number is even at the pres- 
ent day great. ‘The three leaders were John 
Taylor, of Kentucky; Daniel Parker, of Illinois; 
and Alexander Campbell, of Virginia. 

John Taylor was an earnest, consecrated, 
self-sacrificing and conscientious minister of 
the gospel. He was the only real Baptist of 
the three. No man can read the account of his 
conversion, or the story of his efforts to evan- 
gelize Kentucky for Christ, without feeling that 
he was a converted and honest man. He was 
the victim of the prejudices engendered by his 
lack of education and his early environment. 
Yet all his good qualities but served to give 
respectability and force to his opposition to the 
mission cause. It is pleasant to recall that in 
his later life he was more insympathy with the 
mission movement and less timorous of the bug- 
bear which he had been the first toraise. But, 
as Dr. Spencer well says: ‘‘His pamphlet 
had gone forth on its pernicious mission, and 
probably did more to check the cause of mis- 
sions, in Kentucky, than any other publication 
of the period.’”’* For a comprehension of the 
better side of John Taylor, one should read his 
‘* History of Ten Churches.”’ 

Daniel Parker was contemporary with John 
Taylor and claims to be the first opponent of 
the mission system. ‘‘It makes me shudder 
when I think Iam the first one (that I have any 


* Spencer: History of Kentucky Baptists, vol. 1, p. 575. 


88 THE GENESIS OF 


knowledge of) among the thousands of zeal- 
ous religionists of America, that have ventured 
to draw the sword against the error, or to 
shoot at it and spare no arrows.’’* But it is 
doubtful if this statement be true. Taylor 
wrote in 1819, Parker in 1820 and his pamphlet 
was republished in 1824, at which time it was 
printed at Lexington, Kentucky, along with 
another on the same topic and rehashing the 
same argument, addressed to Maria Creek 
Church. Parker was a son of John Parker. 
He was born in Culpepper county, Virginia, 
reared in Georgia amid extreme poverty and 
ignorance, baptized in 1802, and licensed short- 
ly after. In 1803 he removed to Trumbull 
Church in tennessee, was ordained there in 
1806, and moved to southeastern Illinois in 
1817. He claims to have traveled through a 
creat many of the States of America. In 1810, 
an old brother in Tennessee advocated in acrude 
form the T'wo-Seed Doctrine. Parker rebuked 
him for it, but in 1826 set forth in pamphlet an 
elaboration of the same views. 

Itis not easy to explain, at least what was meant by 
Mr. Parker himself, in the phrase ‘‘’T'wo-Seed,’’ which in 
time became so notorious This at least may be said: the 
teaching represented by it was thatform of antinomianism 
which carried the doctrine of predestination to its utmost 
extreme. + 

STATEMENT OF THE DOCTRINE. 


The essence of God is good; the essence of evil is the 
Devil. Good angels are emanations from or particles of 


* Daniel Parker’s Address, etc. p. 3. 
+H. K. Carroll: Religious Forces, p. 48. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 89 


God; evil angels are particles of the Devil. When God 
created Adam and Eve, they were endowed with an emana- 
tion from himself, or particles of God were included in their 
constitution. They were wholly good. Satan, however, 
diffused into them particles of his essence by which they 
were corrupted. In the beginning God had appointed that 
Eve should bring forth only a certain number of offspring ; 
the same provision applied toeavh of her daughters. But 
when the particles of evil essence had been infused by 
Satan, the conception of Eveand her daughters was in- 
creased. They were now required to bear the original 
number, who were styled the seed of God, and an additional 
number who were called the seed of the serpent.* 


This T'wo-Seed doctrine is a curious revival, 
with some modifications of the ancient specula- 
tive philosophy of Manicheus. Dr. Newman 
calls it a ‘‘very disgusting form of Gnostic 
heresy.”’ It is easy to see how such a heresy 
would cause opposition to missions ; for the pro- 
geny of one of the seed would constitute the 
body of Christ, whose salvation is certain ; for 
the other, no salvation is provided. ‘The fol- 
lowing quotation is taken from page 11 of a 
copy of the first minutes of the General Associa- 
tion of Baptists in Kentucky, organized at 
Louisville, Friday, October 20th, 1837. 

The Anti-missionary spirit owes its origin to the notori- 
ous Daniel Parker. Hewas the first person called Baptist 
that lent a hand to the Infidel, and Papist in opposing the 
proclamation of the gospel to every creature, and the trans 


*H,. K. Carroll’s ‘‘Religious Forces,’ p.49. Compare 
also for fuller statement of this doctrine Spencer’s History 
of Kentucky Baptists, vol. 1, pp. 576 to 578. The statement 
as given here is quoted from History of Baptist States east 
of the Mississippi, by J. A. Smith, D. D. 


90 THE GENESIS OF 


lation and circulation of the Scriptures in all languages 
and among all people. Possessing a strong native intellect, 
and a bold adventurous imagination—with a mind cast 
in nature’s most capacious mold, but for want of cultiva- 
tion admirably calculated to be the receptacle of notions, 
the most crude, extravagant and chimerical, he generated 
an Utopian scheme of theology, the tendency of which 
was to subvert all practical religion. The grounds of his 
opposition to missions were—that the devil was an eternal 
‘““self-subsistent being’’ (to use his own phrase); that 
though God created all, yet the devil begat a part of man- 
kind ; that those begotten of the devil were his bona fide 
children, and to their father they would and ought to go; 
and of course sending them the gospel and giving them 
the Bible were acts of such gross and supreme folly 
that no Christian should be engaged in them! On the 
other hand he taught that the remaining portion of the 
human family were the actual sons of God from eter- 
nity, and being allied to Jesus Christ ere ‘‘ the morning 
stars sang together and all the sons of God shouted for joy’’ 
by the nearest and dearest ties of consanguinity, being 
no less than ‘particles’ of his body—bone of his bone and 
flesh of his flesh, the Redeemer would zolens volens, take 
them to mansions prepared for them in bliss: and 
hence Mr. Parker very wisely concluded, ‘that if such 
were the case, the Lord had very little use for the 
Bible or Missionary Societies. .... But there were 
many who embraced only half the doctrine of Mr. Parker 
and though they manifested no great apprehension for the 
liege subjects of the Prince of Darkness, yet they expressed 
great alarm lest the missionaries should help the Lord to 
perform his work, and convert the souls of some in 
a way God never intended they should be. They weresuch 
staunch friends of the Lord’s doing all his work, that they 
set upon and terribly assailed their missionary brethren, 
for fear they should by some means assist the Lord in the 
salvation of hiselect! Intheir zeal against these ambi- 
tious strides of the missionaries, they have occasioned 


AMERICAN AN‘TI-MISSIONISM. 91 


great disturpance and distress.—and destroying the Peace 
of Zion, the progress of religion has been greatly retarded, 
and the influence and usefulness of many ministers and 
churches utterly paralyzed. 


Dr. Carroll, of Texas, in a speech before the 
Southern Baptist Convention at Hot Springs, 
Arkansas, in 1900, compared Parker in his vio- 
lence toa wild boar rooting up the tender plants 
ina garden. ‘The foliowing description of the 
person and personality of Daniel Parker was 
written by Dr. John M. Peck, of Home Mission 
fame, while Parker was still alive and active : 


Mr. Parker is one of those singular and extraordinary 
beings whom divine Providence permits to arise as a 
scourge to his church, and a stumbling-block in the way 
of religious effort. Raised on the frontier of Georgia, 
(by others he is spoken of as a native of Virginia,) with- 
out education, uncouth in manner, slovenly in dress, 
diminutive in person, unprepossessing in appearance, 
with shrivelled features and a small, piercing eye, few 
men for a series of years have exercised a wider influence 
on the lower and less educated class of frontier people. 
With a zeal and an enthusiasm bordering on insanity, 
firmness that amounted to obstinacy, and perseverance that 
would have done honor to a good cause, Daniel Parker ex- 
erted himself to the utmost to induce churches to declare 
non-fellowship with all Baptists who united themselves 
with any of the benevolent (or as he caJled them ‘‘new- 
fangled’’) societies. 

His mind we are toid was ofa singular and original 
sort. In doctrine he was antinomian. He believed him- 
self inspired, and so persuaded others. Repeatedly we 
have heard him when his mind seemed to soar above his 
own powers, and he would discourse for afew moments on 
divine attributes or on some devotional subject, with such 
brilliancy of thought and correctness of language as would 
astonish men of education and talents. Then again it 


92 THE GENESIS OF 


would seem as if he were perfectly bewildered in a maze of 
abstruse subtleties.* 

Besides his itineracy among the churches, Parker was 
a writer, and among other things published fora time a 
periodical called the ‘‘Church Advocate.’’+ How much a per- 
son of influence he was is shown by the fact that during 
four years, from 1822 to 1826, he was a member of the 
Illinois State Senate. His disastrous career in Illi- 
nois and Imdiana came to a close in 1833, when he removed 
to Texas.} 

It is said of Daniel Parker, that at one time 
in his earlier career he applied for appoint- 
ment aS missionary, and when it was refused 
him, turned against mission societies and mis- 
sionary effort of every kind.§ ‘This was true 
at least of his coadjutor, Wilson Thompson. 
Just how far Parker wasinfluenced by Taylor 
cannot be known; but Wilson Thompson, his 
coadjutor, admits to being greatly influenced 
by reading Taylor’s pamphlet. Recent mission 
troubles in Texas may possibly be due in part 
to Parker’s labors after reaching that State, 
although we can discover nothing of his life 
after he “moved to Texas. The Parkerite 
heresy has not yet died out, for the census bul- 
letin for 1893 reports the membership of this 
sect in the entire country at 9,932. 


*j. A. Smith: History of Baptist States East of the Mis- 
sissippi, p. 123; quoted in Benedict’s History of the Bap- 
tists. 

+Cf. also Spencer: History of Kentucky Baptists, p. 
528. 

{ Smith: History of Baptist States East of the Missis- 
sippi, p.125. 

§J. A. Smith: History of Baptists States East of the 
Mississippi, p. 125. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 93 


The third and greatest opposer of the mis- 
sion system was Alexander Cam pbell. He was 
the son of Thomas Campbell, a Presbyterian 
clergyman. Alexander was born in Ireland 
but educated at the University of Glasgow, in 
Scotland, for the Presbyterian ministry. The 
date of his arrival in this country is variously 
given between 1807 and 1809. September, 1809, 
is probably the correct date. In 1809 the 
Christian Association at Washington, Penn- 
sylvania, was organized. Alexander Campbell 
preached his first sermon before it in 1810. On 
the 12th day of June, 1812, Alexander Camp- 
belland wife were baptized by Rev. Matthias 
Luce, as were also his father, mother and 
sister. 

All these arrived at their convictions on the 
subject of baptism separately and tothe mu- 
tual surprise of each other. Campbell was re- 
ceived by this baptism into Brush Run Church, 
which next year, 1813, presented a written creed 
to Red Stone Baptist Association, and was re- 
ceived into membership with that body. In 
March, 1811, Campbell married, and in April 
moved to Buffalo (now Bethany), Virginia. In 
1820, he debated with Walker on the subject of 
baptism. In August, 1823, he beganto publish 
a small religious monthly, called ‘The Chris- 
tian Baptist.” After making an extensive tour 
through some of the Western States and finding 
the anti-mission leaven implanted by Parker 
and Taylor already at work, he became much 
more bold in his attacks so that Daniel Parker 
established ‘The Church Advocate,’’ a period- 


94 THE GENESIS OF 


ical similar in size, form and aim to the ‘‘Chris- 
tian Baptist,’’ for the purpose of advocating 
church sovereignty and exclusiveness, in oppo- 
sition to benevolent societies in the West. 
There can be no doubt that in this Parker and 
Campbell made common cause. 

While the chief root of Parker’s opposition 
lay in his heresy, Campbell’s lay in the fact 
that he considered himself a Reformer. As he 
said in his preface, it would do no good to con- 
vert heathens to a form of Christianity held by 
men who themselves needed to be converted to 
New Testament Christianity. Reformers have 
never been missionaries, nor the reforming ages 
periods of missionary activity in the church. 
This was true of the Roman church. For three 
hundred years, while the reformers were trying 
by means of councils to cleanse the church in 
head and members, there was no missionary 
activity. Not until after the Reformation, 
when the Council of Trent had finally puta 
quietus on the reform movements, did Roman 
missionary activity begin. The same was true 
of the Protestant churches. As long as Europe 
was filled with the jangling of their warring 
creeds, missionary effort, though feebly at- 
tempted afew times, miserably failed. “But 
in the fullness of time when religious opin- 
ions had all clarified and crystallized into 
settled creeds, Cary arose to set the Chris- 
tian world on fire with missionary enthus- 
iasm. Campbell, -then, as a reformer could 
not readily be a missionary. His mistake lay 
in supposing the Baptists needed reformation. 
What they needed was co-operation and mis- 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 95 


sionary zeal. This, Campbell was not re- 
sponsible for giving them, except as Judas was 
responsible for our redemption. 

We have then the curious spectacle of the 
highest antinomianism, represented by Parker 
and Taylor, and the most extreme Arminianism, 
represented by Campbell, combined to attack 
the principles of missions. The oneside claimed 
it to be an infringement of the divine, and the 
other of church sovereignty. This coalition was 
greatly successful. Dr. Spencer truly says of 
Campbell, that he exercised more influence over 
the Baptists of Kentucky than of any other 
State, and that while ‘‘not the originator of 
opposition to missions he was its most success- 
ful advocate.’’ It is not our purpose to follow 
Mr. Campbell into all the doctrinal and credal 
tergiversations into which his reform policy 
led him. But by attacking and attempting to 
change the very planof salvation itself, the only 
doctrine more vital than that of missions, he 
finally succeeded in adding another to the 
already large number of sects in Christendom. 
His activity in this line was so great and its 
results are so well known as _ to obscure his re- 
sponsibility for the Hardshell split. The truth 
is, Alexander Campbell was the father of twins, 
Hardshellism and Campbellism. Hardshellism 
first gave indication of its appearance, but as in 
the case of Jacob and Esau, it was supplanted 
in the womb by its brother, Campbellism. 
Hardshellism, though longer in taking to itself 
a local habitation and a name, was the first of 
the two todisturb the Baptist denomination. 
But here, as in the case of Parker, many fol- 


96 THE GENESIS OF 


lowed him in his opposition to missions, who 
did not join him in his doctrinal vagaries and 
who were left behind to vex the saints when the 
believers in his creed, as set forth in the 
“Christian Baptist” and ‘Millennial Har- 
binger,’’ went out from the Baptists to form a 
new denomination. The denomination he 
founded has found it necessary in the struggle 
for existence to discard all his anti-missionary 
ideas, and to use all the methods he so unspar- 
ingly burlesqued. The quotations made from 
his writings are all from the period while he 
was still a Baptist, as his influence was 
largely diminished among them after his 
secession. But not until the last Hardshell, 
Gospel Missioner and Retrenching Church 
and Association has sloughed off from the 
Missionary Baptists, will the cure be complete. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 97 


CHAPTER IV. 


OUTLINE OF JOHN TAYLOR’S ARGU- 
MENT AS TAKEN FROM HIS PAM- 
PHLET (‘“*THOUGHTS, ETC.”), WRIT- 

TEN OCTOBER 27, 1819, WHEN 
MR. TAYLOR WAS SIXTY- 
SEVEN YEARS OLD. 


pe 


“The deadly evil I have in view is under 
the epithets or appellations of Missionary 
Boards, Conventions, Societies, and T heological 
Schools, all bearing the appearance of great 
though affected sanctity, as the mystery of 
antiquity did in the days of Paul, when the 
man of sin was in embryo.’’ Such is the way 
in which Mr. Taylor prefaces his argument. 

The first grave charge that Mr. Taylor 
makes against the missionaries is that they are 
impelled by the love of money. 

(a) About eight or ten years previous, 
Samuel Mills and a ministerial companion, 
Schermerhorn, both emanating from the same 
school with Judson and Rice, while on a mis- 
ponary tour through Ohio, Kentucky, ‘Tennes- 


98 THE GENESIS OF 


see, and the Natchez settlement to New 
Orleans, were induced to go sixty miles out of 
their way to visit Mr. Taylor, who speaks of 
them as ‘‘respectable looking young men, well- 
informed, and zealous in the cause in which 
they are employed.*** I have nodoubt these 
young men meant friendship to me and to 
preachers in general.”’ 

The two young missionaries were, however, 
unfortunate enough to arouse Mr. Taylor’s 
prejudices by trying to show him that for a 
pastor to secure missionary contributions meant 
an increased liberality all alone the line, and 
especially in regard to pastoral support. ‘They 
became quite impatient with my indolence, as- 
suring me if I would only stir up the people to 
missions and Bible society matters, I should 
find a great change in money affairs in favor of 
the preachers ; urging by questions like this: 
‘Do you not know that when Sponges are once 
opened they will always run? Only,’ said they, 
‘get the people in the habit of giving their money 
for any religious use, and they will continue to 
appropriate for all sacred purposes.’’’ (p. 6.) 

Mr. Taylor comments: “Surely it will not be 
thought uncharitable to say, that I did begin 
strongly to smell the Wew England Rat.”’ Here 
the prejudice against Yankees begins to show 
as a factor in the mission problem. This visit 
of Mills and Schermerhorn seems to have oc- 
curred after Judson’s ordination and departure, . 
but before the news came that he had beencon- ~ 
verted to Baptist views. 

(b) The next item in the charge is based on 
the account in Mrs. Jndson’s letter to the 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 99 


Board, published in its first report, p. 34, of a 
poor soldier at the Isle of France, who, al- 
though he had a family to support, paid $8.00 
a mouth from his meager income for a room 
for Mrs. Judson to preach in, and whoalso on 
their departure gave the missionaries $20.00. 
Taylor says of this, “It would look as if her 
husband had the same taste for money that a 
horse leech has for blood.’’ Again, on p. 7, he 
speaks of ‘‘Mr. Judson’s deep concerted scheme 
of self-agerandizement and getting money.” 
Also of Luther Rice he says, ‘‘But it was not 
hard to see, that he wasa man of great sub- 
tlety, the Savior directed his disciples to similar 
measures to gain souls to himself ; but Luther’s 
object was to get money.” (p. 8.) On pee) 
Taylor gives a description of Rice’s first ap- 
pearance and sermon before the Elkhorn Asso- 
ciation. ‘‘When Luther rose up the assembly 
of thousands seemed stricken with his appear- 
ance. A tall, pale-looking, well-dressed young 
man, with all the solemn appearance of one who 
was engaged in the work of the Lord, and per- 
haps he thought he was. Healso being astran- 
eer every eye and ear was open; his text was 
‘Thy Kingdom Come’ Hespoke some handsome 
things about the kingdom of Christ; but every 
stroke he gaveseemed to mean money. Formy 
own part I was more amused with his ingenu- 
ity than edified by his discourse, and more 
astonished at his art in the close, than at any 
other time. He had the more pathos the 
nearer he came getting the money, and raising 
‘his arms,as if he had some awfully pleasing 
vision, expressed without a hesitating doubt 


100 THE GENESIS OF 


that the angels were hovering over the assem- 
bly, and participating in our heavenly exer- 
cise, and just ready to take their leave and, 
bear the good tidings to heaven of what we 
were then about, in giving our money for the 
instruction and the conversion of the poor 
heathens ; and, as if he had power to stop Ga- 
briel’s flight, inthe most pathetic strain cried, 
‘Stop, angels, till you have witnessed the gener- 
osity of this assembly.’ About this time, per- 
haps twenty men, previously appointed, moved 
through the assembly with their hats, and near 
two hundred dollars were collected.—Though 
Tadmired the art of this well tanght Yankee, 
yet I considered him a modern Tetzel, and that 
the Pope’s old orator of that name was equally 
innocent with Luther Rice and his motive about 
the same. He was to get the money by the 
sale of indulgences for the use of the Pope and 
Church. Luther’s motive was through sophis- 
try and Yankee art, to get money for the mis- 
sion, of which he himself was to have a part. 
Tetzel’s great eloquence, and success in getting 
money, alarmed first Martin Luther, and after- 
wards the chief of the States in Germany. Our 
Luther by his measures of cunning in the same 
art of Tetzel may alarm all the American Bap- 
tists.”’ 

Taylor claims that Rice refused to preach 
at Dover Association, Virginia, for Mr. Sem- 
ple several years later unless a missionary col- 
lection were taken up. Semple yielded and the 
collection was taken. 

The Board was accused of being ‘‘either 
weak in judgment or unfaithful in choice, for it 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 101 


seems not so much the question what is your 
character or preaching talents as who will go 
for us—answer our purpose to hoodwink the 
people and get plenty of money?” 

Some of the means for obtaining money are 
attacked asfollows:* ‘'The very many modes, 
and artful measures of those great men to get 
money, are disgustful to common modesty. 
They begin with missionary societies ; then they 
create a great Board of different officers, and 
then select the most vigorous and artful agent 
they can find, to create more societies of differ- 
ferent grades as Female Societies, Cent Socie- 
ties, Mite Societies, Children’s Societies and 
even Negro Societies, both free and bond; be- 
sides the sale of books of various kinds, and in 
some instances the sale of images. Every mis- 
sionary to a foreign country is authorized to 
follow all these arts, as well as common beg- 
ging to get money; so that no set of men ever 
yet seen on the earth, manifest a greater thirst 
by these various modes of peddling to get 
money.— Their shameful cravings are insati- 
able.” On page 20 he says of Luther Rice, ‘‘so 
that scarce a man who attends Baptist worship 
at all in Kentucky has not seen Luther 
Rice or heard of his mighty fame in making 
merchandise of the people through feigned 
words, and from the strongest symptoms of 
covetousness.* <A false teacher always loves 
money.” 

However, the most serious stricture against 
Rice is this: ‘‘At a meeting of the Board 


*Compare Alexander Campbell on this point. 


102 THE GENESIS OF 


for Kentucky at Silas M. Noel’s, soon after 
the arrival of the young Indians in Ken- 
tucky, Luther Rice was present. For the pur- 
pose of immediate relief to the agent, who then 
had the Indians on his hands, a proposition was 
made for each member to pay in ten dollars. 
This was designed as an individual thing. Lu- 
ther was among the first to pay down his ten 
dollars. Who could have thought when the 
board at Philadelphia had sent on $500 for 
the same kind of relief, to find Luther’s $10 
deducted from it! In how many instances cun- 
ning Luther has played this kind of a game, is 
best known to himself. He seems very far 
from being one of those wrong headed conscien- 
tious kind of fellows who according to Judson’s 
estimation, would soon ruin the missionary 
cause. Itis probable when Luther so gener- 
ously paid down his ten dollars, that he de- 
signed it asa bait by which he might catch 
several tens, or use it as a trump card, by 
which he might catch a Jack, which would 
count one in his game, but expected to receive 
his ten dollars again, as he did. When the 
Savior found the disciples fishing he said to 
them. ‘Hereafter you shall catch men.’ That 
Luther Rice would not be willing to catch men 
in the sense the Savior designated, I will not 
say; but that he would much rather catch fish 
(as Peter did) with a piece of money in its 
mouth, I have no doubt.” (pp. 20, 21.) 

Briefly commenting on the above, it seems 
that Brother Tavlor has added at least a pound 
of evil surmise to every ounce of fact! Even 
according to Taylor’s own statement, which he 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 103 


gives only as hearsay evidence, there is nothing 
to show that Rice ever got his ten dollars back. 
Brother Taylor’s reference to the ‘‘trump 
card” and the ‘‘Jack”’ will be readily under- 
stood byall lovers of the game of ‘‘Seven up”’ 
ot ‘Old Sledge.”’ 

Such references as follow are too numerous 
to mention all. ‘‘I have taken some little 
notice of the horse-leech. It is said of that 
creature that it has a forked tongue, with two 
branches which are called its daughters, with 
both of which it sucks blood with great vigor. 
Thus missionaries with many strings to their 
bow, cry mightily for money. The wicked sons 
of Eli the priest had a fleshhook with three 
teeth, by which they made a mighty rake in 
the caldron while the flesh was boiling. The 
missionaries have many hooks by which they 
rake the world for money.”” He compares them 
to Judas, ‘‘who was also a lover of money;’’ to 
the Pharisees, having ‘‘a great hard-hearted- 
ness respecting a man’s old helpless parents or 
his heirs; but great assiduity to obtain a Corban 
or gift to missionaries; half the estate is not 
oo mach * *) 2° Giving much money being 
the best evidence that a man is a Christian— 
Heaven is almost secured to them; as also an 
honorary seat in any of their councils on paying 
one hundred dollars.”’ In this fashion the 
changes are rung in every conceivable man- 
ner and the missionaries are pictured as ereedy 
money grabbers, grinding the face of the poor 
while they themselves are living in luxury and 
ease. It is not necessary now to point out how 
false and distorted such representations are, 


104 THE GENESIS OF 


but at that time, coming from a man whom the 
people knew to be pure in life and character, 
utterly self-sacrificing and having undergone 
trials and hardships for Christ’s sake that riv- 
aled Paul’s list of sufferings, such accusations 
fell with tremendous and blighting force. One 
cannot read the story of John Taylor’s life 
and almost apostolic labors without marveling 
that the old man failed to discover that his 
whole life had been spent in missionary labor. 

The second great point of contention was that 
the missionary system was contrary to Bap- 
tist church government and was hierarchical in 
its tendencies and design. 

(a) It is freely compared with the “mystery 
of antiquity’? and the ‘‘man of sin” in embryo. 

(b) Mr. Taylor had read an extensive account 
of Papal Missions, especially the noted Jesuit 
Mission in Paraguay, and he feared a Similar 
development of the Baptist mission. Judson, 
in a letter 10 Rice, published in the third re- 
port, p. 164, had urged great caution in send- 
ing missionaries to assist him. He desired 
‘men of an amiable, yielding temper, willing 
to take the lowest place, to be the least of all, 
for one wrong-headed, conscientiously obstinate 
man would ruin us.”’* Taylor seizes on this 
phrase as showing that Judson had some deep 
laid plan of domination. He characterizes it as 
a ‘‘deep concerted scheme of self-agerandize- 
ment,’ a ‘mercenary plan of Priestéraity” 
He condemns Judson and Rice for not working 
with the English Board, ‘but equality in 
ee ee 


* Italics ours. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 105 


labour, l apprehend, did not suit those aspir- 
ing gentlemen. Nothing short of a large Him- 
pire would answer their ambitious views. 
Therefore Rice receives his furlough, as Jud- 
son terms it, to return and seek his fortune 
among American Baptists, and succeeds, to be 
sure, far above his most sanguine expectations. 
Sos They were the great machine which by 
him as their agent, was soon brought into 
action all over the United States. Poor half- 
witted Baptists, may Luther well Sav.c a2 1 ie 
associations were supposed to be the instru- 
mentalities by which they were to carry out 
their scheme. After comparing Luther Rice 
to Tetzel, as quoted under the first point 
above, he goes on to say, * Tetzel’s operations 
were when the Pope of Rome and the Mother 
of Harlots were at their zenith. Luther’s 
(Rice) movements bespeak the Man of Sin or 
men of sin in embryo; and Baptist associations 
too soon become the adopted daughters of the 
old Mother of Harlots. Money and power 
were the signs of the times when the mystery 
of iniquity began to work in the days of Paul. 
The same principle is plainly seen in the great 
Board of Missions in America, and Rice, their 
chief cook, as also in their mighty convention. 
. . Money and power are the two principal 
members of the old beast. That both these 
limbs are found in this young beast is obvious, 
and exemplified in the great solicitude of corre- 
spondence with all the Baptist associations. 
Power is acquired by connection with a hun- 
dred associations, a fine nest egg of gold to 
answer their future ambition.”’ 


106 THE GENESIS OF 


‘“‘I consider these great men are verging 
close on an aristocracy, with an object to sap 
the foundation of Baptist republican govern- 
ment. The highest court Christ has fixed on 
earth, is a worshipping congregation called a 
church.’’* 

On page 15, commenting on the efforts of the 
home missionaries to establish churches. he 
says: ‘‘ Why this mighty solicitude in these 
men to constitute churches? The motive is 
obvious. In the first place, there will be fine 
tales to write to the great board; and secondly, 
every church thus set up by themselves will be 
under their own immediate control.’’ Again, 
scoring Judson, on page 17, ‘In Rangoon, the 
pupils have correspondence with the greatest 
men in the naticn, the king not excepted; so 
that in future, should some wrong-headed, con- 
science - bound fellow ruin the missionary 
affairs in Burmah, Mr. Judson may fill some 
high office in the kingdom, and be a favorite in. 


the king’s palace.”’ ‘‘Money and power is the 
watchword of the whole scheme; aiming at 
Lordship over God’s heritage.” .... ‘The 


tenor of the several associations agreeing to 
correspond with each other gives them a free 
hold all over the United States where Baptists 
are found; and that it is not unreasonable to 
ask their vassals for money wherever they find 
them.’’ 

The missionaries are accused of presumption 
verging on blasphemy in giving God a new 


* Thoughts, etc., pp. 9, 10. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 107 


name or epithet, that is, ‘‘Zhe God of Mis- 
stons.”’* 'The apostles also they style mission- 
aries, ‘‘ which favorite terms of theirs (mis- 
sionary) is borrowed from Old Mother Rome. 
And as they are beholden to the Mother of Har- 
lots for this handsome phrase, it is to be hoped 
that our missionaries will acknowledge their own 
old mother, and the Jesuits of the same race 
as their brethren.’’ Another charge on this 
line is that by their money basis of representa- 
tion the unconverted might gain control of the 
Boards. Other objections, such as opposition 
to the Board on account of its connection with 
theological education, will be noticed later. 

Such fears of a Baptist Papacy or extra- 
ecclesiastical form of government seem almost 
childish to us, although they are still urged in 
some quarters; but persecution of Baptists had 
only ceased in Massachusetts the year previous, 
and was still endured in Connecticut. These 
alarms came from a man who had himself been 
mobbed and driven from his preaching places 
by persecution, who had crossed the Allegha- 
nies into a virgin wilderness to escape from the 
persecutions in the coast States. They were 
addressed to the people who had seen and heard 
Baptist preachers preach from jail windows in 
Virginia. Their fears and their ignorance 
formed a fertile soil for prejudices which were 
thus skillfully excited. Such arguments, such 
seed in sucha soil, could not fail to bear an 
abundant harvest. 


* * * *% * * * * 


I TO a ree 


* Thoughts, etc., p. 29. 


108 THE GENESIS OF 


CHAPTER V, 


OUTLINE OF DANIEL PARKER’S AT- 
TACK ON THE MISSIONARY 
SYSTEM. 


In his introduction he speaks as follows: ‘‘It 
is evident that great talents have been en- 
gaged and much timeand money spent to vindi- 
cate the mission plan, and as yet but little said 
or done against it. It makes me shudder when 
I think I am the first one (that I have any 
knowledge of,) among the thousands of zealous 
religions * of America that have ventured to 
draw the sword against the error, or to shoot 
at it and spare no arrows; and more particu- 
larly when I know that I lack that qualification 
that is pleasing to the Spirit of the world, for 
I have no education but to read, and have no 
knowledge of the English grammar only as my 
Bible has taught me; but all the apology I 
shall make for my grammatical errors ate, that 
God has chosen the foolish things of this world 


to confound the wise—therefore I will ven- 
titres” 


He doubtless means “‘religionists.”’ 


* 


AMBRICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 109 


In laying the foundation for this attack, 
Parker says : ‘‘I have observed four things that 
cannot be denied:— 

‘“), The errors which have flowed from the 
misled zeal, and from under the cloak of reli- 
gion, are almost innumerable. 

“2 These errors have nearly all originated 
amongst the wise and learned. 

“3°-They are more generally supported by 
arguments drawn from the wisdom of the 
world, than the authority of the Bible. 

“A That when the Scriptures are introduced 
as evidence, they are sure to be drawn in more to 
answer the plan of man’s invention, than give 
the true meaning of God’s word.... I make 
these remarks to lead our minds to the subject 
in hand which is ‘the principles and practice of 
the Baptist Board of Foreign Missions.”’ 

“**% Th order to be well understood, I shall 
undertake the subject in the following manner: 

“1. Yo remove the prejudices that has arose 
against us who oppose the mission system. 

“9. To show what we stand opposed to, and 
what we are willing to do. 

“3 To understand what the Baptist Board 
intends to do, from the face of their constitu- 
tion, and prove it by their doctrine and prac- 
Lice, 

“4. Examine the principle evidences they in- 
troduce for its support. 

“5 Try the principle and practice of the 
Board in sending out preachers, by the princi- 
ple and practice of Christ and his apostles. 

“6 Point out some of the particular evils 
that I view in the mission plan. 


110 THE GENESIS OF 


“7. And lastly, take a small view of the 
whole.’”’ 

In his discussion of proposition 1, Parker 
claims that prejudice has been exhibited and 
excited against the opposers of the mission Ssys- 
tem by ‘‘the following accusations:— 

(1) That we are opposed to the spread of 
the gospel among the heathen. To this I an- 
Swer, we are pleased with the spread and 
growth of Immanuel’s kingdom throughout 
the world. But we wish it under his direction 
and government, and crown him with the glory 
which we believe is not the case in the mission 
plan.) +> 

(2) We are charged with opposing the 
translation of the Scriptures and the education 
of the heathen. To this I answer the charge 
is incorrect, for we oppose neither; but will 
help it with heart and hand if it could be taken 
in a proper manner, and take the evils from it. 

(3) We are charged with holding a tyrannical 
principle, inasmuch as we are not reconciled 
to our brethren in their giving their money to 
the mission system, and the argument is that 
they have a right to do what they please with 
their own... etc. To this Lanswer . . bestow- 
ing money to the needy is a good work etc., 
but as to a professor being at liberty to do what 
he pleases with his own in all cases, without be- 
ing accountable to the church, is a very absurd 
idea. I ask would you be willing that your 


brethren should gamble on his money,...or 
give it to a priest to forgive his sins, or to the 
worship of idols. .. ; just. so if the mission Sys- 


tem be anevil, and God has never required it at 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. chee 


your hands to give the blessings he has bestowed 
on you to support an unscriptural plan, that 
is repugnant to his gospel government. Then 
we are no tyrants, but have a right todeal with 
you as violators of the government of Christ.”’ 

In a fourth division under this clause he de- 
fends some action of the Wabash Association 
of Illinois, to which he belonged, made on above 
lines in opposition to the Board previous to the 
date at which he writes (1820). An account of 
this action I was not able to obtain, but a pro- 
test by the church at Lamott, Crawford County, 
Illinois, evidently written by Parker and others 
to the same Association in 1823, would indicate 
a change of sentiment in favor of missions even 
in that Association. 

It is not the purpose of the writer of this 
sketch to attempt to answer the various argu- 
ments presented. All he desires to do is to 
faithfully and fairly represent them. Eighty 
years of Baptist history constitute their answer. 
It is well to note, however, that neither here nor 
elsewhere is an avowed and undisguised attack 
made on missions ferse. ‘This will be further 
shown by taking up the second point in his 
proposition, which is in his language, *‘to show 
what part of the mission object we oppose, and 
what part we are willing to support.”’ 

“We stand opposed to the mission plan in 
every point and part where it interferes with 
or is connected with the ministry, either in de- 
pending on the church to give them a call, or 
seminaries-of learning to qualify them to preach, 
or an established fund for the preacher to look 


Ti? THE GENESIS OF 


back upon as a support, and when the Board 
assumes authority to appoint the fields of their 
labor, we believe they sin in attempting a work 
that alone belongs to the Divine Being ..... 
the object of the missionary societies in respect 
to the ministry we are opposed to in every 
point.” 

Just here in this deeply-seated objection to 
seminaries etc., we find two things: first, the 
real root of the anti-mission spirit; and second, 
the reason for the terrible power and blighting 
effect of this spirit in the frontier and southern 
States as contrasted: with its abortive efforts and 
speedy death in the New England States. 

Parker here briefly shows what they are wil- 
ling to do, as follows:—‘‘As to the extrava- 
gant plan of translating the Bible and civilizing 
the Indians, we could bear with it, af tt was not 
under the sacred name of religion; but we be- 
lieve as paper, types, and the labor of man all 
cost money, and belong to the things of nature, 
that zt should be conducted under the direction of 
moral government and not at the expense of re- 
ligion. And as to educating the heathen we 
think it very improper, for to establish mission- 
ary families securing the rights of flocks and 
herds, farms and inc mes, all under the color of 
religion. It seems like making the sacred char- 
acter of religion no greater than the merchan- 
dise of this world, and putting it ina long line 
of trade and traffic, when the colonization of the 
heathens ought to be conducted under the direc- 
tion of our civil government, or a society formed 
for that express purpose, not under the char- 
acter of any society of religion whatever. But 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 113 


we rejoice in all good that is done in translating 
the Bible, or educating the heathens and are 
willing to give our aid in counsel or money, pro- 
vided it can be done and not dishonor the cause 
of religion.”’ 

This is truly a curious plan to come froma 
Baptist hater of civil interference with things 
ecclesiastical, whose whole mind is dominated 
by a fear lest the Baptist Board should destroy 
the democracy of church government, as is 
shown by his third proposition, which is to de- 
duce the plans of the Baptist Board from their 
constitution, doctrine and practice. His charge 
is, that the Board purposes to govern the min- 
istry. He admits they expressly disclaim and 
deny this, but proposes to prove it by the fol- 
lowing considerations: 

(1) ‘‘The exalted title they are pleased to be 
known by, which is the Baptist Board of For- 
eign Missions for the United States of America. 

(a) This evidently proves they claim the 
government of the ministry and consequently 
arrests the government and authority Christ 
gave his church. 

(b) This he claims to be an unauthorized use 
of the Baptist name and authority. 

(c) ‘The Board presumes to further qualify 
their missionaries, 

(d) And to fix the field of their labor and 
the amount of their compensation. 

‘‘T ask who has the right to appoint the fields 
of the labors of the preacher? Certainly the 
authority that has employed him. Well, then, 
the Board acts consistent with their principle, 
for they have employed preachers and sent them 

8 


114 THE GENESIS OF 


out, and pay them for their labors, and to the 
Rev. Luther Rice as high as $8.00 a week, be- 
sides his traveling expenses.’’* 

The Board holds education essential to the 
gospel ministry; ‘‘they have resolved to divide 
America into three sections, and two men in 
each district appointed to receive contributions 
and to attend the business under the control of 
the Board * * * the Baptist Board has urged 
us to form auxiliary societies. What is this 
great exertion for? It is to give pious young 
men education to qualify them to preach. ‘This 
pointedly proves their principle is not only to 
educate preachers, but hold the government of 
the ministry in their own hands. 

‘“They prove tous by their writings that it 
is the business of the churches to impress on 
the minds of their pious young men to preach 
the gospel or call them to the work; although 
they say zz one place tt ts the Holy Ghost that 
makes us able members of the New Testament.’’t 
He quotes a number of passages from the 
“Latter Day Luminary,’’ supposed to prove his 
charge that missionaries deem it the business 
of the church to call or send forth preachers, 
which Parker considers an usurpation of a work 
God has ‘‘ reserved to himself . . . and will ful- 
fill it in his own time and way.” 


*Think of it, ye ‘‘ Retrenchers,’’ this blood-sucker got 
$8.00 a week. Think of it, ye timorous brethren, who are 
disposed to listen to the ‘‘Retrenchers’’ cry, Luther Rice 
was condemned for receiving a salary of $33.00 a month, 
the highest salary htat was paid. ; 


tItalics ours. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 115 


In his discussion of the tourth point, which 
is an examination of the most common evidences 
introduced to support the mission plan. Par- 
ker says there are three points to be observed: 

1. The Scripture they introduce to justify 
them in qualifying, sending out and supporting 
the miSsionaries.’’ 

The case of Jonah; ‘This is the first account 
of an Hebrew teacher being sent to the Gen- 
tiles; this text is intended to justify the mission- 
ary society in sending out preachers... We 
find this was a special act. of God in send- 
ing Jonah to Nineveh, and that not by or 
through a missionary society, and stands a very 
pointed evidence in my favor, and against them- 
selves, unless the mission society will say they 
are acting as God, in sending out preachers, 
and I hope this they will not say. Notice Jonah 
was not sent toa seminary of learning to pre- 
pare him to preach tothese Gentiles; but was 
under the tuition and special order of his God, 
and was in nocase under the order or direction 
of any body of men whatever; neither did he 
look back to a society formed to raise money 
for his support.”’ 

The other passages of Scripture Parker dis- 
cusses are, God’s promise to Abraham that in 
his seed all the nations of the earth should be 
blessed; the great commission; the command of 
the Holy Spirit from the thirteenth Acts, ‘‘Sep- 
arate me Barnabas and Saul,”’ etc., in all of 
which he only reiterates his plea that they can- 
not apply to a society or seminary of learning. 

He then takes up the question whether the 
twenty-second chapter of II. Kings and the 


116 THE GENESIS OF 


twenty-fourth and thirty-fourth chapters of II. 
Chronicles justify the collecting of money for 
missionary purposes. The substance of his ar- 
eument is, ‘Those collections of money were 
for the express purpose of repairing the tem- 
ple, and could not tolerate us further than pub- 
lic collections for building meeting houses.” 
After a brief objection to the title of Preszdent 
and the effort to justify it by the Book of Daniel, 
he passes to his fifth arraignment, ‘‘which is to 
try the principle and practice of the Board in 
sending out preachers, by the principle and 
practice of Christ and his apostles.’’ Here he 
reaches the bed rock of Simon-pure, original 
‘Hardshellism. ‘‘My object is to show that 
the principle and practice of the mission system 
is according to the spirit of this world, and not 
according to the spirit of the gospel, ... The 
mission advocates say their principle is good, 
because it is to send the gospel to the heathens, 
and by that means have heirs of glory begot- 
ten: just so I might say, my neighbor or friend 
is very wealthy and wants an heir very bad, 
and I viewing his wealth, and how happy his 
heir would be, join with his anxiety to divide 
his happiness with his heir. Would it not be 
a good principle to wish he had an heir? Yes; 
but a most horrid act for me to attempt to be- 
come the father. Just so we all agree the object 
is good, and we can truly say, ‘‘Oh, that the 
heathen were all saints.’’ But for us to step 
in the place of God to send means to accom- 
plish the birth of these heirs must be horrid 
and wicked. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 117 


“TI have thought their zeal like old Sarah’s 
was when the Lord had promised the birth of 
an heir. She became so restless and was so 
anxious, that she could not wait for the Lord to 
bring it about agreeable to his own purpose, 
but must give her handmaid to her husband. 
But still, notwithstanding all it was an Ish- 
maelite, and was not the heir as God designed. 
Just so,”’ etc. 

He also refers to Uzza’s reaching forth the 
arm of flesh to steady the ark of the Lord, and 
to Nadab’s and Abihu’s offering strange fire on 
the altar of the Lord, etc. ‘‘Notice the mis- 
sion society do not require a call to the work, 
only gifts and graces, and what sort them are we 
must guess at. But Christ, when he was about 
to send out preachers, he called them, whether 
they had learning or not, and gives us no 
account that a Seminary of learning was essen- 
tial to the ministry : andold Paul tells us when 
it pleased God to call him, he conferred not 
with flesh and blood and that he never sought 
itof man, . . . and the Bible tells us if any 
man lack wisdom, let him ask of God. And 
Paul brings to view our calling, by telling us, 
we see our calling, brethren, that not many 
wise, not many noble after the flesh are called. 
Let me observe here, I have thought the mis- 
sion system is about to give old Paul the dodge 
here, for it seems that if they are not wise and 
noble when they are called, they intend to 
make them wise and noble before they send 
themi-ont.))...- « 

‘‘Preachers have no right to look back where 
they came from, for there is no account that 


118 THE GENESIS OF 


the gospel ministers are supported from be- 
hind,—for Paul calis it robbery, and confesses 
himself guilty of robbing other churches and 
taking wages from them to do service to the 
Corinthian Church, and asks forgiveness for 
that wrong. Wemust say that wherever a 
preacher labors is the place for him to claim his 
support, and he has no scriptural authority to 
look anywhere else... The poor is relieved 
as an act of charity and the preachers support- 
ed as their just due.”’ 

Parker remarks on missionary zea/ as follows: 
“Tf great and warm zeal is to justify the prin- 
ciple, then surely the worshippers of Jugger- 
not will claim the preference, while the Mo- 
hammedans may lay in their plea, and the per- 
secutors of the church of Christ have much to 
hope, .... I wish the mission friends to 
know that all their zeal, their prayers, their 
answers to their prayers, and their foregoing 
all the conflicts of life, even if they give them- 
selves a sacrifice to the mission system, it will 
never justify the principle or practice unless 
they have thus saith the word of the Lord for 
it. For, we are commanded not to be wise 
above that which is written. | We have to ac- 
knowledge that the gospel has been conducted, 
directed and supported for nearly 1800 years 
without such a plan as the board has pre- 
scribed.”’ 

Right here by the use of a striking illustra- 
tion Parker gives the one intimation of his own 
idea as to how the gospel should be spread 
abroad. ‘“‘I keep thinking of a little anecdote 
that I once heard. A very homely lady under- 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 119 


took to dress herself before the glass and make 
herself look handsome; but let her turn herself 
or her dress as she would, the glass was true 
and would show her ugly features until she 
was very much enraged and to vent her spite 
struck a fatal blow at the innocent glass and 
broke it in pieces and scattered it over the 
whole house, which made the matter still worse, 
for then go where she would in the house there 
was some piece of glass which would still show 
her ugly features. This, I have thought, most 
beautifully brings to my view the situation of 
the saints after the day of Pentecost, when 
they were embodied together and as a glass 
all the devil could do in his dissimulations and 
coming near the gospel light and beauty, by his 
dressing erroras finely as he could. Yet the 
saints as the glass through which the gospel 
light did shine and disclose the ugly features 
of error. The devil got mad, struck the fatal 
blow through the Pagan persecution, scattered 
the disciples of Christ through a great many 
parts of the then known world, and the same 
may be said by every persecution ever since; but 
blessed be God there is ina great many parts 
of the world, and even in what we may call the 
wilderness and frontiers of America, parts of 
that true glass that will show Satan’s ugly 
features, let him come in whatever shape he 
pleases, and even if it is among the Baptists, 
the true church of Christ. And I would as 
soon think that somehow like this the gospel - 
will get to all nations as anyhow else, as God 
generally breaks the devil’s head with his own 
weapon.”’ 


120 THE GENESIS OF 


Under the sixth head or particular objections 
to the principles and practice of the Board, he 
says: ‘‘My object on this point is to show the 
moral evil that I see in the mission system, and 
where it causes our brethren to sin, which is the 
reason we can have no fellowship with them in 
the mission spirit, and lays us under the heart- 
rending necessity of denying fellowship with 
them, while engaged in it.’’ 

Ist Objection. ‘‘It has neither precept nor 
example to justify it within the two lids of the 
Bible,” 

Bud Objection, bMS board=.2. =. have re- 
belled against the king of Zion, violated the gov- 
ernment of the gospel church and forfeited their 
right to the union and brought distress on the 
church of Christ.”’ 

‘“(1) ‘They have rebelled against the king of 
Zion, inasmuchas they have assumed an author- 
ity that Christ has reserved alone to himself. 

‘(2) ‘They have violated the right of govern- 
ment of the church of Christ in forming them- 
selves into a body and acting without the 
authority of the union. 

(3) ‘They have forfeited their right to the 
union by departing from the gospel plan and 
the common, constant and constitutional faith 
and practice of the Baptist Church.’’* Well, 
if the authority of government isin the Church, 
and the mission society act without it, then 
they are evidently in disorder and consequently 


*It is worthy of note that Parker in common with others 
of these early writers gives no intimation that the histori- 
cal continuity of the Baptists is doubted among them. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 12f 


their work is in disorder. The preachers they 
send, the members they baptize and the 
churches they constitute, are all ina state of 
disorder. ... They have violated our govern- 
ment and thereby forfeited their right to the 
Baptist union. ... Our breturen have left us, 
we have not left them, therefore we claim the 
constitutional grounds, ard i such cases the 
minority can exclude the majority.” 

3rd Objection. ‘‘The mission society applies 
under the character of religion to the enemies 
of Christ for help, and therefore casts contempt 
on his dignity. .. Members of these (auxiliary) 
societies obtain their seats and authority here 
by paying their money; and wicked men here 
have as great a right as any other by paying 
their money, and when my money gives mea 
seat in a religious council, then I say money is 
the cause of my fellowship.”’ 

4th Objection. ‘*‘The mission spirit does not 
appear from my view like the spirit of Christ. 
It looks like that abomination spoken of by 
Daniel the Prophet standing in the holy place; 
this holy place spoken of or where it ought not 
to be is evidently the church of Christ. . Alas! 
alas! has the time come when the spirit that 
moved in the council at the rise of the Popish 
dominion, that gave education a seat in religion, 
and made it-essential to the ministry, has itnow 
got possession of the hearts of some of our dear 
Baptist brethren—will it prevail? O, no! for 
I verily believe it is one of the flood-gates of 
hell, and our blessed Lord has said it shall not 
prevail against his church.” 


122 THE GENESIS OF 


This is practically the conclusion of his ar- 
gument, although he animadverts with great 
vehemence against those ‘‘would-be philanthro- 
pists’? who, while holding Negroes under their 
own ‘‘despotic yoke,’’ send the ‘‘products of 
their labor’’ to be “‘lavishly squandered in sup- 
port of missionaries sent to foreign countries 
seeking opportunities of converting foreign bar- 
barians.’’ In short, he works the heathen-at- 
home plea for all it is worth. 

The seventh point is merely a recapitulation 
of the arguments previously made. He places 
(after the manner of old men) the golden age of 
Baptists about ‘“‘thirty or forty years ago,’ and 
laments that it is now scarcely possible to dis- 
tinguish preachers from lawyers, when you 
meet them at the court house. He says, in 
conclusion, ‘‘My mindis yet fruitful, but I must 
close... Remember we are told the love of 
money is the root of all evil, and tocharge them 
that are rich in this world not to be high- 
minded; and I hope you will take particular no- 
tice and don’t forget that when Christ found in 
the temple them that sold oxen and sheep and 
doves, and them that attended to the table of 
money changing, that he made a scourge of 
small chords, and drove them out, and overthrew 
the table, and charged them of making his 
father’s house a house of merchandise, ora den 
of thieves. And we have no account that Christ 
has ever authorized the table of money chang- 
ing to be set up in his spiritual temple, and we 
think he will not, as he overthrew it himself: 
and I hope you will not think hard if Christ 
should with his scourge of small chords, that 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. Zs 


he has still left in his temple, drive out all 
such characters, and overthrow the table. 
So I hope you will trade no more on sheep and 
oxen, but consider what I say, and may the 
Lord give thee understanding in all things.”’ 
Clark County, Illinois, 1820. 


124 THE GENESIS OF 


CHAPTER VI. 


ALEXANDER CAMPBELL’S ATTACK 
ON MISSIONS. 


I. PLAN OF ATTACK. 


1. Like his predecessors in opposing mis- 
sions, Campbell does not attack missions er se, 
but only the mission plan or method. 

(a) ‘*. . as some objects are manifestly good, 
and the means attempted for their accomplish- 
ment manifestly evil, speaking against the 
means employed, we may be sometimes under- 
stood as opposing the object abstractly, espe- 
cially by those who do not wish to understand, 
but rather to misrepresent. For instance, that 
the conversion of the heathen to the Christian 
religion is an object manifestly good, all Chris- 
tian will acknowledge; yet every one acquainted 
with the history of the means employed, and of 
the success attendant on the meats, must know 
that these means have not been blessed; and 
every intelligent Christian must know that 
many of the means employed have been mani- 
festly evil. Besides to convert the heathen to 
the popular Christianity of these times would 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 125 


be an object of no great consequence, as the 
popular Christians themselves, for the most part 
require to be converted to the Christianity of 
the New Testament.” * . 

(b) ‘*... as to the missionary plans, I am 
constrained to differ from many whom I love 
and esteem...at the same time I am very 
sorry to think that any man should suppose 
that 1 am either regardless of the deplorable 
condition of the heathen world, or opposed to 
any means authorized by the New Testament 
for either the civilization or salvation of those 
infatuated pagans. But, my dear sir, how can 
I, with the New Testament before my face, ap- 
prove the Catholic, the Episcopalian, the Pres- 
byterian, etc., missionary schemes. Are they 
not evidentiy mere sectarian speculations, for 
enlarging their sects, and finding appointment 
for their supernumerary clergy? Look again 
at the sums of money squandered at home and 
abroad under the pretext of converting the 
world; and again wherein is the heathen world 
benefited by such conversion ? Is the hand of 
the Lord in this business ? Does he work at it 
as in days of yore? Look at our own country— 
our Indian neighbors and our African bondmen. 
Are not these, equally, asthe Japanese or Bur- 
mans, objects worthy of our sympathy and re- 
gard? I do not oppose, intentionally, at least, 
the scriptural plan of converting the world. 
My opponents . . . do rank meas opposing the 
means of converting the world, not wishing to 


Soe Dipl IE 
*Christian Baptist, Vol.1 (2nd edition), Preface, pages 
ix and x. 


126 THE GENESIS OF 


discriminate in my case, at least, between per- 
sons opposing the abuses of a good cause, and 
the cause itself. I did contribute my mite and 
my efforts to the popular missionary cause, until 
my conscience forbade me from an acquaintance 
with the abuses of the principle.’ * — 

(c) After quoting from Buck’s Theological 
Dictionary, Vol. 1, p. 147, an account of the 
zeal, earnestness, methods and successes of the 
Roman Catholics, especially the Jesuits, Camp- 
bell says: ‘‘We all, who call ourselves Protest- 
ants, hesitate not to say, that these mission- 
aries, notwithstanding their zeal, their priva- 
tions, and their sufferings in the missionary 
cause, left the heathen no better than they 
found them; nay, in some instances, they left 
them much worse. . It may be worthy of the se- 
rious consideration of many of the zealous advo- 
cates of the various sectarian missions in our 
day, whether in a few years, the same things 
may not be said of their favorite projects 
which they themselves affirm of the Catholic 
missions and missionaries. They should also 
remember that it was once as unpopular and as 
impious to speak against the missionary under- 
takings of the ‘Mother Church’ as it can possi- 
bly be now to even call in question the schemes 
of any of her daughters. It might not be-amiss 
also to consider, that a Dominican on Jesuit did 
appeal to the privations and sufferings of their 
missionaries as a proof of their sincerity and 


“Christian Baptist, Vol. 1 (2nd edition), p. 208. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. Hea 


piety, and to their great success, as a proof 
that the Lord of Hosts was with them.” * 

2. ‘These attacks on methods include attacks 
on Associations, Conventions, Auxiliary Socie- 
ties and every form of organized work. 

(a) Campbellsometimesmakes a half-hearted 
defense of Associations, e. g., ‘‘Christian Bap- 
tist,”’ Vol. 52.189. > Tn this he seems to al- 
most hold the Baptist view. 

(b) He strongly commends the Boone Creek 
Association of Kentucky for abolishing its con- 
stitution in 1828. Its powers were to be lim- 
ited toa voluntary meeting for the worship of 
God andthe voluntary communication of ‘‘the 
state of religion amongst us by letter and mes- 
senger.’” § 

(c) He prints an attack on Baptist Associa- 
tions by one subscribing himself *‘A Lover of 
Truth,” who says, ‘itis well known that Baptist 
Associations exist. The plain, simple question 
is, are they authorized in the Bibles” After 
discussing passages of Scripture quoted in favor 
of Associations, he asks, ‘‘in all this where do 
we find the least feature of a Baptist Associa- 
tion? ‘Truly there is no resemblance.’’ He 
claims that a proper idea of the church leaves 
no place for an Association. To Campbell he 
concludes: ‘‘You have not put forth one argu- 
ment in this field of controversy (strictures 
against Presbyteries, Synods, etc.) which will 
not apply in all their pointed denunciations 
against Baptist Associations.” 


* Christian Baptist, Vol. 1 (2nd edition), p- 38. 
+ Christian Baptist, Vol. 6, p. 120. 


128 THE GENESIS OF 


(d) As to his views on Conventions, the fol- 
lowing editorial on ‘‘A Circular Letter” will 
give it with sufficient definiteness: 


A CIRCULAR LETTER 


Appeared in the “Columbian Star” of June 19th, ad- 
dressed to every Baptist Church in Massachusetts, and 
signed by Thomas Baldwin, Lucius Boles, N. W. Williams, 
Jonathan Going, F. Wayland, jun. recommending as ‘‘a 
good work”’ the formation of a state convention, to be en- 
titled, ‘‘The Baptist Convention of the State of Massachu- 
setts.’’ As an inducement to the Churches in Massachu- 
setts to form such a convention, they are told that similar 
conventions ‘“‘are formed and forming” in Connecticut, Ver- 
mont, Maine, New Hampshire, and New York, besides in 
several of the southern states. 

Provided three associations concur in the constitution 
recommended and in the measureasa whole, the first meet- 
ing is to take place in Boston the last Wednesday in Oc- 
tober next. Itisalso propgsed under the 10th article of 
this constitution, that ‘‘whenever a general convention 
formed from state conventions throughout the United 
States shall be formed or designed, it shall bein the power 
ofthis convention to send delegates to such conventions 
and to instruct them to enter into any arrangements to 
promote the interests of religion,”’ etc. 

The Baptist churches send three or four delegates or rep- 
resentatives to the associations. The associations are, ac- 
cording to this constitution, to send one delegate for every 
five churches tothe state convention, and the state con- 
vention is to send delegates on some ratio to the general 
assembly or convention. 

And so we Baptists are to march forthin solid phalanx, 
“terrible as an army with banners.’ I would propose an 
amendment to this plan. I dislike tautology and monot- 
ony, and would, instead of so many kinds of conventions, 
move that the names of those highly useful meetings be 
changed as follows: 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 129 


Those councils that are sometimes called churches, let 
them be called church sessions. Let the associations be called 
presbyteries; the state conventions, synods, the general con- 
vention, letit be called the general assembly of the Baptist 
Church of the United States. Wet there be a fund attached 
to this establishment called the delegate’s fund, and let it 
be enjoined at the first meeting of the general convention 
or the general assembly, that every minister shall dedicate 
to the Lord every male and female child, born of baptized 
parents, at any convenient time within forty days after its 
birth; and let this rite be called spiritual baptism adapted 
to infants; provided always that the parents are willing to 
bring their infants tothe church tothe parson to bless 
them; and that the parson’s hand which shall be laid upon 
their head shall be duly dry at the time of the imposition. 

Under this arrangement and modification, I think we 
shall be the most popular and powerful party in the 
Union; and as for being orthodox, there can be no doubt 
upon that subject, seeing we shall have the concurrence of 
the Presbyterian and Congregational brethren, who will 
assuredly send us annually afew delegates, indicative of 
their great good will and high approbation of our charity, 
liberality and soundness in the faith. I hope we Baptists 
in the western states will have no conscientious scruples on 
the propriety of this ‘“‘motion’’ nor even callinto question the 
“scripturality’’ of such a scheme, seeing the New England 
states and those in the south have said, ‘‘Go forward! Keep 
not back!’ And especially as Jethro in the wilderness ad- 
vised Moses to appoint captains over tens, captains over 
fifties, captains over hundreds, and captains over thou- 
sands. All of which is respectfully submitted to our breth- 
ren in the East and West by 

THe Epiror, * 


(e) All the vials of his scorn are poured out 
on some of the devices used to collect missionary 


* Christian Baptist, Vol. 1 (2nd edition.) pp. 229, 230. 
9 


130 THE GENESIS OF 


money, such.as missionary wheels, stalls, and 
boxes, rag societies, cent societies, etc. 


SURELY there can be no human employment in which so 
much ingenuity and fertility ofinvention are displayed, as 
the business of sponging the public of their money for mis- 
sionary purposes.._The pittance earned by the sweat of the 
brow is wrenched from the poor, the harmless rattle, 
snatched from the hand of the infant—the food arrested on 
its passage tothe mouth ofthe hungry, the sick are de- 
prived of their restoratives; and the little enjoyments that 
would serve to eke out the remnant of existence in toler- 
able ease, aretaken from those who are borne down by the 
weight of years. But this is not enough: it is not sufficient 
that all classes in society, from the highest to the lowest, 
should contribute te support the missionary in his luxury, 
and to dress out the missionary’s wife in her extravagance; 
but the very birds of the air are to be rendered subservient 
to these worse than useless purposes. The few berries pro- 
vided for their support by Him, without whose knowledge 
not a sparrow falleth to the ground, are to be added to the 
mass of plunder accumulated for the ostensible purpose of 
“educating the heathen child”’ but which is veally applied to 
disseminate the most unreasonable and unnatural sectarian 
Opinions, and to support many a worthless person who 
might be better employed in trailing a wheelbarrow through 
our streets, or in sweeping our chimneys. 4 Missionary 
Stall! Some old woman to be employed to retail split open 
melons, and plums and cherries which the birds carry off! 
Contemptible artifices! is it possible that the Omnipotent 
Ruler of the Universe, who rides upon the storm and the 
whirlwind, and holds the mighty watersin the hollow of 
his hand, can have condescended to stake the eternal happi- 
ness or misery of his creatures upon such paltry contriv- 
ances: the very thought is sacreligious. 

Reformer* 


* Christian Baptist, Vol. 1 (2nd ed.) pp. 61, 62. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 131 


3. He affects to see in all these missionary 
efforts dangers tothe New Testament form 
of charch government and tendencies to priestly 
power and corruption. 

(a) His comparison of methods of the Prot- 
estant missionary societies with those of 
Catholic missions (Compare 1, [c,] supra) 
shows this. 

(b) ‘*We have long considered,”’ says he, 
‘the various societies called Missionary, 
Bible, Sunday-School and Tract Societies, as 
great religious engines, fitted and designed for 
the predominance of the leading sectaries 
who set themselves agoing, and ultimately 
tending toa national creed and a religious es- 
tablishment.”’ 

(c) These attacks on the mission system are 
combined with his attacks on ‘‘the clergy,”’ 
‘the priesthood,’ including in these terms all 
ministers except such as have adopted his ideas, 
“‘textuaries,’’ etc. His work abounds in slurs 
representing the missionaries as grasping at 
money and power. 

(d) His comments on ‘‘A Circular Letter’’ 
(given under 2, [d] sufra) show how he shakes 
the Romish scarecrow. 


II. POINTS OF ATTACK. 


Alexander Campbell attacks foreign missions 
by attacking those interests which he sees to 
be inseparably connected with that cause. 

‘1. Ministerial Education. Although Camp- 
bell himself lectured in a Bible College in the 


ey THE GENESIS OF 


closing years of his life,* and although his pa- 
per is devoted to giving theological instruction 
in his own credal ideas, he also raises the hue 
and cry against Seminaries and Ministerial 
Education. 


(a) TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-NINE YOUNG 
CLERGYMEN ON THE WHEEL! 


The Pittsburg Recorder of November 6th, informs us 
that fifty-four Presbyteries of the General Assembly, re- 
ported at their last meeting One Hundred and Thirty-two 
Beneficiaries; that is, poor, pious youth of talents, educat- 
ed or assisted in obtaining an education by alms of the 
munificent devotees of the church. It alsoinforms us that 
the Philadelphia Education Society which holds its annual 
meeting in the city of New York, existing for five years, 
is the most powerful institution of the kind in the United 
States, excepting the American Education Society. Now 
the Luminary of July last informs us, that at the fifth an- 
niversary of this Society, one hundred and three young 
men were reported on its list of beneficiaries. The aggre- 
gate of the poor pious Presbyterian beneficiaries is TWO 
HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-NINE. 

What a blessed prospect opens to fhis Zion! ‘Thanks 
to Mammon for his pious aid to the cause of Heaven! He 
has come upto the help of the Lord against the Mighty! O, 
ye mines of silver! Ye are the streams that make glad the 
city ofour King! Flow on, ye fountains of pure metal ! 
Ye veins of grace! Ye mines of salvation! Still continue 
to gladden the hearts of the poor! Yecan raisethem from 
the dung-hill and set them among princes, even the Priests 
of Pharaoh! Hail, Zion! thy millennial glory dawns! Blow 
ye the trumpet, blow! Say unto Zion, TWO HUNDRED 
AND SEVENTY-NINE YOUNG PRIESTS COME! Yes, 


*One of my church members used to attend these lec- 
tures. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 133 


they come, meek and lowly, riding upon the alms of the 
people, the colt of the asses of Judah. Yes, and TWO 
HUNDRED MORE MIGHTY MEN, riding in chariots, 
come to thine aid! O Zion! thy Mammon is thy glory!!! 
EDITOR.* 


(b) The following i is taken from his ‘‘Review 


of a Sermon,’’ preached by the Rev. Gideon 
Blackburn, D. D.: 


His sermon is intended to proclaim that it is the duty 
of the church to prepare in her bosom pious youths for 
the gospel ministry. Now thisis really a new MeSSaLE 
from the skies, for there is not one word from Genesis to 
John, which saith that it is the duty of a church to prepare 
pious youth for the gospel ministry. This point could not 
be proven from the words of any previous embassador and 
it is unnecessary for an embassador to prove his own com- 
munications to be true. But now this reverend embassador 
informs the world that it is the duty of the church to train 
young men for the gospel ministry, and of these young 
men to make presbyters or elders. 

His text, to have been pertinent to his purpose, ought 
to have read, ‘‘When Jesus was ascended to his throne, he 
gave apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors and teachers 
supernaturally qualified for the work, and in a moment 
prepared to discharge the duties of their calling—and then 
gave orders to the churches to train up young men artifi- 
cially and mechanically, to be their successors in the man- 
ner hereinafter specified.’’ This text would have suited his 
SHOPeCE ae. pene t 

(c) The following query and answer is also 
in point : 

DID God ever call a man to any work for which he was 


not fully qualified, andin the performance of which he 
was notsuccessful ? 


*Christian Baptist, second edition, vol. 1, pp. 98. 
+Christian Baptist, second edition, Vol. 2, pp. 328, 329. 


134 THE GENESIS OF 


ANS.—No, if we except the modern preachers at home, 
and those called missionaries abroad. They say they are 
specially called, but neither their qualifications nor their 
success warrant the belief of these professions. With an 
open Bible ia my hand, I must say that God never called a 
man to any work for which he was not fully qualified and 
in the performance of which he was not successful.* 

(d) After reciting facts given by the Ameri- 
can Education Society to show the necessity of 
education, he says: 

How very different the course recommended by the Re- 
corder to enlighten the world, and that recommended by 
the Saviour and his apostles. The scheme of a learned 
priesthood chiefly composed of beneficiaries, has long 
since proved itself to be a grand device to keep men in ig- 
norance and bondage; ascheme by means of which the 
people have been shrewdly taught to put out their own 
eyes, to fetter their own feet, and to bind the yoke upon 
their own necks. From this iniquitous scheme, a knowl- 
edge of the New Testament is the only means that can set 
these people FREE.}+ 

(e) When the Bishop rests from his labors, the church, 
of which he had the oversight, by his labors, and by the 
opportunity afforded all the members of exercising their 
faculties of communication and inquiry in the public as- 
sembly, finds within itself others educated and qualified 
to be appointed tothe same good work. The church of 
the living God is thus independent of theological schools 
and colleges for its existence, enlargement, comfort, and 
perfection; for it isitself put in possession of all the means 
of education and accomplishments, if these means be 
widely used.t 

(f) The Church Missionary Society are about to estab- 
lish a Seminary for the education of missionaries. The cost ~ 


*Christian Baptist, second edition, Vol. 1, p. 154, 
+Christian Baptist, Vol. 1, pp. 46, 47. 
¢Christian Baptist, Vol. 1, p. 206. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 135, 


of the premises, buildings, furniture, etc., is expected to 
amount to nearly £10,000, or forty-four thousand four hun- 
dred and forty-four dollars.’’* 


Mr. Campbell evidently considers this a case 
of wilful waste. 

(g) The present age is an age of new invention, and of 
rapid growth. D.Ds spring upas by a magic rod, and 
more especially in this warmclimate, where gourds, camp- 
meetings, theological schools and pumpkins flourish with 
uncommon rapidity.t 


2. Home Missions, as well as foreign, are 
attacked. 

(a) Like all anti-missionaries, he seeks to 
make the needs of the home fields a club with 
which to destroy foreign missions: 

It is to be hoped that all Christians will turn their at- 
tention more to good works and to the conversion of those 
around them, and to the union of all disciples on primitive 
grounds, in order that the whole world may be brought 
under the dominion of the Root and Offspring of David. 
The religious communities of this country have long 
enough indulged in the idea of converting other nations, 
and have squandered many thousands already, as well as 
sacrificed many useful lives in the chimerical project of 
converting foreign idolaters, while millions at home de- 
mand more energies than all now employed to ameliorate 
their condition, and to accelerate the march of truth on 
its own high road throughout the earth. ‘‘Holy Father, 
may all that believe on thee through the testimony of the 
apostles, be one—that the whole world may be converted 
and persuaded that thou didst send me to be the Saviour 
of the world!’’ So spake the Lord Jesus. And who will 
not say, Amen ! Epiror.{ 


*Christian Baptist, Vol. 2, p. 156. 
*+Christian Baptist, Vol. 2, p. 292. 
{Christian Baptist, Vol. 5, p. 71. 


136 THE GENESIS OF 


(b) But he also bitterly attacks the efforts 
in the home field. 


(1) Thechurches in the Kast had much better bestow their 
charities in the support of widows, than send missionaries 
tothe West. Through the help of God wecan take care of 
ourselves. Indeed, the people have little or no confidence 
in these graduated missionaries, who receive a salary 
of $400 per annum—ride about the country, and do little or 
no good to the souls or bodies of their fellow creatures. 
We care not how many ministers, men who have the fear 
of God in their hearts, remove to the West. Such we shall 
give a hearty welcome as fellow laborers in the King- 
dom.* 


(2) Commenting on a circular letter sent out 
by the Congregational Domestic Missionary So- 
ciety from New Haven, September 16, 1823, 
and signed by Samuel Merwin, Nathaniel Tay- 
lor and Timothy Dwight, Mr. Campbell makes 
the following criticism : 

You have for your object, 1st, the spread of the gospel 
only—or 2nd, the accumulation of funds—or 3d, it isa 
mere policy, and that policy the increase of our sect, and 
your own ascendency over other sects, and the people. The 
first you allege is your only motive; butit is very much 
doubted. The second you deny but many believeit. But 
that the third comes in for a principal share in your tho- 
tive is not only too evident to deny, but is now proved by 
confessions in the foregoing circular.+ 


The full discussion covers pages 150-153 in- 
clusive. 

Other passages might be cited, some of them 
containing his keenest shafts of wit and ridi- 
cule, but these will doubtless suffice. 


*Christian Baptist, Vol. 7, pp. 88, 89. 
{Christian Baptist, Vol. 1, 152. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. We Ve 


(3) Bible Societies come in for their share of 
abuse and criticism at his hands. 

With regard to Bible Societies, they are the most spe- 
cious and plausible of all the institutions of thisage. No 
man who loves the Bible can refrain from rejoicing at its 
increasing circulation, but every Christian who under- 
stands the nature and design, the excellence and glory of 
the institution called the Church of Jesus Christ, will lament 
to see its glory transferred toa human corporation. The 
church is robbed of its character by every institution, 
merely human, that would ape its excellence and subs'i- 
tute itself in its place..... * 


III. METHODS OF ATTACK. 


These have necessarily been shown to some 
extent in the citations above. It is worthy of 
note, however, that one of his favorite methods 
isto harp on the— 

1. Expense of missionary operations as con- 
trasted with the results accomplished. 

This has been ever a favorite theme with the 
opponents of missions, but Campbell was en- 
abled to use it with greater power than any of 
his successors, because missions were then in 
their infancy. It was pre-eminently a time of 
clearing and breaking ground, of sowing seed 
and laving foundation, of planting and water- 
ing and waiting for God to give the increase. 
And during the long years of waiting for even 
the first convert, when difficulties towered 
mountain high, and the future was brightened 
only by the promises of God, how cruelly the 
enemies at home pressed the question of expense! 


*Christian Baptist, Vol. 1, p. 97. 


138 THE GENESIS OF 


(a) A number of the citations given refer to 
this point as well as to the one under which 
they were quoted. 

(b) On page 45, volume 1, he quoted from the 
‘“‘Boston Recorder” a list of the educational 
and missionary societies in Great Britian and 
America, with the amount of their income. 
This he follows by scathing comment and crit- 
icism on page 45. 

(c) Surely there can be no human employment in which 
so much ingenuity and fertility of invention are displayed, 
as the business of sponging the public out of their money 
for missionary purposes, etc. (This has been quoted in 
full under ‘‘e” on page 130 supra), 


(d) I have thought it worth while to copy a 
part of his comment on the expense list of a mis- 
sion station, taken from the sixth annual report 
of the United Foreign Missionary Society, held 
in New York May 7, 1823: 


In locking overthe expenses of the various stations, we 
find that the Seneca Mission is indeed, as the “managers”? 
say, “interesting,” if expenses can make it so. There are, 
we believe, seven persons belonging to this mission fami- 
ly, including the interpreter, (who is a white man in cos- 
tume of a native), and including the children, nineteen in 
number The following isa copy of the amount paid to 
this establishment in one year, ending March 1822, as stat- 
ed in the secretary’s account of moneys paid: 


1821. 
June 12, By Cash paid Rev. Mr. Harris’ draft 
Nos 9: cass. ene eee $ 776.79 
Do. Thos. Armstrong’s draft No. 10 45.00 
Oct. 4,, Do. Rev. T. 8S. Harris and J. Young’s 
dtalivNoy22ee po eee 648.09 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 139 


Dec. 2, Do. Messrs. Harris and Young’s draft 
ING ce Setere ete oe tena /ol ner sae «telus ecolengneter =! = $ 688.12 
Do. Thos. Armstrong’s draft No. 33. 45.00 
1822. 
Feb. 24, Do. Harris and Young’s draft No. 43 758.07 
March 1, Do. Thos. Armstrong’s draft No. 44 45.00 
$3,051.07 
These several sums were drawn for quarterly by Messrs. 
Harris and Young, the missionaries at the Seneca Station, 
and Thomas Armstrong, the interpreter, and amount, as 
the footing shows, to $3,051.07 for one year’s expenses. 
The same book from which we copy this, states, that the 
Seneca Mission was commenced in 1811, (of course it has 
been in operation twelve years), and during the /as¢t year a 
church has been formed, consisting of four Indian mem- 
bers. What the expense of this mission was during the 
first eleven years of its existence, we know not; but put- 
ting that out of the account, and taking the expense of the 
twelfth year only, which is $3,051.07, dividing it by four, 
the number of Indians who have ‘joined the church,’ and 
we have a fraction over $762.76 to each Indian ‘prought in.’ 
This, reader, is the account, as it stands in the missionary 
report. which, of course, must be taken and received as au- 
thentic. Whether the four who have joined the church are 
better than before, weare not told—of course we must infer 
they are mot—for these people always brag of all they 
have.* 

(e) The sermon on goat’s milk is too rich and 
humorous, and too well illustrates Campbell’s 
power of drying up the fountains of benevolence 
not to be giveninfull. This, though first quo- 
ted here, was really his first missile. 

A SERMON UPON GOATS. 
BY THE REV. MR. M’——D, D. D., F. R. S. 


“And thou shalt have goat's milk enough for thy food, for 
the food of thy household, and for the maintenance of thy maia- 
ens.?—Prov. xxvii:27. 


*Christian Baptist, Vol. 1, (2d edition, ) p. 79. 


140 THE GENESIS OF 


From the days of Origen, in the second century, to the 
present, it has been fashionable to spiritualize the scrip- 
tures, and to teach men that they havea meaning besides 
what is expressed, Many to this day think the scrip- 
tures have a double sense—what is said and what is meant. 
A man who could find a Spiritual meaning to Sampson’s 
bee-hive, jaw-bone,and the tailsof his three hundred foxes 
connected with firebrands, could doubtless find a spiritual 
meaning to our text. What could it be? We will sup- 
pose it to be this : 

Ist. The person addressed must mean a minister of 
modern times, to whom it is said, ‘“‘And thou shalt have 
goat’s milk enough,” &c. 

2d. His household and maidens must Signify in the 
spiritual sense, his family and domestics. 

3d. The goats must mean the non-elect, who are in the 
end to be eternally miserable, after feeding the minister 
and his family for life; according to Matthew xxv, &c. 

4th. The goat’s milk, in the spiritual sense of the text, 
which is represented as abundant, must meanthe generous 
and constant support which these ministers, their chil- 
dren and servants have received from the non-elect, or such 
as are declared to be of that number, who do so well for 
their owners here, and who are to be treated so cruelly 
hereafter. 


We will allow that the first three propositions are so 
plain that thev need no illustration, and proceed to prove 
the truth of the fourth particular—‘‘ Thou shalt have goat’s 
milk enough.” It isa fact beyond all dispute, that those 
who are considered the Unconverted or non-elect are gen- 
erally depended on for the Support of such as have for 
years been considered ministers of the gospel. The meet- 
ing housesare chiefly built with the money which helongs to 
such as are denominated goats; and were it not for this 
part of the people, what a poor condition the sheep would 
bein! It isa curiosity the manner in which the goat’s milk 
is obtained. Money is wanted to make the parson a life- 
member of the Biblie Society. The goats must be milkeq— 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 141 


and soon the ladies produce the money. A pious young man 
presents himself asone called tothe ministry, but is not able 
to obtain an honorable education at Princeton, Providence or 
Cambridge. Milk the goats is the next step. Men, women 
and children are called, and the help is stripped from them, 
and the pious young men have ‘“‘goat’s milk enough.” 

Missionaries are needed among the heathen in Vermont, 
Maine and Rhode Island. The goats are milked again and 
the missionaries spread their fame in all directions. A broth- 
er clergyman is dismissed ‘‘because no man hath hired him;”’ 
the goats are milked, and he is on a mission at twenty or 
fifty dollars per month. A mission is agreed on to Asia, 
and the goats are resorted to support the friends for 
twenty-four years. At last this fails, and what next? Mr. 
Ward appears, and tells the owners of the goats that noth- 
ing can be done unless a college is builtin Asia, and some 
of the natives made ministers. The goats are called up and 
ten thousand dollars are collected. The goats are left to 
feed on the high hills until another milking time returns, 
when their empty pails are again presented, to be replen- 
ished from the same source. 

These milking vessels are placed wherever the goats 
are likely to resort—as in the bureau, on the merchant’s 
counter, in the museum—for the purpose of milking out the 
abundance of these milch kine. They have drawn from 
the goats money, hats, shoes, stockings, shirts and gowns; 
sweetmeats and other luxuries; with missionary fields, 
corn, potatoes, cabbages, pumpkins, &c. 

All these things have been done, in addition to strip- 
ping for watch seals and the estates of old bachelors and 
maids when death shall put an end to their wants. Accord- 
ing to the modern pulpit doctrine, these poor goats are 
to be rewarded for all their milk, (no good for the elect,) 
with a portion with the devils and damned souls in eternal 
misery, where they shall see the ‘‘very elect,’’ who are fed 
upon their milk, and by it nourished and prepared for 
glory everlasting.* 


Nee 
*Christian Baptist, Vol. 1, (2nd edition,) pp. 18-20. 


142 THE GENESIS OF 


Not only, however, were the missionaries 
charged with extravagance, but with 

2. Corruption, embezzlement, dishonesty, 
speculation and stealing. 

(a) In an open letter addressed to ‘Mr. Rob- 
ert Cautious,’’ he says :* 

Our objections to the missionary plan originated from 
the conviction that it is unauthorized in the New Testa- 
ment and that, in many instances, itis a system of iniqui- 
tous peculation and speculation. I feel perfectly able to 
maintain both the one and the other of these positions. 

He then adduces as proof the instance of a 
missionary who received forty dollars for four 
Sermons preached in Pittsburg. 

(b) He relates the pleasing incident ofa missionary sent 
from Connecticut to Ohio, who made a successful specu- 
lation and who, on being asked a few years later by a 
magistrate ‘‘which was the most pleasant employment, to 
preach the gospel as a missionary, or to engage in land 
Speculations ?”’ replied, ‘‘D—n the preaching so Jong asI can : 
make more money by Speculation.’ 

Campbell seems to be ashamed of publishing 
this and warns his readers that : “To deduce a 
general conclusion from particular occurrences 
is.very bad logic.” Still his publication of the 
incident, which he claims to be of undoubted 
authenticity, could have no other object or ef- 
fect than to arouse prejudice against missions. 
But he makes a far more serious charge against 
the Serampore inissionaries. I append the ar- 
ticle in full and the editor's apology for letting 
it appear : 

(c) SERAMPORE MISSIONARIES.—The Baptist Mis- 
Sionary Society in England has at length broke silence on 


*Christian Baptist, Vol. 1, (2nd edition,) p..149, 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 143 


the subject of the missionaries at Serampore, and in their 
Magazine for July last undisguisedly express their sur- 
prise, concern and dissatisfaction at the proceedings at 
that place. The Baptist Missionary Society in England 
who sent out these very missionaries, are, in fact, as we 
stated some years ago, cut off from all participation in the 
property and in the management of the concerns at Seram- 
pore. The immense property at that place is wholly in the 
possession and under the control of the Serampore mis- 
sionaries; and this event was brought about, or rather this 
seizure of the property was made at the very time when 
the Baptist Missionary Society in England had no other idea 
but that these missionaries were acting merely as trustees 
forthe society in England. These great men must now be 
wealthy enough. The ten thousand dollars obtained in this 
country a few years ago must addsomething to their funds, 
and might serve to show, we should suppose, the folly of 
giving money to missionary beggars under the pretence of 
converting the heathen. How many other ‘‘pious’’ and 
“renowned” missionaries will play as successfula gameas 
those at Serampore, time must show. We hope the editor 
of the New York Commercial Advertiser, on seeing the 
statement made by the Baptist Missionary Society in Eng- 
land, will recall some of his abusive epithets against us 
for publishing only the truth, and that of such a kind as 
the public were entitled to know. 

It seems from the statement given, that since the seizure 
of the property at Serampore, the London Baptist Mission- 
ary Society has used every effort to obtain some participa- 
tion in the property or in the management of the concerns 
at Serampore. But while the Serampore missionaries 
have all along been calling on the society in England for 
money, and have actually obtained considerable sums, 
they have been exceedingly vigilant and careful not to al- 
low the society in England the least right, title or author- 
ity with respect to anything at Serampore.- Such a state 
of things could not long be endured. During Dr. Marsh- 
man’s last visit to England, it was proposed as a last re- 


144 THE GENESIS OF 


sort by the London Society, for ‘‘Doctors” Carey and Marsh- 
manto have the whole management of things at Seram- 
pore during their lives, reserving to the society only the 
nomination of their successors. ‘‘The consideration of this 
proposal,” say the committee of the London Society,‘‘and 
the general subject, occupied several days of most anxious 
deliberation, and repeated efforts were made to prevent 
the painful issue to which the discussions were apparently 
tending. But as every proposal made by the committee 
was declined by Mr. Marshman, they were constrained to 
yield to a separation, which their present communications 
with Dr. Marshman convinced them had actually been 
made, and which it was manifestly determined to main- 
tain. The committee were fully aware of the unfavorable 
impression which might be produced, and deeply sympa- 
thized in the painful feelings which the event might occa- 
sion; but they also felt that they could not consistently 
continue to vote the funds with which they were entrusted 
to a body asserting entire independence.” 

It is not likely that the Serampore missionaries will 
be able to get any more money from the Baptists in Eng- 
land. They are rich enough without it, and live more in 
the style of princes than humble missionaries of Christ. 
If such has been the termination of those who first engaged 
in moderna missionary enterprises, and whose praises have 
been sounded over the four quarters of the globe, what can 
be expected of those who have succeeded them since mis- 
sionary undertakings have become more popular, and 
whose motives consequently for engaging in them are 
more questionable. 

REFORMER. 

(I never was opposed, in principle or practice, to any 
scriptural means of converting the heathen. I expressed 
many doubts in the first volume of this work on the pro- 
priety and utility of modern missionary schemes. I have 
said little on thisssubject for the last three years, but I 
have thought a good deal upon the subject. I yet cannot 
flatter myself into any sanguine expectations from all 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 145 


these devices. I take no pleasure in recording such disas- 
ters as the above; but I could not do justice to the signs 
of the times unless I gave the above extract. I make not 
such incidentals, however, a test of truth, nor do I op- 
pose the modern devices because of such mismanage- 
ment.) 

Ep. C. B. 


But the greatest weapon of Mr. Campbell’s 
attack was his 

(3) Terrific Power of Ridicule. 

(2) Compare his accounts of means-of raising 
money and his sermon on goat’s milk already 
quoted. 

(b) His interlarded comments on an article 
copied by The Reformer from The Watchman 
on ‘‘Madagascar”’ are rich with humor and 
bristling with satire. It is too long to quote 
here. 

(c) His burlesque of the ordination of the 
‘*Missionaries to Burmah’’ is too excruciatingly 
funny and was too effective not to be repub- 
lished. 


FrRoM THE LATTER Day LUMINARY, July, 1823. 


MISSIONARIES TO BURMAH. 


On Wednesday, the 11th of June, at Utica, New York, 
the Rev. Jonathan Wade and his consort were set apart as 
missionaries to the Burman Empire, by a Committee of 
the Board of Managers of the Baptist General Convention. 
An interesting sermon was delivered on the occasion by the 
Rev. Nathaniel Kendrick from Il Timothy 2:10—‘‘ Therefore 
T endure all things for the elects’ sake, that they also may at- 
tain the salvation which ts in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.” 
Rev. Alfred Bennett \ed in offering up the consecrating 
prayer. Rev. Daniel Hascall gave Mr. Wade an appropri- 
ate charge, and the Rev. Joel W. Clark gave him the right 


hand of fellowship,‘‘that he should go to the heathen.” Rev. 
10 


146 THE GENESIS OF 


John Peck addressed Mrs. Wade, and Rev. Llon Galusha 
gave her the right hand of fellowship. Rev. Elyah F. Wil- 
“ey offered the concluding prayer. The services were per- 
formed in Rey. Mr. Atkin’s meeting house. The day was 
fine, and the assemblage was very large, and proved by 
their fixed and silent attention to the services, how much 
they felt for the world that lieth in wickedness ; and by a 
collection of $86.23 taken on the spot, they showed a wil- 
lingness to sharein the pleasure and expense of spreading 
the gospel in all the earth. 

Mr. Wade is a young man, and a native of the State of 
New York. He received his classical and theological edu- 
cation in the theological seminary at Hamilton. He ap- 
peared before the committee a man of good sense, of ar- 
dent piety, and understandingly led by the Spirit of God to 
the work in which he has now engaged. Mrs. Wadeis from 
a respectable family in Hamilton, Madison county—-daugh- 
ter of Deacon Lapham. Her early piety and active zeal in 
the cause of her Redeemer, has encouraged the hope that 
she will be eminently useful in the cause of missions with 
her husband. 

NoTrE BY THE EpITor :--How accordant is the language 
and spirit of the above to the following passage from the 
13th chapter of the Acts of the Apostles: ‘‘On Wednesday 
the 11th of June, A. D., 44, the Rev. Saulus Paulus and the 
Rev. Joses Barnabas were set apart as missionaries to the 
Gentiles dispersed throughout the world, by a committee 
of the Board of Managers of the Baptist General Conven- 
tion, met in the city of Antioch. An interesting sermon 
was delivered on the occasion by the Rev. Simon Niger, 
from Isaiah 42:4 The isles shall watt for his law.’ The 
Rev. Lucius of Cyrene, led in offering up the consecrating 
prayer. Rev. Manaen gave Mr. Paulus and his compan- 
ion (Mr. Barnabas) an appropriate charge, and the Rev. 
John Mark gave them the right hand of fellowship, ‘‘that 
they should go to the heathen.’’ ‘The Rev. Lucius of Cy- 
rene offered up the concluding prayer. The services were 
performed in the Rev. Mr. Simon Niger’s meeting house. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 147 


The day was fine, and the assemblage was very large, and 
proved by their fixed and silent attention to the services, 
how inuch they felt for the world that lieth in wickedness; 
and by a collection of $86.25, they showed a willingness to 
aid the Rev. Mr. Paul and the Rev. Mr. Barnabas in carry- 
ing the gospei to the heathen. : 

Mr. Paulus is a young man, and a native of the city of 
Tarsus ; he received his classical and theological education 
in the theological seminary in Jerusalem. He appeared be- 
fore the committee a man of good sense, of ardent piety, and 
understandingly led by the Spirit of God to the work in 
which he has now engaged. 

It is then plain that the above notification is just in the 
spirit and style of this passage from the 13th chapter of 
the Acts. But in the common translation the original loses 
much of its aptitude and beauty, for lo! it reads thus: 
‘‘Now there was in the Church that was at Antioch certain 
prophets and teachers; as Barnabas, and Simon that was 
called Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene, and Manaen which had 
been brought up with Herod the tetrarch, and Saul. As 
they ministered to the Lord, and fasted, the Holy Ghost 
said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work where- 
unto I have called them. And when they had fasted and 
prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them 
away. 

It is much to be desired that the Baptists in the West- 
ern country will not imitate these precedents of pompous 
vanity, so consecrated in the east ; and that they will rath- 
er cherish the spirit and copy the style of that much de- 
spised little volume ca led the New Testament. Then we 
know they will remember that it isspoken by our Lord,’ Be 
not called Rabbi,’’ or Reverend. Then they will confess 
that many things of high reputaticn inthis age are an 
abomination in the sight of God.* 


Ridicule is the hardest thing in the world to 
answer. Witness the popularity of Voltaire, 


*Christian Baptist, Vol. 1, pp. 43-45. 


148 THE GENESIS OF 


Ingersoll and other infidels. Alexander Camp- 
bell found it a weapon no less effective against 
the truth than did Voltaire, or than Ingersoll 
has since that time. Itis a weapon mighty to 
the pulling down of strongholds, but as Eli 
Perkins justly claims in his ‘‘Philosophy of 
Wit and Humor,’’ it is a weapon only used 
against truth. 


JAW 


It will have been noticed by the most casual 
reader that Campbell always claims to be in 
favor of what he considered New Testament 
missions. Let us now see what he considers 
necessary to a missionary movement on New 
Testament plans: 

1. Christian Unity is made a condition pre- 
cedent to missionary endeavor. : 

(a) In the preface to Vol. I, page 10 of 
‘Christian Baptist,’’ he says: ‘‘To convert 
the heathen to the popular Christianity of 
these times would be an object of no great con- 
sequence, as the popular Christians themselves, 
for the most part, require to be converted to 
the Christianity of the New Testament.”’ 

(b) Again, on page 70 of Vol. II, ‘‘Christian 
Baptist,’’ he states this position with such un- 
equivocal clearness that it is impossible to be 
misunderstood. 


But the conversion of the world is planned and ordered 
by the will of heaven to be dependent on the unity of the 
disciples, as well as this unity dependent upon the apostles’ 
testimony. An attempt toconvert pagans and Mohame- 
tans to believe that Jesus is the Son of God, and the sent of 
the Father, until Christians are united, is also an attempt 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 149 


to frustrate the power of the Messiah, to subvert his throne 
and government. There are unalterable laws in the moral 
world asin the natural. There are also unalterable laws 
in the government ofthe moral and religious world, asin 
the government of the natural. Those laws cannot, by hu- 
man interference, be set aside or frustrated—we might as 
reasonably expect that Indian corn will grow in the open 
fields in the midst of the frost and snows of winter, as that 
pagan nations can be converted to Jesus Christ till Christ- 
ians are united through the belief of the apostles’ testimony 
We may force corn to grow by artificial means in the depth 
of winter, but it is not like the corn of August. So maya 
few disciples be made in pagan lands by such means inthe 
moral empire as those by which cornis made to grow in 
winter in the natural empire, but they are not like the disci- 
ples of primitivetimes before sectarian creeds came into 
being. It isenough to say, on this topic, that the Saviour 
made the unity of the disciples essential to the conviction 
of the world; and he that attempts it independent of this 
essential, sets himself against the wisdom and plans of 
heaven, and aims at overruling the dominion and govern- 
ment of the Great King.” 


2. He maintains that the missionaries must 
be endowed with power to work miracles. This 
view he fully sets forth in an article in the first 
volume of the ‘‘Christian Baptist,’’ entitled 
‘“The Capital Mistake of Modern Missionary 
Schemes.”’ This article is too long to quote in 
full, but the following copious extracts are 
given: 

In order that this (i.e. the capital mistake of modern 
missionary schemes,) may appear as plain as possible, we 
shall take a brief view of the two grand missions insti- 
tuted by God. The first was that of Moses and Joshua. 
Moses was the great apostle from God tothe Israelites in 
Egypt...After forty years (in Midian) the Lord appeared 
to him and commissioned him as his missionary to Egypt. 


150 © THE GENESIS OF 


Moses from his own experience on a former occasion, dis- 
covered that something more was necessary to his success 
than good professions and good speeches; he, therefore, an- 
swered and said, ‘‘But behold they will net believe in me, 
nor hearken unto my voice; for they willsay, the Lord hath 
not appeared unto thee.’? The Lord immediately authorized 
and empowered him to work miracles. He now goes forth, 
inconjunction with his brother Aaron, clothed with proper 
authority, confirming his testimony with signs and won- 
ders, and effects the deliverance of the Israelites from ig- 
norance and bondage... He brought them out, after he had 
shewn wonders and signs in the land of Egyptjand in the 
Red Sea, and in the wilderness forty years. ... Signs and 
wonders accompanied the ministry of Joshua until he placed 
the tribes of Israel in their own land and divided it to them 
by lot... Without pausing on the mission of John the Bap- 
tist to introduce the Christian era, which was also authen- 
ticated by signs and wonders attendant on his conception 
and birth, and which were noised abroad throughout all 
Judea, whereby his testimony was confirmed unto the peo- 
ple; we proceed to the second in order of time, but in fact 
the first grand mission to which all others were subservi- 
ent; we mean the Father sending his own Son into the 
world as his great apostle or missionary and the Son’s 
sending his missionaries to perfect this grand mission. 
We need not stop here to show that signs and wonders ac- 
companied his preaching, as every Christian, on the evi- 
dence of these signs and wonders, receives him as God’s 
Messiah, the Saviour ofthe world. But how did he send 
forth his missionaries? .. . ‘Jesus called unto him his 
twelve disciples, and gave them power against unclean 
spirits to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness 
and disease.’’ These he commanded to go to the lost sheep 
of the house of Israel, and to preach the approaching reign 
of heaven, and toconfirm it by miracles, ‘‘heal the sick, 
cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out demons; freely 
ye have received, freely give.’? The seventy disciples who 
were sent out by the Messiah to go before his face. . were 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 151 


sent in the same manner, empowered to confirm their tes- 
timony by signs and wonders. See Luke 10. The apostles 
in the last commission, were sent to all the world; but were 
prohibited, in the accompanying instructions, from com- 
mencing their operations, until they should be endued with 
a power from on high. Thus all the missionaries sent from 
heaven, were authorized and empowered toconfirm their 
doctrines with signs and wonders sufficient to awe opposi- 
tion, to subdue the deepest rooted prejudices, and to sat- 
isfy the most inquisitive of the origin of their doctrine. 
After Pentecost their powers were enlarged and new signs 
added... Those spiritual gifts continued until the gospel 
was preached to all the world, Jews and Gentiles, and until 
churches were planted in all nations. Then they ceased. 
Why? Doubtless, because in the eyes of Omniscience, they 
were no longer necessary. The missionary work was done. 
The gospel had been preached unto all nations before the 
end of the apostolicage. The Bible, then, gives us no idea 
of a missionary without the power of working miracles. 
Miracles and missionaries are inseparably connected in the’ 
New Testament... From these plain and obvious factsand 
considerations, itis evident that it is a capital mistake to 
suppose that missionaries in heathen lands, without the 
power of working miracles, can succeed in establishing the 
Christian religion. If it was necessary for the first mis- 
sionaries to possess them, it isas necessary for those of our 
time who go to pagan lands to possess them. . . Is then, the 
attempt to convert the heathen by means of modern mis- 
sionaries, an unauthorized and a hopeless one? It seems 
to be unauthorized, and, if so, then it is a hopeless one. 


V. CAMPBELL’S MISSIONARY SCHEME. 


This is presented in language of exquisite 
beauty, although he makes no attempt to carry 
out his own suggestion or to put in operation 
forces that will carry it out. His plan is to 
transport an entire church to some heathen land, 


152 THE GENESIS OF 


where purely by the force of their example they 
would convert the surrounding heathen to 
Christ. 


The New Testament. .. teaches us that the association 
called the church of Jesus Christ, isin propria forma, the 
only institution of God left on earth to illuminate and re- 
form the world... When spiritual men, i.e. men having 
spiritual gifts, or as now termed, miraculous gifts, were 
withdrawn, this institution was left on earth, as the grand 
scheme of heaven, to enlighten and reform the world.... 
The church of the living God is therefore styled the pz/lar 
and support of the truth. The Christian religion isa social 
religion, and can be exhibited to the full conviction of the 
world, only when it appears in this social character. 


He then shows how the apostles formed the 
church and left it by its doctrine and example 
to Christianize the world. But men’s ignorance 
and ambition have been such that they have 
perverted the New Testament simplicity so 
that Campbell can say to them: 


The Christian name has been through your crimes blas- 
phemed among the heathen... .Yes, indeed, so blasphemed 
so disgraced, so vilified, that amongst those pagans that 
have heard of it, the term Christian denotes everything 
that is hateful and impious. Consequently there can be no 
hope for the conversion of the pagan nations until the 
Christians return to the ancient model delineated in the 
New Testament; and until they keep the ordinances as de- 
livered to them by the apostles. .. Then suppose a Christian 
church were to be placed on the confines of a heathen land, 
as some of them must inevitably be, the darkness of pa- 
ganism will serve, asa shade ina picture, toexhibit the 
lustre of Christianity... Ifin the present day and among, 
those who talk so much of a missionary spirit, there could 
be found such a society, though it were composed of but 
twenty willing to emigrate to some heathen land, where 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 153 


they would support themselves like the natives, wear the 
same garb, adopt the country as their own, and profess 
nothing like the missionary project; Should such a society. 
sit down and hold forth in word and deed the saving truth, 
not deriding the gods nor the religion of the natives, but 
allowing their own works and example to speak for their 
religion, and practicing as above hinted; we are persuaded 
that, in process of time, a more solid foundation for the 
conversion ot the natives would be laid, and more actual 
success resulting, than from all the missionaries employed 
for twenty-five years. ...* 


(1) It is seen that this plan assumes— 

(a) That the gospel was preached to all the 
world in the first century. 

(b) That this exhausts the great Commission, 
as is proved:by the cessation of miraculous gifts. 
This is the fundamental hardshell position. 

(c) That now, only the church and not the 
individual can engage in missionary activity and 
the church can engage in it only by example. 

(2) This position ignores— 

(a) The obligation to successive genera- 
tions. 

(b) The fact that ‘‘John (the Baptist) did no 
miracle." 

(c) The influence of the Bible asa mission- 
ary agent. 

(d) The command to Timothy, ‘‘to do the 
work of an evangelist.’ 

In short, while claiming the necessity of fol- 
lowing the New Testament, it demands a dif- 
ferent. method of procedure now for converting 
the world than was used then. That was ad- 


*Christian Baptist, Vol. 1, (2nd edition) pp. 41-43. 


154 THE GENESIS OF 


mittedly done by individuals as well aschurches. 
But it is demanded that this be done by 
churches only. 

The effect of such an evasion of duty and of 
such attacks as he made on those who were 
attempting something for Christ and the lost 
world, can be briefly, but clearly, shown by 
extracts from a letter of remonstrance ad- 
dressed to Campbell and published by him in 
the ‘‘Christian Baptist.’”’ The signature is 
not printed. 


‘“...TLregret exceedingly the opposition you have made 
to the missionary and Bible Society cause. It has greatly 
injured your usefulness and put into the hands of your Pai- 
d>o-Baptist opposers a weapon to break the heads of the 
Baptists. .. My dear sir, you have begun wrong if your ob- 
ject is reformation. Never attack the principle which multi- 
plies the number of Bibles, or which promotes the preaching 
of the gospel or the support of it, if you desire Christian- 
ity to prevail. AsI informed you when here, I repeat it 
again, your opposition to a preached gospel, to the preach” 
ers and Bible societies, secure to you the concurrence of the 
covetous, the ignorant, the prayerless and Christless Chris- 
tians. Should they have had any religion, they cease to 
enjoy it as soon as they embrace vour views; at the same 
time you wound the hearts of the zealous and devout 
Christians. These are not the expressions of one who has 
an interest in defending the ‘‘Kingdom of the clergy,”’ or 
the hireling system, but of one who, like yourself, has been 
providentially thrown into the possession of a competency 
of the good things of this world. Iam as much as you 
can be for the correction of all errors, but in making the 
correction, or in aiming at it—spare, I beseech you, the 
grand means that God has employed and is still using for 
extending Christ's kingdom—I mean a preached gospel. 
I agree with you in the use and operation of every other 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 155 


mean in its proper place; but I must insist on is, that the 
preaching ofthe gospel is a most powerful one... 
Iam yours etc..—-——_—————* 


All the quotations given from Mr. Campbell 
have been taken from his writings while he still 
claimed to be a Baptist and gave his paper that 
name. 


*Christian Baptist, Vol. 50, (2nd edition), pp. 204, 205. 


156 THE GENESIS OF 


CHAPTER. Vit. 


PROGRESS AND SPIRIT OF OPPOSI- 
TION TO MISSIONS. 


The stream of anti-mission sentiment can be 
traced back to the source already mentioned, 
1. e., the writings and influence of Daniel Par- 
ker and Alexander Campbell. Daniel Parker’s 
influence has been great in southern Illinois, 
Indiana, Tennessee and Kentucky, especially 
in the last named State. He sometimes made 
long journeys at his own expense to fight in 
church and association the mission cause. In 
reference to the effects of Mr. Campbell’s 
teaching, I can give no better idea than to 
quote Dr. Spencer, who alone among Baptist 
historians has recognized the tremendous part 
played by Mr. Campbell in this arena. * 

The effects of these teachings were felt as far as the 
“Christian Baptist’ was circulated, and nowhere morethan 
among Baptists of Kentucky. The preachers who had hith- 
erto received but a small pittance from their charges, were 
further reduced in their resources of living. The friends 
of education were discouraged in their endeavors to erect 
acolleze. The Baptist Missionary societies, that started 


* Dr. Spencer is my chief authority forall matters relating 
to Kentucky. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 157 


under such auspicious circumstances, were dwarfed, and 
ultimately perished. The ministers were brought into dis- 
repute among those who most needed the restraints of 
their teaching, and practical benevolence was well nigh de- 
stroyed in the churches, at least, so far as any effort to 
spread a knowledge of the gospel was concerned. It re- 
quired the labors of thirty years to bring the Baptist 
ehurches of Kentucky upto the standard of Christian be- 
nevolence, to which they had attained in 1816, and a con- 
siderable fraction of them continued their downward 
course, in this respect, thirty years longer.* 


Prior to 1830, the Licking Association of 
Kentucky adopted the policy of Mr. Campbell 
in regard to missions, benevolent societies and 
theological education, but rejected his theology. 
In the meantime, of course, Mr. Campbell had 
been developing his theology in its more well- 
known forms and laying the foundation for a 
new denomination. In Kentucky, by 1830, there 
was a definite separation between the Baptists 
and the Disciples, as they called themselves. 
The remnant of the one-time strong Arminian 
element among the Baptists had gone with the 
Disciples. But the fact that this Arminianism 
was made prominent prevented many of those 
among the Baptists who shared Mr. Campbell’s 
views in regard to missionary operations, Bible 
distribution and theological education from join- 
ing his ‘‘Disciples.’”” These were left among 
the Baptists to cause yet further division. The 
anti-missionaries thus-left behind were not 
agreed among themselves. The larger element, 


*Spencer’s History of Kentucky Baptists, Vol. 1, pp. 593, 
594, 


158 THE GENESIS OF 


represented by Licking, Red River and other 
Associations, was decidedly antinomian in its 
doctrine. This antinomian taction was itself di- 
vided on the Two-Seeds doctrine of Parker and 
afterward on theresurrection. The other divi- 
sion of theanti-missionaries followed Dr. Andrew 
Fuller’s interpretation of the doctrines of grace, 
but ‘‘opposed all human societies’’ for carrying 
the gospel. The number of these anti-mission- 
aries left was about 7,000; their loss in numbers 
would have been seriously felt, but the power 
of the church to recuperate would have been 
greatly strengthened had they gone out with 
the rest of Mr. Campbell’s ‘‘Disciples.”” In 1831 
efforts were revived to have a ‘‘General Meet- 
ing.’’ Dr. Noel was the chief mover in this enter- 
prise. It was, of course, bitterly opposed by the 
anti-missionaries; but on December 11, 1831,aso- 
ciety of 153 members was formed at Frankfort, 
Kentucky, styled ‘‘The Frankfort Association, 
auxiliary to the Kentucky Baptist Convention 
(expected to be instituted).’’. This resulted in 
the organization of the Kentucky Baptist State 
Convention at Bardstown, March 29th, 1832. 
The attempt of this body to defend a theory of 
subordination in the ministry, or episcopacy, 
enabled the anti-missionaries to destroy it. 
Their success in this matter encouraged them 
in their intolerance so that the friends of benev- 
olent societies soon came to regard themselves 
as fortunate if they could effect a compromise 
in the churches and associations of Kentucky 
on the ground that giving, or not giving, shall 
be no bar to fellowship. This statement is 
still found in many old church and associational 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 159 


records. For the next ten years, i. e., until 1840, 
the anti-missionaries flourished as the green bay 
tree and succeeded in having a number of breth- 
ren and preachers excluded from their churches 
for giving to or advocating the claims of mis- 
sions. The organization of the Baptist General 
Association brought the matter to a crisis. 
This body was organized in 1837. The enemies 
of the General Association in both churches and 
district associations forced the matter to a vote 
and either excluded the missionaries, if they had 
a majority, or, if not, went off and set up house- 
keeping for themselves, under the designations 
of “Old,’’ ‘‘Old School,”’ ‘‘Primitive,’’ ‘‘Pre- 
destinarian,” ‘“‘Original,’’ ‘‘Particular,”’ “‘Reg- 
ular,’’ and in one small association, ‘‘Anti- 
Missionary.” To all of these terms they affixed 
the word ‘‘Baptist.”’ ‘These all continued the 
same attack in the same spirit, renewing the 
onslaught with fearful bitterness during the 
financial panic of 1842. The division was com- 
plete by the year 1850. The anti-missionary 
faction had all along opposed protracted meet- 
ings and all other efforts to bring sinners to 
Christ, and hence, have never since the time 
of their separation, enjoyed a revival of any 
considerable extent. Spencer gives these sta- 
tistics for the year 1850: 

The anti-missionaries had gathered themselves into 
twenty-five smaJl associations, embracing 266 churches 
and 9,476 members. Of these, about three-fourths did not 
differ from the Missionary Baptists, except in the single 
item of forming and contributing to benevolent societies. 
The other fourth were pretty evenly divided into Two- 
Seeders, Hyper-Calvinists, and Anti-Resurrectionists. The 


160 THE GENESIS OF 


main body of the denomination com prised forty-three 
associations, 757 churches, and 65,489 members. There were 
at this period in Kentucky, altogether, 68 Baptist associa- 
tions, comprising 1,023 churches and 74,965 members. * 


I have not been able to secure a complete his- 
tory of this period among the Baptists of North 
Carolina, although the anti-missionary spirit 
was quite strong there, and seems to have 
spread into that State from Tennessee and 
Kentucky. It is certain that Mr. Campbell’s 
anti-missionary followers early organized 
themselves there. The following letter or rather 
extract from a letter was printed in ‘The 
Christian Baptist’’ of December 4th, 1826: 


I have before me a letter received from a Baptist preach- 
er in Wake county, North Carolina, stating that nine 
churches of the Raleigh Baptist Association, have rent 
themselves from that association in consequence of the an- 
noyance they have met with from missionary schemes and 
missionary beggars. They call themselves the ‘Reformed 
Baptist Churches.”’ Ialso saw a few day s since a respect- 
able Baptist preacher from the Neuse Baptist Association, 
who stated that he thought there were as many as fifteen 
churches in that association, ready to separate from the 
association for the same reasons. He also stated that one 
church in the Kehukee Association had pointedly declared 
against the missionary and money-begging system.+ 


As a general rule, however, the hyper-Cal- 
vinism of the anti-missionaries in North Caro- 
lina was enough stronger than their hatred of 
human organizations for spreading the gospel, 
to hold them in the Baptist ranks until some 


*Spencer: History of Kentucky Baptists, pp. 694, 695. 
}Requoted from Spencer’s History of Kentucky Baptists, 
p- 609. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 161 


years after the Campbellite split. The same 
intolerance was displayed there as in Kentucky, 
necessitating finally the same division, although 
the missionaries bore long and patiently with 
the violence and unfairness of their anti-mis- 
sionary brethren. The formation of the North 
Carolina State Convention was effected by a 
comparatively small number of the missionary 
brethren, but eventually captured the State for 
the missionary cause. 

In Alabama the story is much the same. 
The following quotation from Hosea Holcombe, 
warning the Alabama Baptists from following 
the example of the North Carolina anti-mis- 
sionary brethren, isa sufficient indication that 
Campbells’ influence against missions was felt 
in Alabama also: 

Is it for Baptists then to oppose missions, to decry the 
Bible ana tract societies, to proscribe colleges and theolog- 
ical seminaries ? Baptists of all men in the world ought to 
be foremost in these enterprises. Everything which con- 
tributes to spread light among mankind will hasten the tri- 
umph of our principles. It is a source of surprise and sor- 
row that there are men who call themselves Baptists, and 
who are nevertheless opposed to all these exertions. Let 
them come forth as they are now doing like the “Kehukee 
Association” and the “‘ Reformed Churches,” the sooner they 
disclose their true character the better. Let the line be 
drawn distinctly between the friends and the enemies of 
missions. * 

At the beginning of the mission controversy 
Alabama was very sparsely settled. In fact, 
it only received the name of Alabama in 1817. 
There was some difference of sentiment among 


* Holcombe’s History of Baptists of Alabama, p. 88 
all 


162 THE GENESIS OF 


the early settlers. Some of them held that the 
command of our Lord as given in the Great 
Commission must be obeyed by the churches 
by sending men to preach the gospel to the des- 
titute; others greatly objected to this as being 
an attempt to thwart the will of God by secur- 
ing the salvation of those whom he had decreed 
to be damned from before the foundation of the 
world. In time these differences became more 
marked and the work of disintegration early be- 
gan. The inconsistency of some of the mis- 
sionary Baptists, and the firm dogmatic convic- 
tions of the anti-missionaries helped the divi- 
sion along. As usual, the attempt to organizea 
State Convention brought the matter to a head, 
and the anti-missionaries took the field against 
their missionary brethren. 

There come periods in the histories of all causes which af- 
fordan opportunity for petty leadership. More ambitious 
than righteous, acertain class of malcontents hampered 
by their own pride and flattered by their vanity, placed 
themselves in the lead of such discordant elements as they 
could rally, inorder to oppose the work projected by the 
Convention. Fora long period the forces which at last broke 
forth in open revolt against missionary effort, had been 
slowly gathering. The occasion had not before arisen 
when they could be so pronounced, and being so, excite so 
much attention and work such great damage. The advanced 
position taken by the Convention in the appointment 
of missionaries was the signal for the would-be leaders to 
sally forth in opposition. The neglect previously exer- 
cised by the pastors or preachers in the State, with re- 
spect to the development of the members of the churches, 
furnished these opposers with a club with which to cudgel 
the head of a missionary convention. This indifference 
to development was now bearing fruit, and it was bitter 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 163 


fruit to the pioneer missionary; for everywhere he went 
he encountered more or less obstruction. This opposition 
was, perhaps, more pronounced in the northern and cen- 
tral portions of the State than elsewhere. In the first men- 
tioned region it showed itself, first of all, by a marked in- 
difference ; but this soon took on the form of active oppo- 
sition. In the Alabama Association, under the lead- 
ership of such men as Rev. Wm. Jones, the opposition was 
severe. ....At the time about which we write he was a 
turbulent element among the churches in the central and 
southern portions of the State. It wasat his instigation 
that there was submitted to the Alabama Association in 
1825 this declaration from the Breastwork Church, Butler 
county. The following extract from the record shows the 
spirit of the author and of those in sympathy with him: 

‘“Breastwork Church petitioned in her letter that this 
Association take into consideration the propriety, or im- 
propriety, and make decision thereon of a declaration 
made by thatchurch, declaring an uncommunion fellow- 
ship with the Baptist State Conventions, theological 
schools, Bible societies, tract societies, and all churches 
that hold members of such societies in fellowship with 
them.’’ The scheme happily failed of its purpose. The As- 
sociation refused to consider the petition, and wisely dis- 
posed of it by laying it upon the table. But it was the 
gage of battle. It became the slogan of certain officious 
preachers who zealously fomented trouble as they found 
opportunity. * 

The churches and associations gave up their 
time to trivial discussions on foot-washing, tem- 
perance and kindred topics, enlivening their 
meetings by diatribes against their missionary 
brethren. The missionaries made the usual 
mistake of trying toremain in harmony with 
their anti-missionary brethren, and pleaded in 


*Riley’s History of the Baptists of Alabama, pp. 43-45, 


164 THE GENESIS OF 


vain for a spirit of toleration. Riley says that 
“every step of progress was resisted by a people 
who glorified in their ignorance, and regarded 
with complacent satisfaction their indispo- 
sition to activity in church life.” The follow- 
ing quotations taken from the speeches of two 
of the prominent opponents of missions wil] 
show the gentle Christian spirit and chaste 
language with which the Hardshells endeavored 
to dissuade their missionary brethren : 


Mr. /. W. Richards of Chambers County :—I have 
known some preachers who at first thought all benevolent 
institutions were wrong but the Foreign Missions; and 
after a while they would receive another trait of the beast 
as right, and so on, until they would receive all but the 
tail, (Temperance Societies ;) and ¢hat they would oppose 
with all their might for a while, but finding it was conrect-— 
ed with the body, they would swallow that. I will tell you, 
my brother, what it makes me think of: it is just like a 
snake trying to swallow a squirrel. It will begin at its 
head and swallow that first, and so on untilit comesto the 
tail. Then it tries every stratagem to vet rid of swallow- 
ing the tail; but finding it is connected with the body, it 
must either vomit all back or take down the tail, although 
averse to it ; forif they vomit up the body and head, they 
will be laughed at for saying and contending that these 
things are right. 

Mr. A. Keaton, of Green County :—Do not forget the 
enemy, (missionaries) bear them in mind ; the howling de- 
structive wolves, the ravenous dogs, and the filthy and 
their numerous whelps. By a minute observation and the 
consultation of the sacred, never failing descriptive chart, 
even their physiogomy in dress, mein and carriage, and 
many other indented, indelible, descriptive marks, too te- 
dious at present to write. The wolfish smell is enough to 
alar.n, tocreate suspicion, and to ascertain ; the dog’s 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 165 


teeth are noted, and the wolves for their peculiar and 
distinct howl, etc., etc.—See Primitive Baptist.* 

Mr. Holcombe gives the following -vivid de- 
scription of a scene at one of the associations in 
which the controversy was in progress: 

To undertake to describe a scene which we witnessed 
in the Flint River Association, would be the most painful; 
in truth, it beggars description. There were some of the 
most pious, humble, respectable and intelligent brethren, 
who most affectionately and earnestly besought their anti- 
brethren to suffer them to do as they felt bound in con- 
science to do, as they would with their own, and not let 
those things be a bar to Christian fellowship. They en- 
treated, they pled by the mercies of God—by the love of 
the Saviour, and by the joys of heaven ; they wept—tears 
flowed ; they cried to heaven—heaven smiled! But the 
adamantine hearts of the anti-brethren were not touched; 
they were apparently as hard as the nether millstone. Not- 
withstanding all this, the missionary party still clave to 
them, hoping to win them over to the truth; yet it wasev- 
ident they had no well-grounded hope, for the antis were 
determined and inflexible. Elder William Crutcher stood 
at their head, who appeared to be really sincere. Two 
years after this, the separating line was drawn, and the 
associations divided.+ 

Mr. Holcombe has the following footnote on 
the above : 

We have been credibly informed by a worthy brother that 
a Baptist minister in the State of Georgia saic, that ‘ifan 
angel was tocome down from heaven, and declare the 
missionary cause was of God, he would not believe it!’—he 
immediately lost his speech, and remained in that deplora- 
ble situation until he died. 


* Holcombe’s History of Baptists in Alabama, pp. 90, 91. 
The quotation from the Primitive Baptist isan exact re- 
production, both as to the grammar and the punctuation. 

+ Holcombe’s History of the Baptists in Alabama, p. 93. 


166 THE GENESIS OF 


I give this footnote for what it is worth. It 
was hearsay evidence with Mr. Holcombe, and 
is no less so with me. 

Dr. Riley so well describes the conditions 
preparatory to and during the final division 
that I can do no better than to quote at length 
his words : 


The anti-missionary elements had become more turbu- 
lent and had never ceased to harass and menace as oppor- 
tunity offered. The spirit of persecution waxed fiercer still 
as the months moved on. Repeated overtures from the 
conservative Baptists were spurned. The anti-mission- 
ary elements demanded that the matter of missions be 
wiped out entirely from thechurches. They insisted upon 
the retention of an uneducated ministry. They demanded 
compliance with perverted notions of doctrine. They 
proudly boasted of their ignorance. They gloried in that 
which others disdained. The consciences of others counted 
for naught if their own notions, springing from ignor- 
ance, were only respected. The conservative branch ofthe 
Baptist family had foreborne, because they felt that they 
could afford to do so. They could afford to make conces- 
sions as long as principle was not involved. But the pa- 
tience and forbearance of the conservative Baptists only 
made more aggressive and bolder the extremists. Theiz 
demands became more intolerant still. That which they 
meted out to the Missionary Baptists was insult, and only 
insult continually. The time for revolution had come. The 
denomination was ripe for it. The household was divided 
against itself. It could not stand. Throughout the State 
disorders broke out afresh. They showed themselves in 
the northern, eastern and southern parts of the State al- 
most simultaneously. In north Alabama there had been a 
continual struggle since the founding of the first churches 
in that territory. Inthe counties of Chambers and Ran- 
dolph desperate and unlawful measures were sometimes 
adopted to eject the missionary elements from the churches. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 167 


In Randolph the chief leaders were James Roquemore and 
John Blackman. These men gave industrious circula- 
tion to a sheet of anti-missionary views published in New 
York by one Beebe, who was said to have been a member 
of no church at all. The malicious falsehoods of this pub- 
lication were to the effect that the money collected by pas- 
tors, missionaries and others was never applied to that for 
which it was claimed to be raised, but was used for pur- 
poses of speculation inthe North. These men were heroic- 
ally met andresisted. Rev. Jefferson Falkner, then a 
young minister in Randolph county, did valiant service in 
this connection. He had removed from Georgia in 1832, 
aud at the time about which we write, was clerk of the 
County Court of Randolphcounty. Mr. Falkner withstood 
these defamers to their faces, and vindicated the Mission- 
ary Baptists from their aspersions. 


While these disorders reigned along the eastern border 
of the State, the county of Montgomery and those adja- 
cent were suffering from similar troubles. While to the 
more thoughtful and considerate among the Baptists, this 
revolutionary spirit, precipitated by their opponents, was 
regarded disruptive, they were only the throes which pre- 
ceded final deliverance. Theseparation had to come. With 
out it peace was impossible. Without it there could be 
no prosperity. To be thus severed from the anti-missiona- 
ries was, to the progressive Baptists the riddance of an in- 
cubus. No real, steady progress came until there was dis— 
solution, utter and final. 

The scenes attendant upon disseverance were, in many 
instances, most exciting. The movement involved a sep- 
aration of parents and children, brothers and sisters in 
their church relations. In every part of the State in which 
these colliding elements in the Baptist ranks existed, there 
came this final division. It is known throughout the State 
to-day proverbially as the “‘big split.” as 


* Riley ; History of Alabama Baptists, pp. 108, 110. 


168 THE GENESIS OF 


The Pilgrim’s Rest, the Beulah, and the Eb- 
enezer Associations were the three principal 
anti-missionary bodies. ‘The last two named 
were organized in 1838. The Ebenezer Asso-. 
ciation, the largest of these, was composed 
of eighteen churches. Seventeen of these 
churches seceded from the Alabama Associa- 
tion at the session held in Breastwork Church 
in October, 1838. The following significant 
prophecy is made by Rev. Hosea Holcombe in 
regard to the future of the opposers of mis- 
sions. lt was written prior to 1840, but he lived 
to see its partial fulfillment, and every year 
that fulfillment becomes more complete : 


The time is coming when the opposers of missions, 
whether professors of religion or not, will appear in a far 
different light from that in which they are now frequently 
regarded ; they will be associated with infidels, and athe- 
ists, and all the open and deadly enemies of the cross. 
The time is coming when, to be lukewarm inthe cause of 
missions will be regarded but little better than high trea- 
son against the King of heaven. Thetime may be expected 
sooner or later to arrive when God will manifest his dis- 
pleasure against anti-missionary churches by the most 
signal and alarming punishments. The times of ignorance 
he compassionately winks at—in this respect we should 
imitate the example of our heavenly and merciful Father, 
and exercise a tender charity towards those mistaken breth- 
ren, whose errors can be palliated by theirignorance. But 
these times of darkness’are fast passing away. The re- 
quirements of the gospel, and the miseries of a perishing 
world, have for a few years past, been presented to view 
in such a flood of light and demonstration, that if the 
churches upon which the light is beaming continue to close 
their eyes against it and slumber on in theit leaden apathy, 
God will probably close up the avenues of his mercy, send 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 169 


leanness into their souls and mildew upon their heritage; 
and finally leave them to be totally devoured by the rust 
and rottenness of antinomian lethargy. Alas! have we 
not already witnessed the beginning of these calamities in 
many of the churches in Alabama, which have set them- 
selves in array against the missionary cause. * 
Remember that this prophecy was written 
before 1840; how much before that time we do 
not know. But certainly previous to that, for 
his entire history was printed in that year. 
How well he read the future may be seen by 
quoting from another history of the Baptists of 
Alabama, by Dr. Riley, published in 1895: 

Only a few churches of the anti-missionary Baptists re- 
main in Alabama, and they are in the most retired dis- 
tricts. They never thrive in the light of intelligence and 
amid the pulsations of church energy. Their associa- 
tions were the largest when first organized. But as intel- 
ligence advanced and evangelization progressed, these as- 
sociations have diminished, and in the majority of instances 
have vanished. They have decreased as intelligence has 
increased. Many of their people were honest, loyal citizens; 
put their prejudice was as boundless as their illiteracy.+ 

In the Middle States, z. e., Pennsylvania, 
Maryland, etc., the opposition to missions, 
while severe in some instances, was not so hit- 
ter as in the Western and Southern States. 
The Chemung Association, composed of eight 
churches in Pennsylvaniaand New York, passed 
the following resolution in September, 1835 : 

WHEREAS, A number of the Associations with whom we 
have held correspondence have departed from the siimplic- 
ity ofthe doctrine and practice of the gospel of Christ, 
and have followed cunningly devised fables (the inventions 


*Holcombe’s History of the Baptists of Alabama, p. 102. 
+Riley’s History of the Baptists of Alabama, p. 123. 


170 THE GENESIS OF 


of men) uniting themselves with the world, in what are 
falsely called benevolent societies founded upon a moneyed 
base, with a profession to spread the gospel, which is an- 
other gospel differing for (sic, but evidently a misprint for 
“from’’) the gospel of Christ ; 

Resolved, Therefore, that we discontinue our correspond- 
ence with the Phila., Bridgewater, Franklin, Madison, 
Steuben, and all other associations which are supporting 
the popular institutions of the day, and most affectionate- 
ly invite all those Churches or members of Churches among 
them who cannot fellowship them, to come out from among 
them and leave them.* 

The Baltimore Association passes a resolu- 
tion of the same tenor May, 1836, after which 
the separation between the two parties was 
rapidly accomplished. The anti-missionaries 
excluded the missionaries from their associa- 
tions and fellowship for belonging to mission- 
ary enterprises or contributing to their support. 
The missionaries were glad enough to be sepa- 
tated and the division did not cause a great deal 
of friction, in spite of the violent denunciations 
made by the Hardshells according to their usual 
custom. At the present time there are only 
five anti-missionary associations in the Middle 
States. The Warwick and Lexington in New 
York; the Chemung and Delaware River in 
Pennsylvania (the Delaware River Association 
includes some churches in New Jersey), and the 
Delaware constitute the number. All of them 
were at first supporters of Sunday schools, mis- 
sions, education. etc., but cunning leaders 
aroused their prejudices and eventually carried 
them into the Hardshell ranks. They have suf- 


*Vedder’s History of the Baptists in Middle States,p. 204. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 171 


fered the same marked and deadly decrease 
there as elsewhere since the time of the separa- 
tion. According to the last census their strength 
in the Middle States is as follows: New York, 
31 churches, 1,019 members; New Jersey, “ 
churches, 258 members ; Pennsylvania, 15 
churches, 314 members ; Delaware, © churches, 
183 members. ‘Total, 56 churches, 1,774 mem- 
bers. * 

™he first non-Roman Catholic white residents 
of what is now known as Missouriseem to have 
been Baptists. They arrived in 1796 and were 
joined in 1799 by an aged Baptist minister from 
Georgia—a former missionary among the Cher- 
okee Indians, by the name of Thomas Johnson. 
These all settled in or near the town of Jack- 
son in what is now known as Cape Girardeau 
County. Here the first Baptist Church in 
Missouri was constituted in 1806. A gavel 
made from one of the original logs of their first 
house of worship is now used in the meetings of 
the General Association of Missouri. The 
pioneer Baptists of that State came largely 
from North Carolina, South Carolina and Ken- 
tucky. Missouri had been originally a part of 
the Louisiana Purchase ratified by the United 
States Senate in 1804. In 1812 it became a ter- 
ritory of a higher grade and was given the 
name of Missouri. ‘The name is that of a pecu- 
liarly shaped Indian canoe. During the terri- 
torial period Missouri was visited by missiona- 
ries, especially John M. Peck and James E. 


pag aie Se ESS 
* Vedder’s History of the Baptists in the Middle States, 
pp. 204-206. 


172 THE GENESIS OF 


Welch. Thelabors of these men, together with 
those of Jonathan Going, brought about the or- 
ganization of the Home Mission Board, and Mis- 
souri became the great field of that Board. 
The district associations were first organized 
by the non and even anti-missionary churches. 
The first of these were Bethel Association in 
Southeast Missouri, Missouri (now St. Louis) 
Association, and Mount Pleasant Association. 
Missouri became a State in 1821. Thirteen 
years later came the beginnings of the Gen- 
eral Association. The population of Missouri 
at that time was about 250,000. French infi- 
delity in St. Louis had made a bitter fight 
against the Sabbath’s crossing the Mississippi 
River. Thieving, warring and vagrant In- 
dians, the Mormons and the Mormon War, and 
flinally the terrible cholera scourge of 1832, all 
acted as obstacles to prevent early organization 
for mission work. In August, 1834, there was 
organized at Providence what is now the Gen- 
eral Association, although it was known as the 
Central Society until 1839. The attempt to 
organize brought forcible opposition. Two of 
the earliest and most prominent of the opposers 
were Theoderick Boulware and T. Peyton Ste- 
phens. These men were invited to assist in- 
forming the organization. The following quo- 
tation from Boulware’s autobiography, page 11, 
will show in what spirit they received the invi- 
tation : 

I received a letter from Eld. Ebenezer Rogers and oth- 
ers inviting me to attend a minister’s meeting at Provi- 
dence on a certain day, to adopt missionaryism—a plan for 
the better support of the ministry and to sustain the now 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 173 


tottering cause of the Baptists. I, Elder T. Peyton Ste- 
phens and others met Elders Rogers, Hurley, Longan, Sug- 
gett, Vardemav and others. We advised and entreated 
these brethren to disperse and not establish this cockatrice 
den among us, from which will emanate a serpentine brood 
marring the peace of God’s children and bringing much 
scandal on the cause of Christ, for we are assured you 
have in view more than the happiness of the church and 
the salvation of men. We fear you are somewhat decep 
tive. They formed, adjourned and met again and estab- 
lished their Central Society, from which have resulted all 
the consequences I anticipated and worse. 


This was written nine years after the Provi- 
dence meeting. I will let Dr. Yeaman describe 
their crusade. It is the same old familiar story. 

It is true, however, that under the leadership of Boul- 
ware and Stephens the anti-missionary Baptists began a 
bitter warfare against the missionary Baptists. They de- 
nounced the organizers of the ‘‘Central Society” as ‘‘mer- 
cenaries,’’ as ‘‘hirelings,’’ ‘*money-made preacbers.’’ They 
made tours of the churches and by ridicule, threats and 
intimidation sought to array them against this missionary 
movement. Thechurches that aligned themselves with 
the anti-missionaries forbade the members making contri- 
butions to missions. Persons favorable to missions were 
denied membership in such churches. The spirit of perse- 
cution was rife and rabid in the anti-missionaries. The 
cockatrices and serpent broods were set agoing by those 
who prophecied them. They were those who marred the 
happiness of the churches. Pseudo and mal-prophets will 
ever bring about a fulfillwent of their evil predictions if 
possible. * 


* Yeaman’s History of the Missouri Baptist General 
Association, p. 49. Dr. Yeaman’s most able and interest- 
ing work is the best authority on Baptist affairs in Mis- 
souri. It would be well if all the States had their history 
so well written. 


174 THE GENESIS OF 


As late as 1836 there was as yet no Board 
and no agent or corresponding secretary to su- 
pervise and direct the work of the Association. 
After a few years an executive board was ap- 
pointed and in one year there was an increase 
in mission contributions from $69.25 to $313.25. 
The same year this report was made, 1837, 
Rev. Kemp Scott was appointed General Agent. 
Dr. Yeaman says: 

Up to this time and for several subsequent years, there 
seemed a hesitancy on the part of the Association to en- 
gage an agent at a stipulated compensation. Itis almost 
equally certain that this hesitancy wasnot so much there- 
sult of deliberate opposition to a paid agency as it was 
the effect of intimidation growing out of the persist 
ent and violent adverse criticism of the anti-mission Bap- 
tists. While the Missiotiary Baptists desired to carry for- 
ward the work upon which they had entered, and their 
purpose was to do so, they at the same time wishedto avoid 
all occasion for disturbing agitations and alienations, 
They had hoped to do their work without a paid financial 
agent, but each year experiences made it more manifest 
that such method could not be fruitful of satisfactory re- 
sults. * 

Violent opposition rendered the work of the 
agent hardest at first and the results propor- 
tionately small; but each year the success of the 
movement became more apparent, the work 
easier and the results greater, both in conver- 
sions and in contributions. The desire of the 
missionaries to go to any length in meekly 
bearing the frowns and contumely of their op- 
ponents, asking only for liberty to follow their 


* Yeaman’s History of the Missouri Baptist General As- 
sociation, pp, 63, 64. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 1% 


own conscience, while worthy of praise as 
showing the spirit of Christ in their attitude 
toward the brethren, proved futile to concili- 
ate their opposers. The year 1835 was the year 
in which the greatest part of the division oc- 
curred. During a meeting of the Mount Pleas- . 
ant Association the preceding year the query 
was introduced : ‘‘What shall be done with the 
missionary system which has made its appear- 
ance among us ?’’ Some one mildly suggested 
that ‘‘liberty of conscience shall be granted.” 
But this soft answer did not turn away wrath; 
it rather had the effect that would be produced 
by flaunting a red rag in the face of a herd of 
angry bulls. Long and heated discussion en- 
sued and the proposition to grant liberty of 
conscience was negatived. James H. Birch, a 
politician who was present, then submitted this 
answer to the vexatious question: ‘‘That the 
subject of missions is one upon which Chris- 
tians might conscientiously differ, but we advise 
the churches to keep it out of their bodies.”’ 
The antis, believing him to be on their side, as- 
sented to this, but went back on it the next year 
and refused to be comforted by anything less 
than the head of the General Association sev- 
ered from the Baptist body and brought 
them on a charger. By thus refusing to be gov- 
erned by the principles of the Baptists of the 
United States and their own action of the pre- 
ceding year, they rendered the division inevit- 
able. (The sooner Missionary Baptists learn 
that compromise is impossible with the mission- 
ary opponents, and that a flag of truce will 
only be regarded as an evidence of weakness, 


176 THE GENESIS OF 


the .sooner will they make progress in their 
missionary efforts.) I cannot refrain from quot- 
ing Dr. Yeaman’s tribute to the missionary ef- 
forts of Fielding Wilhite, Thomas Fristoe and 
Ebenezer Rogers : 

They were not slumbering on the plains where Achilles 
fought and Hector fell, with the towering mountains of 
Samothrace standing awful and gloomy sentinel; no night 
vision of one in distress, cried to them, “Come over and 
help us.”’ But the spirit of the same ONE that appeared to 
the persecutor while on his way to Damascus and trans- 
formed him intoan apostle, found these two humble men 
in their rural homes, and filling their hearts with a thirst 
for souls and a desire to glorify God, led them out into the 
destitute regions of a wild but prophetic country to seek 
out and save the scattered souls that peopled in sparse set- 
tlements, a land destined to blossom as the rose and yield 
its fruits for the upbuilding our empire State. Forthgoing 
in obedience to the heavenly impulse, they, with hearts 
knit together by a holy fellowship, traversed prairies and 
p2netrated forests hunting congregations and places to 
preach. They know not when mounting their trusty 
horses in the early morn where their resting place would 
be at night. But confident thatthe ‘‘Lord will provide,”’ 
they counted not their lives dear to them, and at their 
own charges they went forth weeping, sowing seed. * 


The following careful statistics eloquently 
tell the results of the division : 


“In 1836, one year from the completion of the organiza- 
tion of the General Society, there were in Missouri 8,723 
Baptists, alltold. Of these there were 5,367 Missionary 
Baptists, having 150 churches and 77 ministers: of anti- 
missionary Baptists there were 3,366 members, having 80 
churches and 49 ministers. In 1846 the Missionary Bap- 


* Yeaman: History of Missouri Baptist General Associ- 
ation, pp. 109, 110. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 177 


tists had grown to 15,331, having 292 churches and 144 
ministers, and the anti-missionaries had 4,336 members, 
118 churches and 57 ministers. In that decade the Mission- 
ary Baptists had increased in numbers 9,964. The anti- 
missionaries had increased 970. The reader will see that 
the percentage of increase for the Missionary Baptists is 
almost marvelously beyondthat of the anti-missionaries 
for the ten years mentioned. It is almost useless to speak 
of the difference between the two wings of the denomina- 
tion at this (1898) date. The Missionary Baptists have ap- 
proximately 150,000 members, 1,000 preachers and 1,700 
churches in the State, while the antis are not as numerous 
as they were in 1846. * 


It may be added that in order to exist at all 
the antis in Missouri have had to modify their 
views. Many of them now favor Sabbath 
schools and protracted meetings, while they are 
all less pugnacious and more inclined to effort 
than their predecessors. 

Most of the early Baptists in Louisiana came 
from Mississippi. The State itself was, of 
course, part of the famous Louisiana Purchase 
of 1803, although apart of it, knownas West 
Florida, did not come definitely into possession 
of this country until the Treaty of 1819, which 
ceded to the United States, East and West 
Florida in consideration of $5,000,000 and the 
relinquishment on the part of the United States 
of all claims to Texas. This was a very foolish 
trade and one which cost a war and many mil- 
lions of dollars to rectify. But that has noth- 
ing to do with our story now. Having once 
been in the possession of Spain, the Roman 


* Yeaman’s History of the Missouri Baptist General As- 
sociation, p. 98. 
14 


178 THE GENESIS OF 


Catholic influence, there has always been and 
is now quite strong. The Mississippi Society 
for Baptist Missions, Domestic and Foreign, 
organized in 1816, sent missionaries to Louisi- 
ana, where the number of preachers and 
churches multiplied as soon as they were freed 
from fear of Roman Catholic interference which 
was not, of course, until 1819, when the last 
claim of Spanish sovereignty was relinquished. 
But other troubles were to come. Dr. Paxton 
says: 

In 1830, and for some years after, the church began to 
be troubled with the leaven of Campbellism, and some with 
Parkerism or Two-Seedism. The distractions growing out 
of these questions fell like a blight upon the cause of re- 
ligion. In 1833 it was reported to the Association the Na 
talbany Church had imbibed the Two-seed doctrine; and 
upon investigation it was found to be true, and the fellow- 
ship of the Association was withdrawn. * 

In 1832 a society was organized auxiliary to 
the Home Mission Society of New York, called 
the Domestic Missionary Society of Louisiana. 
This does not seem to have accomplished any 
great results. In 1846 the Ouchita Association 
had passed a resolution requesting the churches 
to send up contributions to support a minister 
in destitute parts of the Association. This 
aroused the anti-missionary feeling and in 1847 
at the session of the Association with Aimwell 
Church, Catahoula Parish, after only one year’s 
trial, a resolution was passed declaring that in 
order to preserve peace and union among the 


* Paxton’s History of the Baptists of Louisiana, p. 40. 
Paxton is my chief authority for Baptist History in Louis- 
ana. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. Wek: 


churches, the request could not be complied 
with. But the missionary spirit would not 
down and the next year, 1848, when the Asso- 
ciation met with the Hebron Church, Catahoula 
Parish, this resolution was introduced for the 
double purpose of allaying the opposition to 
missions, while at the same time those desiring 
to do missionary work or to contribute that it 
should be done might be allowed to do so. 


It shall be the alienable right of each convocation of the 
Association, of each church composing her body, and every 
member of the same, to contribute for benevolent pur- 
poses, or withhold, according to their several views, and 
this right shall never bechallenged in the Association. Any 
motion to the contrary shall be ruled out of order by the 
moderator as being unconstitutional. * 


But this only settled the matter for two 
years; for in 1850, at Catahoula Church, Cata- 
houla Parish, with 17 churches represented, 
the split took place. 


The anti-missionary spirit which had been brewing 
culminated at this session. The Mount Pleasant Church 
asked for a letter of dismission, and after some objections 
and much debate the application was laid upon the table 
until next meeting, whereupon Elder T. Meredith an- 
nounced to the Association in behalf ot that church that 
she was no longer a member of Ouachita Association. A 
Committee was appointed tolabor with the church and, 
if possible, bring about a reconciliation, but nothing was 
accomplished. Under the lead of Elder Thomas Meredith 
a Convention met at Pilgrim’s Rest, an unassociated 
church, September 11, 1851, for the purpose of forming an 
association of the anti-missionary order. Ten churches 
met in convention: Hephzibah, Zion Hill, Mount Pleasant, 


* Paxton, p. 285. 


180 THE GENESIS OF 


New Bethel, Pilgrim’s Rest, Hopewell, d’Arbonne, New 
Providence, Mt. Olive and Bethel, of which only Zion Hill 
and Mt. Pleasant appear to have been from the Ouachita 
Association. The rest were no doubt of this order. * 


Not a single minister followed Mr. Meredith 
from the Ouachita Association, although he was 
greatly beloved. He was joined by a few anti- 
missionary preachers, and the new association 
adopted articles of faith much similar to those 
of the Missionary Baptists, except their article 
on feet-washing and the usual article disclaim- 
ing connection with any missionary society or 
body. The usual progress for the missionaries 
and shrinkage for the anti-missionaries then 
commenced. 

In Tennessee there was a decided reaction 
against missions. One quotation from Dr. Riley 
succinctly sums up the story. 


It seems that Luther Rice, during his tours of the South 
had succeeded in arousing much zeal in missions among 
the churches of Tennessee. But about 1820 the current of 
sentiment changed and the reaction assumed a most malig- 
nant form. Indeed, so serious did the Opposition become 
that it is said, ‘‘not a man ventured to open his mouth in 
favor of any benevolent enterprise or action.”? The result 
was that the work of organization effected by Rice went to 
pieces, a deplorably chaotic condition of the churches fol- 
lowed, the friends of the opposition rallied, and the cause 
of missions was for a long time paralyzed. The influence 
of this reaction spread into adjoining regions. Largelyin 
consequence of this the churches of North Alabama almost 
without exception became anti-missionary. + 
ae sie eR St es GC AO 

*Paxton’s History of the Baptists of Louisiana, p. 286. 


+ Riley’s History of the Baptists in the Southern States 
East of the Mississippi, PP 7151725 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 181 


As early as 1743 Baptist missionaries from 
Maryland penetrated into the northern part of 
Virginia. Some work was also done here by 
missionaries from the Philadelphia Association 
and she may be counted as a missionary State 
from that time until the present day. About 
1823 Alexander Campbell became a disturber 
of the saints. His attacks against salaried 
ministers and organized missionary efforts have 
been fully treated heretofore. While he suc- 
ceeded in urging some to the adoption of his 
views and in alienating and rendering fruitless 
yet others, such men as Taylor, Jeter, Witt and 
Semple stood like strong bulwarks against both 
his anti-mi-sionary and his doctrinal heresies, 
so that the bulk of the denomination was kept 
in sympathy with the general work of the Bap- 
tists in the entire country. And the zeal aroused 
by Luther Rice was not allowed to die ont. 

Early among the States of the South, Mary- 
land had constituted the Baltimore Baptist As- 
sociation and the Baptists there had gcne on 
record as a missionary body; but in 1836 the 
anti-missionary Baptists came into control of 
this Association and by a vote of 16 to9, adopted 
the usual resolutions against ‘‘worldly socie- 
ties’’ andthose who by joining with them had 
forfeited their fellowship. But this same year 
was formed the Maryland Baptist Union Associ- 
ation into which were gathered the missionary 
hosts and the denominational life, leaving the 
Baltimore Baptist Association but an empty 
shell, without real life or vitality. 

Georgia effected organization under the able 
leadership of Jesse Mercer. The Powelton 


182 THE GENESIS OF 


Conferences developed into the missionary and 
educational organizations of Georgia: first, the 
General Committee, composed of members from 
each district association, which purposed to 
promote State Missions, itinerant preaching, 
and education of the Creek Indians, as the 
special objects of organization; second, the State 
Convention, and third, Mercer University. 
The mission fight in Georgiais epitomized in 
the fight in the Hephzibah Association. 

In 1832, Elder J. H. T. Kilpatrick, a young man, and a 
stranger to the people, visited the Hephzibah Association 
forthe first time. The Hephzibah is the second in age 
among the Associations in Georgia, and is the first born 
of your own venerable association. (The Georgia Baptist 
Association, organized 1784.) On the occasion above men- 
tioned, the refined and portly Wm. T. Brantly, Sr., then 
pastor of the Augusta Baptist Church, was also present 
bearing a letter from the Foreign Mission Board) When 
the letter was presented, a majority of the delegates voted 
against allowing it to be read to the body. A motion was 
then made that the letter be thrown under the table. The 
vote was taken by rising, and the motion prevailed. One 
delegate, whose weight was about two hundred pounds, 
gave emphasis to his vote by leaping clear of the floor 
more than once, and coming down on his feet with such 
violence as to jar the whole building. The man appointed to 
throw theletter under the table ‘‘dashead”’ it to the floor with 
as much vehemence and venom as if it had been a missive 
from the lower regions.’ Just then, a certain brother, per- 
haps the same who had leaped from the floor, approached 
Dr. Brantley where he was sitting, and flourished a large 
knotted hickory stick above him ina threatening manner, 
frequently fetching it very near to his head, abused him 
severely for having sought to entice them into the mis- 
sionary work, and warned him in extremely discourteous 
terms never to repeat the attempt. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 183 


From this day young Kilpatrick was resolved to reclaim 
the churches from their deplorable condition. At the next 
session he was present again, this time as a messenger 
from oneofthechurches. Year by year he strove, most 
in private interviews to impart more correct ideas to such 
as were willing to be enlightened, and spoke publicly 
wherever he deemed it prudent. At times the case seemed 
to grow worse. In 1825,in the absence of Kilpatrick, some 
ofthe churches petitioned the body to send a committee to 
he General Association (now the Baptist State Conven- 
tion) to‘‘view their order’’ and report conclusions. Notonly 
was the petition refused, but the decorum was immediately 
amended so as to forbid the Association from ever cor- 
responding with a missionary body in the future, or any 
messenger from ever making a motion to that effect. Still 
Kilpatrick refused to accept defeat or to desist from his 
purpose. In 1836, just fourteen years after this rude re- 
jection of the letter fromthe Foreign Mission Board, he 
witnessed the passage ofa resolution by the body to ‘‘be- 
come acomponent member of the Baptist Convention o 
the State of Georgia.’’ To-day it stands among the fore- 
most of our Associations for intelligence, liberality and de- 
votion to all the benevolent enterprises of the denomina- 
tion, with the eldest son of J. H. T. Kilpatrick, the succes- 
sor of his father in the moderator’s chair * 

The members of the General Committee of 
Georgia injured their missionary plans by an 
attempt at denominational union which failed to 
meet the approbation of either the Baptists or 
the members of other denominations. But in 
spite of this, and of the spirit manifested in 
some of the associations, such as the one de- 
scribed, Georgia was always preyailingly mis- 
sonary and stands in the front rank of the Bap- 


* Address of Rev. A. B. Campbell, D. D., in the ‘‘Baptist 
Centennial Volume,” pp. 145. 146. 


184 THE GENESIS OF 


tist States which have welcomed and defended 
the foreign mission movement. 

In North Carolina an almost hopeless stupor 
prevailed until 1830, when the North Carolina 
State Convention was organized. The wisdom 
and zeal of Rev. Thomas Meredith, after a 
hard fight with the opposers of missions, made 
success possible. North Carolina is now third 
in numerical strength among the States of the 
Southern Baptist Convention. * 

South Carolina, under Screven, Hart and 
Furmen, had anticipated Judson and Rice in 
their zeal for education and missions. Rice 
nowhere found a warmer reception than there. 

In Mississippi the same difficulties prevailed, 
but to a smaller extent than in North Carolina 
and Tennessee. Her mission strength was 
mostly confined to the home field, although the 
Louisiana work had its foundation here. 

Florida has itself been a mission field for 
some years after the organization of the South- 
ern Baptist Convention. Texas has just 
emerged triumphant from her fight with the 
anti-missionaries, who claim the missionary 
name, and Arkansas has just achieved her 
first signal victory over them. As _ before 
stated, in the Northern and Northeastern 
States the anti-missionary spirit never made 
any real progress nor caused a denominational 
split. 

SUMMARY. 


The facts gleaned as to progress and spirit 


eS eee 
* Riley: History of Baptists in Southern States East of 
Mississippi, p. 187. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 185 


of the opposition to missions have been neces- 
sarily somewhat confused in order, so that 
some tautology and periphrastic repetition has 
been inevitable, but they may be summarized 
as follows: 

1. The opposition in every State is traceable 
directly or by inevitable inference to Parker 
and Campbell. 

2. This opposition was led by men of small 
mental calibre but with sharp, acute and suspi- 
cious minds. Asarule, they lacked education 
themselves, and were violently opposed to those 
who had it. But while not educated in books, 
they had thoroughly understood that type of 
human nature which surrounded them and 
whose sympathies they desired to enlist for 
themselves or whose antipathies they wished 
to arouse against others. 


3. The opposition to missions needed to be 
incited. The churches of America in 1812, 
while toa large extent non-missionary, were 
not by any means totally so, as was shown in 
Chapter I. But while many were non-mission- 
ary, none were anti-missionary. I have care- 
fully investigated Dr. Spencer’s claim that 
previous to 1816 there was not an anti-mission- 
ary Baptist Church in America, and I believe 
his claim to be correct. Luther Rice and others 
were always at first received with enthusiasm; 
not until the days of Taylor was there any op- 
position offered. 

4. This opposition was incited and carried 
on by a skilful appeal to the prejudices, good 
and bad, of the uninformed people. The good 


186 THE GENESIS OF 


prejudices that were appealed to were: their 
love of the Bible as the sole rule of faith and 
practice; their love of the church as the divinely 
organized, providentially preserved, and inher- 
ently sufficient instrument of evangelization and 
pillar and support of the truth; and their love 
of religious liberty, which liberty they were led 
to believe was about to be taken away, by de- 
stroying the independence and sovereignty of 
the churches and merging them in a whole 
which would be equal to the sum of all its rarts 
and greater than any one of them. We know 
and history has demonstrated that these fears 
were not well founded. Neither district asso- 
ciations, State conventions, nor General con- 
ventions presumed to set themselves up as 
extra-ecclesiastical authorities. They do not 
exercise an atom more of power over the 
churches of to-day than they did when first or- 
ganized. Their decisions and their authority 
can be enforced over no church; not churches 
but individuals are their constituent parts. 
They are merely instruments of co-operation. 
If it be right to co-operate, it cannot be 
wrong to use some means of co-operation. 
When several persons combine their efforts 
and contributions to have a thing done at a 
a place where they cannot themselves go, it is 
necessary to employ an agent. If several indi- 
viduals or corporations combine to employ a 
lawyer to do a piece of work, which all of them 
feel under obligations to have done, and which 
will benefit each of them, and which they can 
do most easily and cheaply by paying the law- 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 187: 


yer to undertake it, their employment of lim 
does not make him their master but their serv- 
ant. In engaging him they have lost neither 
independence nor sovereignty. Baptist Con- 
ventions or Associations are in no sense of the 
word ecclesiastical bodies. They do not claim 
the right to interpret or enforce the Scriptures. 
No appeal can be taken to them from any action 
of a local church. ‘They can only control 
their own membership. They are co-operative 
organizations for the cheap and speedy trans- 
mission of the liberality of churches, mission- 
ary societies and individuals to worthy objects 
of benevolent effort, which the aforesaid 
churches and individuals may use or not, as 
seems good to them. But while all these 
things are true, and were urged at the time, 
the point is that the anti-mission leaders made 
the people believe that the conventions were 
synods or general councils, and that their ap- 
peals and suggestions were intended to have 
the force of papal bulls. Their agents were 
painted as tax-gatherers and their officers 
dubbed priests, bishops and popes. Thus by 
a distorted representation of the missionary 
work the fountains of liberality were dried up 
and opposition was encouraged to rear its 
snaky head and demand, ‘‘that they (the mis- 
sionaries) ought to desist, and dispense with 
their temperance society—their Sunday school 
—their reading sermons, and with ¢hezr prayer 
meetings ! !”’ 

The evil prejudices that were appealed to 
were: (1) Sectional Animosity: missions were 


188 THE GENESIS OF 


denounced as a Yankee institution. (2) Class 
Hatred: the missionaries were represented as 
living in luxury and as anxious to secure the 
hard earned pittance of the poor to enable 
them to continue their extravagance. (3) Social 
Condition: the missionaries were painted 
as vain with learning acquired at college 
and seminary, despisers of the ignorant and 
endeavoring to outwit them so as to gain 
their money, and to organize them, as a means 
of obtaining official superiority and power over 
them. .The anti-missionary leaders success- 
fully urged allthe arts of the demagogue to 
swing their forces into line. When did such arts 
ever fail of temporary success,or of final defeat? 
Certainly not here. 


5. The attack always came from the antis. 
They forced the fighting and necessitated the 
division. 

6. The Hardshells were, without exception 
intolerant, impatient of opposition and accusers 
of their brethren. The missionaries injured 
themselves and the cause by too long endeavor- 
ing to effect a compromise and to retain a union 
where no affinities existed. 


7. The separation always marked the be- 
ginning of growth with the missionaries and 
the beginning of shrinkage and dwindling with 
the Hardshells. 


8. The opposition was grafted on such wide- 
ly differing doctrinal roots as Anti-nomianism, 
Arminianism and Manichenism. The Mani- 
cheans formeda party to themselves. ‘The 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 189 


Campbellites absorbed the Arminian element, 
and the Antinomian element a few years later 
became asect which has received the expressive 
sobriquet of ‘‘Hardshell;”’ truly a most fitting 
and appropriate name, but one to which they 
are by no means exclusively entitled, and the 
word is properly used in these pages to desig- 
nate all opponents of mission methods, what- 
eyer their views as to predestination and elec- 
tion. 

9, The distinctive principles of the hyper- 
Calvinistic sect of missionary opposers, popu- 
larly known as Hardshells are as follows: 

(1) That God is omnipotent, all-powerful 
and sovereign and would himself do all that was 
necessary to be done to save the elect. 

(2) Any attempt on man’s part to bring 
about the salvation of their fellow men is an in- 
fringement of the divine prerogative and an in- 
sult tothe Almighty. In extreme cases they 
even refused to offer the invitations of the Gos- 
pel to sinners, * 


*I have already explained Mr. Campbell’s Arminianism 
in connection with this point. That Arminianism was 
the only reason the Hardshells do not bear his name. As 
a proof that some at first swatlowed even his Arminianism 
for the sake of his opposition to “‘human institutions,” il 
would point to the fact that asect have recently separated 
from the Campbellites or Disciples, who revert to the 
strictest antinomianism and style themselves the elect 
They have a church here in Louisville. The sect founded 
by Mr. Campbell having adopted missionary methods, no 
‘reason remained for a longer affiliation with that body; 
hence the division. 


190 AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 


(3) The church is the only institution of di- 
vine appointment, and all human organizations 
for doing good are evil necessarily and fer se, 
whether they propose to take the place of the 
church or not. 

(4) Churches may not co-operate to do their 
work, although they may associate to ask con- 
cerning each other’s health. 

(5) ‘The world was evangelized during the 
frst century and the Great Commission was 
then exbausted and has no present force as is 
proved by the cessation of miracles. 

(6) An educated ministry is ‘‘an abomination 
unto the Lord.”’ 


(7) ‘Theological seminaries, Sunday schools, 
mission and temperance societies are all devices 
of the Devil, intended so ensnare and corrupt 
the church. 

(8) The Hardshells being always and only 
right, possess constitutional and disciplinary 
authority over their refractory brethren, the 
missionaries, and the minority can if necessary 
exclude the majority. 

Such principles, especially when taken in 
connection with their methods of expounding 
and defending them, produced the inevitable 
Separation. Most of the divisions occurred be- 
tween the years 1826 and 1840. ‘This separa- 
tion was an unspeakable blessing to the mis- 
sionary churches. The sooner these churches 
have another such expurgation of the Hard- 
shells who have since that time grown up within 
their pale, the better it will be for the churches 
and for the world. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


THE RELATION OF THE FOREIGN 
MISSION MOVEMENT TO EDUCA- 
LIOM:. 


The thesis I shall attempt to establish in 
this chapter is that the Foreign Mission move- 
ment is the parent of Baptist Christian educa- 
tion as it exists in our denomination to-day. 
Brown University is the sole exception to this 
statement; this was the only university owned 
by the Baptists in the United States at the time 
of the conversion of Judson and Rice. In fact, 
Judson obtained part of his education there. 
Brown University grew out of the great revival 
or awakening. It was the desire to found a 
college which should be under the chief direc- 
tion of the Baptists and in which education 
might be promoted, and *“‘superior learning ob- 
tained free from any sectarian tests.’’ The 
treachery of Dr. Ezra Stiles, a Congregational 
minister, and of Mr. William Cellery, who had 
been intrusted with the preparation of the char- 
ter, came near throwing it into Congregational 
control. But the plan was exposed in time to 
prevent it; a new charter, giving the Baptists 
the control, was formed and Brown Univer- 
sity was established just sixty-four years 
after Yale College, which was founded just 


sixty-four years after Harvard. 
(191) 


192 THE GENESIS OF 


When Rice returned to this country he found 
ignorance to be the greatest foe to Missions; so 
he began to preach an educational crusade also. 
This stirred up both the friends and enemies of 
education and the educational question became 
the most fiercely contested issue in the fight. 
The body organized in Philadelphia, May 14th, 
1814, and afterwards known as the Triennial 
Convention, was first designed only for the sup- 
port of foreign missions. Butthe constitution 
was subsequently modified in several particu- 
lars. One of these was to aid in securing the 
‘‘training of the young men for the gospel minis- 
try.”’ In other words, the Convention took up 
the founding and support of Columbian College. 
At the second meeting, in 1817, the Convention 
empowered the Board, ‘‘when funds of a suffi- 
cient amount should have been contributed for 
this purpose to institute a classical and theo- 
logical seminary.’’ In 1821 a charter was ob- 
tained from Congress, which really gave full 
university powers, although the name given was 
‘The Columbian College in the District of Co- 
lumbia.’’ In 1825 the theological department 
thus established was transferred to Newton 
Theological Institute. After a few years Lu- 
ther Rice made the educational feature promi- 
nent, and finally so pre-eminent as to take near- 
ly all his time and attention. His interest 
in education was so wel] known, that in 1815 he 
was elected President of Transylvania univer- 
sity, Lexington, Ky., which honor he declined.* 


* Second Annual Report of the Baptist Board of Foreign 
Missions (1816). p. 67. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 193 


The state of public sentiment in the West in 
regard to ministerial education and the reasons 
therefore have been previously told. Tose 
who opposed education at all never constituted 
the real body of the Baptist denomination, nor 
did they fairly represent its sentiments. At 
best, they occupied denominational outposts 
and when the mission cause finally made min- 
isterial education an issue, the Baptists gave 
forth no uncertain sound. Our opponents have 
delighted to make the views of this fraction 
seem to be that of the whole denomination and 
we have not always defended ourselves wisely 
or well. Mr. Parker, who is an ideal exponent 
of the Hardshell view, thus caustically states 
his ideas as to the effect of education:— 


Some may say that I stand opposed to education from 
the remarks that I have made; but I think education a 
great common blessing inits place. But when we worship 
the creature instead of the Creator, we sin and abuse the 
blessings bestowed upon us. So I oppose the principle of 
education being an essential qualification to the ministry. 
It is evident that education makes a man a more accom- 
plished deceiver, and he is better enabled to practice fraud 
on the minds of the people, and it has ever been the case 
and ever will, unless governed by the power of divine 
grace: for it is evident that education has made manifest 
more bad men than it ever has good ones. Sol think we 
had better leave it for God’s work to call men of education 
wien he wauts such, than to undertake to make preachers 
by giving them education. It is true, where grace governs 
education, both meeting in one man, and that man iscalled 
by the effectual working of God’s spirit, tothe work of 
the ministry, he is better qualified to express or communi- 
cate his ideas. But hestill labors under serious difficulties, 


194 THE GENESIS OF 

The pride of his heart calls on him to tickle the ear or 
please the fancy of the learned part of his congregation 
and to do that leave the ignorant part without informa- 
tion, 

But this is like the spirit of the world, and like the old 
proverb *‘ God help the rich, the poor can beg.’’ Let the 
learned part of the world be pleased and informed more 
and more, but the ignorant stay where they are. So I say 
if the clergy must have education to understand the gram- 
matical sense of word, so the hearers ought to have the 
Same understanding, lest a fraud should be practiced on 
them, for through false zeal and the advantage of educa- 
tion, the whole of the delusion and false ways are imposed 
on the world of mankind, and have caused thousands of 
God’s dear children to seal their testimony of Christ 
with their own blood, when persecution had prevailed un- 
der the prejudice of education. Then no wonder when we 
Baptists dread its appearance under the name of religion 
and draw the sword against it. 

So I conclude that adopting such plans is aiming to 
make additions to God’s word, and argues that the King of 
Zion was imperfect and did not know the best plans for 
qualifying, supporting and sending out preachers. I con- 
ceive the mission plan cast this contempt onthe diginity 
of Christ, while they rob God of his glory and make mer- 
chandise of the gospel.* 

That the statements concerning education 
made by its opposers were either misunder- 
standings, caricatures or wilful perversions 
will be evident by a perusal of this extract 
from an address of the Triennial Convention, 


at their second meeting in 1820:— 

We are far from thinking that learning can make a 
minister of Christ; we are assured that unsanctified lit- 
ee ee 


* A Public Address to the Baptist Society, etc., by Dan- 
iel Parker, pp. 30-32. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 195 


erature, as well as superior talents, elevated stations, 
riches, and worldly honors, may prove a great curse; 
and that it has been often abused tothe vilest of purposes. 
It is still on= of the excelleat attainments of the Christian, 
he must add, to his faith and virtue, knowledge. It enters 
into the character of those able pastors, promised by God, 
to his church—they are to feed men with knowledge. Min- 
isters, according to our sentiments, must be gracious men 
renewed and sanctified by the spirit of God; they must 
possess gifts from Christ for their office, and must be called 
of God to engage init. But these gifts they may either 
neglect or improve, according to the itimation given in the 
exhortation of Paul to Timothy: ‘‘Neglect not the gift 
that is in thee;’”’ ‘‘Give attention to reading, to exhorta- 
tion, to doctrine;’’ ‘Study to show thyself approved unto 
God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly di- 
viding the word of truth;” ‘‘Meditate on these things—give 
thyself wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear to 
all.’ Here their duty as well as danger, is described. The 
word of God declares, that the pastor must not bea novice; 
that he must be apt to teach, and must speak in a manner 
easy to be understood—which no man can do, unless he is 
well acquainted with the subject on which he discourses. 


It is evident that the Missionary Baptists 
recognized whatever truth there might be in 
the statements of their anti-brethren as to the 
dangers of education, but did not allow a preju- 
dice thus engendered to close their eyes to its 
benefits. The Baptist General Association of 
Kentucky, at its organization, declared views 
_ similar to those just quoted from the address of 
the Triennial Convention. 


There is nothing that more intimately pertains to the 
prosperity of the Baptists in Kentucky, than the establish- 
ment of a school or schools for the education of those of 
our young ministers who may desire it. That age 


196 THE GENESIS OF 


of foily is past,* which denied to a man because he was 
a preacher of the gospel, the right to improve his mind. 
There is neither Scripture nor common sense for saying 
that a manif he is called to preach, ought to go immedi- 
ately to work, and use no endeavors and avail himself of 
no Opportunity to obtain an education. There is 
nothing criminal in being learned—indeed, it is 
right and proper for every man, minister or laymen, 
but more especially the former, to cultivate and en- 
large by every means in his power, those faculties with 
which he was endowed by his maker, to enlighten and 
benefit mankind. It cannot be wrong for a minister Of 
Jesus to be taught to read the inspired language of the 
Scriptures—the language which the Holy Ghost used in re- 
vealing the glorious truths of the Bible, it cannot be crim- 
nal for any one to read, much less him whose peculiar 
business it is to expound and enforce it. t 

The missionaries always repudiated, the 
charge made by their opponents that the 
churches were to call men to preach. ‘They did 
feel the obligation to search out and aid those 
whom God had called to preach. ‘The history 
of the attacks made on missions by Taylor, Par- 
ker and Campbell show how their favorite point 
of attack was education and especially theolog- 
ical education. This same attack was continued 
by their successors. 

(1) In one of the circulars of the Pilgrim’s 
Rest, Ala., Association, written by Rev. Henry 
Petty, we find the following: 

We view theological schools unwarranted in the Word of 
God and dangerous to religious liberty. And wherever 
they have been organized, whether Jewish, pagan. heathen, 


*The Kentucky General Association of Baptists was 
organized in 1837. 

t+Minutes of the General Association of Baptists in Ken- 
tucky, for 1837, page 15. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 197 


Roman Catholic, or Christian, they have been a source of 
persecution and bloodshed on the Church of Christ. = 
(2) The following extract is from the consti- 
tution of the Ebenezer Association of Alabama: 
We do not hold in union any church that retains in their 
fellowship members that belong to any of the following 
institutions, to wit: Theological Schools, State Convention, 
Missionary Society, Tract Society, Sunday School Union, 
Temperence Society, or any other society that is tributary 
to the missionary plan, as it now exists in the United 
States; neither will we knowingly correspond with, nor re- 
ceive acorrespondence from, any association, that con- 
tinues churches in fellowship who are members, or whose 
members, belong to any of the above named societies. + 


(3) In the debates in Alabama prior to the 
forming of the States Convention, Mr. William 
Crutcher, known as a New-Tester, thus choice- 
ly and chastely delivered himself: 

Old Simeon was President of the College at Jerusalem, 
and Gamaliel his successor made it a theological school, 
and Paul who was brought up at his feet came out a pol- 
ished persecutor....It seems to me to be enough to stop 
the mouth of the whole world, with regard to theological 
schools to make preachers, and it looks more like the bot- 
tomless pit spoken of in the Revelation to make locusts, 
than anything else; for a bottomless pit has no foundation 
in the Scriptures as an institution of God. I am told 
that a locust makes a track like a sheep’s track only it is 
larger, etc. t eg 

(4) Even when the value of education in other 
callings and professions was acknowledged, 
the Hardshells still demanded that it be with- 


*Riley’s History of the Baptists of Alabama, page 110. 
+Riley: History of Alabama Baptists, p. 122. 
+Holcombe’s History of the Baptists in Alabama, p. 90. 


198 THE GENESIS OF 


held from the ministry.* The Pilgrim’s Rest 
Association, in a circular of 1838, observed that: 

Here, perhaps, an objection will arise which is, that by this 
way of arguing, allhuman learning seems to be utterly 
condemned. We answer, it follows not because it is not to’ 
be allowed in this way, that therefore it is not any use. 
We do believe it to be a useful thing in its right place, 
which is for statesmen, physicians, lawyers, and gentlemen, 
yea, for all men, who can attain to it as men.{ ..above all 
other qualifications, that this world can give, but briny it 
once to bea help to understand the mind and will of God, 
in the Holy Scriptures, and in that respect it becomes 
detestable filth and dross. ¢ 

Not only did the opponents of missions always 
attack ministerial education but the friends of 
missions always defended it. The advocates of 
the one were the advocates of the other. The 
two interests were intimately and even vitally 
connected in the mind of both friends and foes. 
As we have given some references to show that 
this was true of the foes, so will we give some 
to show that it is likewise true of the friends of 
missions. 

(1) The same Bowdenheim .Association jin 
Maine which had taken the lead in mission 
work took the lead also in founding a theolog- 
ical seminary. 

(2) Colby University was the result of stich 
a spirit. 

(3) Note also two significant facts in regard 
to Newton Theological Seminary. First, 


*Compare the quotation from Parker, on pages 131, 132 
of this Thesis. 

tNote the fine distinction between gentlemen and 
preachers, or even between men and preachers. 

t{Holcombe’s History of Alabama Baptists, p. 287. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 199 


Luther Rice was on the committee to take the 
subject into consideration. Second, the cost, 
$7,988, was contributed by thirty persons and 
one missionary society. This Seminary was 
opened October Wth, 1825. 

(4) The various State Conventions, when 
organized, almost without exception, stated mis- 
sions and education as two of the causes the or- 
ganization was intended to promote. For exam- 
ple, when the General Association of Kentucky 
was organized, of the four objects named, the 
second is ‘‘to foster a more thorough education 
in the ministry and to encourage education 
among the people.’’ And the fourth is ‘‘ the 
support of foreign missions.” 

(5) Georgetown College in Kentucky was 
organized to secure a better educated ministry 
to resist Campbellism. 

(6) Of Mercer University it has been elo- 
quently said: ‘‘At first it encountered fierce 
opposition. Like a young Hercules, it had 
to grapple in its cradle the twin serpents 
Anti-mission and Anti-education, and throttle 
them.’’* 

And so we might trace the rapidly increas- 
ing institutions of learning among the Baptistst 


*Address on Mercer University by Rev. J. G. Ryals, 
D. D., published in Baptist Centennial Volume, p. 123. 

+An article on Higher Education Among American Bap- 
tists by Prof. A. T. Robertson, D. D., contains a list of the 
State denominational colleges and the dates of their or- 
ganizations up to 1845. The names of many established 
since that time are also given. The article was published 
in the Baptist Argus of January 24, 1901. 


200 THE GENESIS OF 


and we would find that they have been organ- 
ized not only by missionary people but also for 
missionary reasons. One of the highest ex- 
emplifications of this fact is the missionary 
spirit of the Southern Baptist Theological 
Seminary. This spirit is not only the bright- 
est jewel in her crown, but its lustre and radj- 
ance are beginning to attract the attention of 
the Christian world. Her ‘* Missionary Day”’ 
and her missionary enthusiasm are everywhere 
causing comment and compelling imitation. 

To sum up, then, the relation of missions to 
education in our denomination : 

1. Missions caused its need to be felt. 

2. The foreign missionary organizations 
brought the educational issue into being. 

3. Missionaries advocated it. 

4. Anti-missionaries opposed it. 

5. The same organizations defended and 
propagated both missions and education. 

They have ever thriven together and 
languished apart. Though they are now, for 
the sake of convenience, carried on by different 
Boards of the same body, yet the accurate his- 
torian must point his moralizing finger at for- 
eign missions and say to ministerial education, 
‘* Son, behold thy mother !”’ 


CHAPTER IX, 


RELATION OF THE FOREIGN MIS- 
SION MOVEMENT TO ORGAN- 
IZATION. 


The district association was already among 
us as an institution long before the foreign 
mission movement began. ‘There is little need 
to describe it in those early days. since the 
changes have not been great. There were 
some who feared it contained the seeds of an 
hierarchy. History has shown how little this 
fear has been justified. Still to prevent the 
facts, it were well to have the fear. The 
nearest approach to a realization of the fear 
was in Kentucky, and even there it did not 
materialize.* That fear is not now enter- 
tained. It is to be regretted that the associa- 
tional meetings have grown more formal, and 
that the churches have, to a large extent, 
ceased to submit to it for fraternal sympathy 
and advice vexed questions of doctrine and 
discipline. The prevalence of the denomi- 
national paper in the land is one cause of this. 


*The appointment of Samuel Harris as an ‘‘Apostle”’ in 


Virginia was much prior to 1812. 
(201) 


202 THE GENESIS OF 


The minutes and reports have also become 
more statistical and less hortatory and didactic, 
while the circular letter is now generally 
omitted. These things, and the fact that gen- 
eral denominational interests are given more 
time, while the individual churches are given 
less, constitute the chief changes. 


The district association is not the result of a 
missionary movement, so much as of the desire 
of Christians belonging to different churches 
in the same denomination to get together for 
counsel, sympathy and advice in regard to the 
various questions of doctrine and discipline 
‘constantly arising. This feeling and need will 
be found to predominate in all the earlier asso- 
ciations. It caused the Philadelphia Associa- 
tion to publish its famous Confession of Faith. 
It caused the promulgation in the North of the 
New Hampshire Confession of Faith. It crops 
out in all the circular letters sent forth by the 
associations. The first letter of this kind de- 
voted entirely to missions was the one sent out 
by the Charleston Association in 1814 on the 
strength of Rice’s visit the preceding year. A 
German historian quoted by Dr. Geo. B. Eager 
in the ‘‘ Baptist Argus” of January 24, 1901, 
says of American Baptists, that ‘‘ their rapid 
growth is contemporaneous and coterminous 
with the development of the IDEA OF THE 
ASSOCIATION OF THEIR CHURCHES.” 
It is the rather true that the growth and 
development of the churches caused the associ- 
ational idea. It came in response to a felt 
need. When it came it of course furthered 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 203 


growth, coming as at oncea result and a cause, 
and, as was shown in Chapter I., was to a cer- 
tain extent missionary. But, notwithstanding 
the missionary activity, and its results, of the 
Philadelphia Association, I maintain that the 
missionary idea was not fundamental nor pri- 
mary. When the anti-missionary split came, 
some of the oldest and strongest associations 
unanimously went Hardshell, both North and 
South. (Cf. the action of the Chemung and 
other Northern Associations.) The Kehukee, 
a daughter of the Charleston and a grand- 
daughter of the Philadelphia Association, and 
the Pilgrims’ Rest Association are examples 
in the South. Had missions been the fun- 
damental idea in their organization this would, 
of course, have been impossible. Not only did 
many of the old associations go anti-mission, 
but in Missouri and other States the first as- 
sociations formed were formed by Hardshells. 
The Hardshells have district associations now, 
and have never made a fight against them, 
which fight they would surely have made if 
they had even suspected them of an inherent 
missionary taint. Nor are the Conventions, 
which are strictly missionary bodies, a develop- 
ment from the association; nor the General 
bodies a further evolution of the State Conven- 
tion. The missionaries, indeed, took advantage 
of the fact that the associations were in existence 
and used them, and the incidental missionary 
activity which had developed in them, as far as 
possible. But when Luther Rice returned to 
Awmerica he found no instrument perfectly fitted 


204 THE GENESIS OF 


for the missionary work; hence, the necessity 
of organizing the Triennial Convention. But 
when that Convention was organized, the 
Associations lacked adaptability to do even the 
local work, and so State Conventions and local 
missionary societies came into being. This is 
not theory but history, and one of the triumphs 
of the foreign mission movement has been its 
success in making Baptist associations so 
thoroughly missionary, sometimes, and not alto- 
gether without loss, to the almost total exclu- 
sion of the original idea in their formation. 


STATE CONVENTIONS. 


(1) In 1802 the Massachusetts Baptist Mis- 
sionary Society was organized at the First 
Baptist Churchin Boston. This, in the course 
of time, led to the organization of the Massa- 
chusetts Baptist State Convention in 1825.* 

(2) But South Carolina was the first to form 
a State Convention. An address was first sent 
out ‘‘to the different Baptist associations in the 
State of South Carolina.”’ The reasons for it are 
a neglect on the part of the churches of a proper 
zeal in education and missions. The address 
also complains that ‘‘ The plan of assisting 
pious young men in obtaining education for the 
ministry which used to belong exclusively to 
the Baptists, has been adopted by these (other) 
denominations,’’ while among Baptists igno- 
rant men insensible of the defects in themselves 
““are bold and confident of their knowledge 


*Compare p. 16 of this Thesis for an account of the origin 
of this Society. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 205 


and abilities, and venture upon subjects to 
which they are unequal, in language which is 
not proper, and with reasoning which is not 
just.’’ Not only that, but ‘‘entrance into the 
ministry is made so easy that every person 
with warm passions, apparent piety and a lit- 
tle fluency of speech can readily get encourage- 
ment to enter on the ministerial character and 
work.’ ‘The address proposes that a general 
meeting of all the Baptist associations in the 
State be held to consider the two subjects of 
education of ministers and the sending the gos- 
pel to the destitute. ‘‘ Each of these subjects 
embraces two important objects: the first of 
which respects the immediate assistance of 
pious young men designed for the gospel min- 
istry, by giving them a knowledge of language 
and general science; the second, for the es- 
tablishment of the theological seminary pro- 
posed by the General Convention. For for- 
eign missionary purposes, contributions are 
proposed—first, for sending the gospel to the 
heathen ; secondly, to the destitute of our own 
country. The whole to be conducted in strict 
connection with the General Convention, in 
which we consider the interests of the Baptists 
in America, virtually and happily combined.” 
This address was sent out in 1820, and was, as 
might have been expected, from the Charleston 
Association. Accordingly on December 4, 


*This was Columbian College, but the influences thus 
‘set in motion finally resulted in the organization of the 
Southern Baptist Theological Seminary, first at Greenville, 
S. C., and now at Louisville, Ky. 


206 THE GENESIS OF 


1821, at Columbia, S. C., was held the meet- 
ing proposed. The organization was styled 
‘“ The State Convention of the Baptist Denom- 
ination in South Carolina.’”’ Its objects were 
those suggested and specified by the circular 
address calling them together.* 

(3) In 1822, under the influence of the 
Georgia and Ocmulgee Associations, and not 
without opposition, the ‘‘ General Baptist As- 
sociation of the State of Georgia’’ was formed 
‘*to confer together on subjects of general in- 
terest and plans of public utility; and to devise 
and recommend schemes for the revival of ex- 
perimental and practical religion; for the pro- 
motion of uniformity in sentiment, practice and 
discipline; for the extension of the gospel by 
missions, by Bibles and tracts, and for the ful- 
filment of that Scriptural injunction, ‘ provoke 
one another to good works.’ ’’t 

(4) In New York in 1821 the work of various 
missionary societies resulted in a State Con- 
vention but not until the union of that body 
with the Hamilton Missionary Society was the 
State Convention formed on its present basis. t 

(5) The Connecticut State Covention was or- 


*Cf. address of the Charleston Association and first copy 
of Convention minutes. 

+Constitution of General Baptist Association of Georgia, 
quoted in History of Georgia Baptists compiled by ‘“‘Chris- 
tian Index.’’ 

{Compare American Church Hist., Vol. II., Baptists, by 
Dr. Newman, p. 405, with Vedder’s History of Baftists, in 
Middle States, p. 107; note and Dargan’s Ecclesiology, p. 
108. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. Oe 


ganized in 1823 with no opposition. The Vir- 
ginia State Convention was organized the same 
year against a powerful and determined oppo- 
sition. ‘‘Out of the twenty associations in the 
State, with a membership of about 40,000, 
only fifteen delegates representing a few of the 
associations were present at the meeting for 
organization.”’* This opposition was of course 
by the anti-missionaries. 

(6) The Maine State Convention was organ- 
ized in 1824; no real opposition. 

(7) Vermont Convention organized in 1825 
with comparative ease. ‘The Alabama Conven- 
tion was organized the same year. The vindic- 
tive animus of the opposition there has been al- 
ready narrated. 

The spirit of the first Baptist State Convention of Alaba- 
ma proved to be essentially missionary. After the organ- 
zation, by the election of Rev. Charles Crow as President 
and Rev. J. A. Ranaldson as Secretary, the bodv proceeded 
to business. It numbered about twenty members. Both 
in the constitution adopted, and in the address prepared to 
the Baptists of Alabama, the Convention was pronounced 
in favor of foreign and domestic missions, and of render- 
ing aid to pious and intelligent young men called of God 
to preach the gospel.+ 

(8) The New Hampshire Convention was 
organized in 1826. 

(9) Pennsylvania Convention held its first 
session in 1827. 

(10) New Jersey and North Carolina were 
organized in 1830. 


*Amer. Ch. Hist., Vol. II., Baptist, by Dr. Newman, p. 
405. 
+Riley’s History of the Baptist of Alabama, p. 39. 


208 THE GENESIS OF 


No difficulty was experienced in New Jersey; 
but the tug-of-war came in North Carolina. 
Repeated efforts were made, only to result in 
failure. Finally a small fraction of the de- 
nomination effected a successful organization in 
1830, which in the course of years has drawn to 
itself the bulk of the Baptists, both in brains 
and numbers, and the opposition has finally 
melted away. 

(11) Tennessee, after similar experience, 
started her State Convention in 1832. 

(12) In Kentucky, ‘‘the missionary societies that had so 
warmly and liberally supported foreign and domestic mis- 
sions before the ‘‘Christian Baptist” ‘‘stopped’’ their 
operations, had been dissolved. The first thing to be done 
in the new interprise, therefore, was toform a constitu- 
tion for a Convention.* - _ 

This was done by preaching missions, and in 
December, 1831, chiefly through the influence 
of Dr. Noel, who had been influenced by per- 
sonal conversations with Luther Rice, the 
Kentucky Baptist State Convention was organ- 
ized. It did good missionary work, mainly 
within its own limits for a few years, but 
gradually growing weaker, it perished. ‘The 
cause of its decline was the theory of its epis- 
copacy or “‘subordination’’ in the ministry. Its 
grandest work was that done by Dr. W. C. 
Buck, especially in regard to inducing churches 
to pay their pastors sufficient salary to relieve 
them from the stigma of being objects of 
charity, dependent upon the occasional dona- 
tions of their members, or of being obliged to 


“Spencer: History of Kentucky Baptists, Vol. I, p. 649. 


AMERICAN “ANTI-MISSIONISM. 209 


neglect giving themselves up to prayer and the 
ministry of the spirit in order to put in their 
time on the farm or elsewhere to prevent their 
families from starving.* Dr. Buck did a great 
work. The chief marvel about it is that it has 
been so little known and appreciated. The 
missionary element among Kentucky Baptists 
were not cast down by the failure of the Con- 
vention. The same great men who had 
planned and worked for the State Convention, 
abandoned their errors, profited by their mis- 
takes, and joined in with their brethren more 
recently aroused to the importance of a State 
organization. On Friday, October 20, 1837, a 
gathering, not large but great. met in the 
Baptist meeting house of Louisville, and after 
being called to order by Dr. W. C. Buck, or- 
ganized the ‘‘General Association of Baptists 
in Kentucky’’ to promote concert and harmony 
among the churches; to preach the gospel to 
the destitute; to advance ministerial education, 
Bible distribution, Bible societies and the sup- 
port of foreign missions.t The success of this 
organization broke the backbone of: missionary 
opposition, and the fight for united effort was 
easier in the states that followed. ; 

(13) Between the time of the first and 
second organization in Kentucky, Missouri 
Baptists had organized in 1834. Dr. Yeaman 
says of that body: 


*A venerable minister of the Long Run Association told 
me that he could remember when Kentucky pastors hardly 
received $25.00 a year salary. 

+Condensed from the minutes of the first meeting (1837). 

14 ° 


210 THE GENESIS OF 


Nothing can be more clearly and certainly attested than 
that the brethren who conceived the idea of a general 
organization of Missouri Baptists were possessed of a pro- 
found and abiding conviction that the gospel itself isa 
missionary enterprise.* 


Article II. of the Constitution distinctly 
states that the object of the organization is 
missionary. Here, asin Alabama, ‘Tennessee 
and Kentucky, the opposition was most bitter, 
prejudiced and determined, but happily proved 
unsuccessful. There has ever been in certain 
portions of the South and among certain 
classes, as the inevitable concomitant of igno- 
rance, an opposition to all forms of missionary 
effort. Sometimes latent, sometimes very ac- 
tive, but always manifesting itself in the same 
ways, using the same methods of attack, strik- 
ing at the same points, and using the same 
arguments. It was never very prominent in the 
North. Its greatest successes and defeats on 
its chosen battle fields have been fairly set 
forth, and it would make this chapter unsuffer- 
ably tiresome to follow its maneuvers any fur- 
‘ther in the various State Conventions. No 
State in the South has been entirely free from 
it, but in no State has it ever gained a final 
victory. 


Its end is necessarily destruction, and its 
destiny the blackness of darkness forever. At 
its funeral there will be no mourners and over 
its grave this Thesis will in all probability be 


*Yeaman’s History of Missouri Baptist General Associa- 
tion, p. 43. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. OLY 


the only monument. Should this record fail of 
reading or preservation, only scattered para- 
graphs in the glorious pages of American Bap- 
tist history will remain to intimate to the 
curious the erstwhile existence of that peculiar 
people who vainly attempted to clip the wings 
of the gospel and make it go the terrapin pace 
of the ‘* Hardshell.”’ 


CHAPTER X. 


THE RELATION OF MISSIONS TO 
HOME MISSIONS, -BIBLE AND 
OTHER SOCIETIES, AND THE 

SOUTHERN BAPTIST CON- 
VENTION. 


The Home Mission work as now organized 
aud representing the combined efforts of the 
eutire denomination is not an indirect but a di- 
rect result of the Foreign Mission work. The 
brief synopsis given here of the events that 
led to making it an independent movement, is 
condensed from Burrage and others. 

I. HOW THE HOME MISSION BOARD STARTED. 

(1) John M. Peck was born at Litchfield, 
South Farms, Connecticut, Oct. 31, 1789. 

(2) He became interested in mission work 
under the personal influence of Rev. Luther 
Rice. Rice insome of his reports to the Trien- 
nial Convention records having counselled with 
Peck on this subject. 

(3) Peck received an appointment from the 
Triennial Convention in 1817. 

(4) Hereached St. Louis by means ofasmall 
one-horse wagon, carrying himself, his wife 
and three children, and organized a church 


there in 1818. 
(212) 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. al 


(5) He used this place as a center from 
which to carry on missionary work in the re- 
gions beyond. 

(6) The Baptist Churches in the Missi;- 
sippi Valley were largely antinomian, antimis- 
sion, anti-Sunday-School, anti-Bible Society, 
etc. 

(7) A-severe struggle followed, in the course 
of which he greatly corrected these evils. 

(8) But complaints from these sources 
caused the Triennial Convention to withdraw 
its aid in 1820. 

(9) He continued his work under the aus- 
pices of the Baptist Missionary Society of 
Massachusetts, from 1822 on, ata salary of 
$5.00 a week, 

(10) In 1826 he made a forcible presentation 
in the Kast of the needs of Western fields. 

(11) In 1831 the Society sent Rev. Jonathan 
Going to join him. He was also much aided by 
James EK. Welch. 

(12) Peck and Going traveled together over 
the greater part of Illinois, Indiana, Missouri 
and Kentucky, and at Shelbyville agreed on the 
plan of the American Baptist Home Missionary 
Society. 

(13) On receipt of their report the Massa- 
chusetts Society sent a committee to confer 
with the New York Baptist Missionary Con- 
vention, which was also doing work in the West, 
with the.result, r 

(14) That the American Baptist Home Mis- 
sionary Society was organized in New York in 
April, 1832, with headquarters at that piace. 


214 THE GENESIS OF 


The quotations already so numerous abun- 
dantly show that not only were education and 
home missions soon incorporated among the 
objects of the Triennial Convention, but that 
even when because of their magnitude they were 
given incharge of separate boards, their inter- 
ests always waxed and waned and their pros- 
perity always rose and fell with the fortunes 
of foreign missions. ‘The measure of the effort 
abroad has ever been the measure of the suc- 
cess at home. ‘‘There is that which scattereth 
and yet increaseth.”” To contract the field is 
to contract the blessing. Only the water that 
is constantly running outward toward the 
ocean can remain fresh and life-giving, while 
yet inits narrow channels. The Baptists of 
America take one dollar out of their purse and 
cast it across the ocean; and lo! they find 
forty dollars tospend on their denominational 
needs and interests at home. 


Il. BIBLE AND OTHER SOCIETIES. 


It can surprise no one who has read thus far 
to be told that Bible Societies, Tract Societies, 
Temperance Societies, Publication Societies and 
Sunday Schools are also outgrowths of the 
foreign mission movement. We would know 
this by the company they keep and by the 
enemies they have made, if for no other reason. 
They are not only outgrowths of the foreign 
mission movement, but logical outgrowths. 
If you send missionaries, they must have 
Bibles and tracts. Who can publish them so 
well as ourselves? If we send. missionaries 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 215 


and whiskey barrels on the same vessels, where 
is our consistency? Even the United States 
Government knows and acts on the knowl- 
edge, that whisky is not good for Indians, 
Filipinos and soldiers; hence their recent regu- 
lations as to the ‘‘canteen’’ and the exporta- 
tion of intoxicants to their colonies. The Bap- 
tists saw these inconsistencies long ago, and 
saw another inconsistency, viz: that of for- 
bidding liquor to the heathen, while using it at 
home; hence the temperance societies. It also 
became manifest that the children as well as the 
ministers must be educated in the Bible; so the 
missionary wing of the denomination welcomed 
- Sunday Schools. The other wing, of course, 
opposedthem. Intime, Boards for the man- 
agement of the Sunday School work were 
especially created, but their interests are still 
intertwined with those of foreign missions. 
Many think that only the money given at home 
can bring any benefit to us, but history has 
shown that our richest blessings have come 
from the money and missionaries we have sent 
abroad. 

The American and Foreign Bible Society was 
organized in 1837, for the purpose of circulat- 
ing pure versions of the Bible inall languages. 
Its executive Board was located in New 
York City. 

The American Baptist Publication and Sun- 
day School Society was organized in 1840, for 
the purpose of publishing and circulating Bap- 
tist literature. Luther Rice and Dr. Staugh- 
ton were among its founders. 2 


216 THE GENESIS OF 


III. THE SOUTHERN BAPTIST CONVENTION. 


This mighty organization did not come into 
being because of slavery, but because of foreign 
missions. ‘There was no bar to fellowship with 
Northern brethren, in the fact that the Southern 
members of the Triennial Convention were 
usually slaveholders. The slavery question 
was merely the occasion of the division. The 
cause was that the Southern brethren wanted 
to do their own foreign missionary work with 
their own men and by. their own methods. 
The division was peaceable, and when the 
Southern body was formed it was called ‘‘The 
Southern Baptist Convention for Foreign Mis- 
stons.’’ Home missions, educational work and 
Sunday School Boards were subsequent devel- 
opments, just asin the North. The steps in 
organizing the Southern Baptist Convention 
were these: 

(1) In 1843, at Boston, a small association 
under the title of the American and Foreign 
Baptist Missionary Society was organized on 
anti-slavery principles. 

(2) Publications soon began to appear in the 
religious periodical press which intimated that 
the acting Board of the Triennial Convention 
would no longer tolerate slavery. 

(3) Ata meeting of the Alabama State Con- 
vention in 1844, a publication of this kind, sup- 
posed to have been written by Dr. R. E. Patti- 
son, then Home Secretary of the Boston Board, 
was read and what is now known as the ‘‘Ala- 
bama Resolutions’? were passed. The second 
of these is: 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 2Y7 


Resolved, that our duty at this crisis requires us to de- 
mand from the proper authorities in all those bodies to 
whose funds we have contributed, or with whom we have 
in any way been connected, the distinct, explicit avowal 
that slaveholders are eligible, and entitled, equally with 
non-slaveholders, to allthe privileges and immunities of 
their several unions; and especially to receive any 
agency, mission, or other appointment, which may run 
within the scope of their operations or duties. 


(4) The Board of the Triennial Convention, 
among other things, said in their reply, ‘‘One 
thing is certain, we can never be a party to 
any arrangement which would imply approba- 
tion of slavery.” 

(5) This answer was condemned by the 
Board of the Foreign Missionary Society in Vir- 
ginia, and the churches and associations of the 
Southern States were requested to send mes- 
sengers to meet in Augusta, Georgia, in May, 
1845. 

(6) _But in April, 1845, the American Baptist 
Missionary Society in session at Providence, 
R.I. passed resolutions setting forth the ex- 
pediency of separate organizations at the 
South and North ‘‘in promoting the objects 
which were originally contemplated by the 
Society.” It was advised that a committee be 
appointed and the separation be a peaceful and 
fraternal one. 

(7) In response to the call of the Virginia 
Mission Society, there met in Agusta, Ga., May 
8th, 1845, 310 delegates from the following 
‘States: Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, 
South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Louisiana, 
Kentucky and the District of Columbia, and 


218 THE GENESIS OF 


other States were represented by letter. 
Thus was organized the Scuthern Baptist 
Convention. Boards of Foreign and Domestic 
Missions were appointed, located respectively 
in Richmond, Va., and Marion, Ala. Adoniram 
Judson’s approval of this course on the part 
of the South was set forth in his address to the 
Southern Baptist Convention, an account of 
which is given on page 53in Chapter II. of this 
Thesis. 

After the organization of the Southern Bap- 
tist Convention, we do not purpose to follow 
the history further in detail. It would be of 
interest, to the author, at least, to write the 
history of the great newspaper wars against 
boards waged by such newspapers as the 
American Baptist Flag, The Texas Baptist 
and Heraldand other papers of that ilk. The 
story would read strangely, like that in Vir- 
ginia and Kentucky when Alexander Campbell 
and Daniel Parker wielded their caustic pens. 
Newspaper assaults were made on the mission 
work in Rhode Island, and even in Maine for a 
short while in the early days, but the brethren 
turned in disgust from those who pursued such 
methods of attack, and the papers died a natu- 
ral and speedy death. The trouble seems to 
be that the retrenching and economy-urging 
brethren soon conclude that it is wrong to 
waste money on adenominational paper and so, 
unless the missionary brethren buy it to see 
what is being said about them, such a paper 
soon perishes from want of nourishment. Our 
Northern brethren have been too astute to sup- 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 219 


port newspapers whose object was to destroy 
their work. ‘The Southern brethren, unfortu- 
nately, have not always been so wise. But 
never again can the fight be so severe as it has 
been in the past. [he archaic weapons of the 
anti-missionaries, deadly enough in their day, 
would provoke derision were it not for the 
malice with which they are still used. There 
has been and can be no improvement on them; 
as they were in the days of Parker and Camp- 
bell, so are they now, but every lessening of ex- 
pense, every missionary exploit in foreign 
fields, every success of organization blunts 
theiredge. ‘The expense can never again be as 
great, nor the outcome of organization as prob- 
lematical. The peoplecan never again be made 
to conjure by the power of the imagination a 
Convention into a hierarchy or a missionary 
board into prelacy. One would almost smile 
to see the ancient weapons again unsheathed by 
the doughty champions of Hardshellism; but as 
one cannot smile when an American soldier is 
slain by the archaic bolo or bow and arrow of 
the naked ‘Taglog, even though he knows 
how utterly futile they must finally be against 
the Krag-Jorgensen and the Maxim, so we can- 
not smile at the tottering and venerable argu- 
ments of the mission opponents, while they still 
deceive some of the uninformed and unwary, 
although we well know what the final result 
must be. 


CHART ER -x<tz 


THE LIGHT SHED BY THE LESSONS 
OF THE PAST: ON THE DUTIES 
OF THE PRESENT. 


Behold the foreign missionary movement. In 
1812 the American Baptist denomination was 
bound like Andromeda by the chains of anti- 
nomianism on the rock of prejudice, waiting 
for the Cretan monster of Ignorance to come 
and devour her. The foreign missionary move- 
ment was the Perseus that delivered her. I 
said the Baptist denomination: up to the time 
of Judson’s conversion there was no Baptist 
denomination, merely scattered churches here 
and there connected only by heredity and by 
the feeble bonds of associational advice. There 
is a pamphlet in the Seminary Library; it is 
meant to be a record of the United Baptists, - 
but by a curious transposition of the two mid- 
dle letters in the first word, it says, instead: 
‘The Untied Baptists.’’ The American Bap- 
tists in 1812 were Untied Baptists ; now they 
are United Baptists, and foreign missions has 
woven the silken cords of fraternal love that 
binds them together. We cast our seed, 


weeping, upon Asiatic soil far across the seas, 
(220) . 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 221 


praying that it might bring forth a harvest for 
the Burman idolaters, dreaming of none for 
ourselves. But the seed grew, although the 
smallest of the seeds of the earth, and became 
a great tree that filled the whole world. Its 
wide-reaching branches stretched across the 
ocean, and sent down its branches until they 
took root in our own soil; but unlike the banyan 
tree, from its beneficent boughs the rich fruit 
hung in golden clusters ready to fall at our 
feet. It became to usa tree of life, and we 
plucked from it its twelve manner of fruits: 
Foreign Missions, Home Missions, Christian 
Education, Ministerial Education, Tract Socie- 
ties, Bible Societies, Publication Societies, 
State Conventions, Temperance Societies, Dis- 
trict Missions, Sunday Schools and the South- 
ern Baptist Convention. Truly its fruit has 
been sweet and its leaves potent for the heal- 
ing of the nations. 

What light does this history shed on our 
present duty? We saw the issue; we saw the 
division ; we heard the clash of swords; what 
is the result? So far when we look at the 
bloody battlefields we are constrained to say 
to the foreign mission movement, ‘‘ No weapon 
that is formed against thee shall prosper.”’ 
The division was even. One hundred thousand 
went each way. The Hardshells, or as they 
prefer to call themselves, ‘‘’The Primitive 
Baptists,’’? now number 126,000,* but with 


*These figures are taken from The American Baptist 
Year-Book, 1900, which has just been received. The statis- 
tics relating to the Two-Seed Baptists are necessarily taken 


222 THE GENESIS OF 


fewer associations than at the time of the 
division. They have but few newspapers; 
few, if any,- benevolent institutions; no cohe- 
sion; no future; no connection with the lost 
world. The Parkerites, or T'wo-Seed Bap- 
tists. according to the census of 1890, as given 
by H. K. Carroll, LL. D., had 50 associations, 
with 473 organizations, 397 church edifices and 
12,851 communicants. ‘They are most numer- 
ous in Texas, Tennessee, Kentucky, Missis- 
sippi and Arkansas. Their Two-Seedism is 
practically all that distinguished them from 
the Primitive Baptists. Baptists of other 
kinds in the United States, such as Free- Will, 
German or Dunkard, Seventh-Day and Sixth- 
Principle, number 304,034 communicants. They 
are prevailingly missionary.* 

The Regular Baptists of the United States 
have 4,181,686 communicants, 29,473 ministers, 
43,427 churches. These are all missionary in 
name at least. They have 7 theological semi- 
naries, which teach 1,012 students; they have 
104 universities and colleges, witha total of 
26,126 students, 1,239 of whom are prepar- 
ing for the ministry. They have 84 acade- 
mies, seminaries and institutes, with 10,882 
pupils, 307 of whom are students for the 
ministry. There are 36 Baptist charitable 
institutions. There are 123 Baptist peri- 
odicals. Such marked growth where missions 
are held to and such notable stagnation where 


from the census of 1890, inasmuch as the Government 
Census of 1900 did not include religious statistics. 
*A merican Baptist Year-Book, 1900. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 223 


they are neglected or rejected cannot be mis- 
understood. We have nothing more to fear 
from the Hardshellism without; but we must 
educate, instruct and enlighten our people in 
regard to systematic giving, or it will grow 
within our missionary churches. Our members 
must be made missionary, and it is the duty of 
the pastors to educate them in systematic lib- 
erality. The great lesson we must learn is to 
guard the inside. Truth is not self-propagat- 
ing; it must be carried. ‘Truth crushed to 
earth will not rise again unless it be lifted. 
The gospel will not spread except it be 
preached, and men cannot preach except they 
be sent. Another lesson is that there can be 
no compromises with the anti-missionary spirit. 
It is as dissimilar from the spirit and com- 
mands of Christ as darkness from light. It 
has no inheritance in David and no part in the 
Son of Jesse. Yet another, and by no means 
the least lesson, is that the Baptists must do 
an independent mission work. Every reason 
that made it impossible for Rice and Judson to 
continue in the service of the Congregational 
‘Board makes it impossible for us to do our 
work by any other means than our own mis- 
sionaries. We must declare the whole council 
of God. Every reason which made it necessary 
that at the cost of a fight for existence and the 
splitting of the denomination in twain we should 
establish our own societies, boards and con- 
ventions, makes it imperative that we should 
avail ourselves of them now that they are 
ready to our hand. We could not do without 


224 THE GENESIS OF 


them then; we cannot do without them now. 
They are the best in the world; by them we 
get greater results at less expense than we 
could by any other organization in the world. 
We do our work cheaper and with greater 
results in proportion to the labor and money 
expended than any other great denomination. 
They are big enough; their plans are broad 
enough; their prospects are bright enough to 
engage all our energies. They are fitted to 
us and we to them. They bind together those 
who are agreed. Why not say, Let us evangel- 
ize the world in this generation by means of 
our Baptist Boards and Mission Societies? 
We do not need to mingle the dialect of Ashdod 
with the language of Canaan. Let us not only 
evangelize the world in this generation, but 
wherever our missionaries go let them leave 
behind them churches, associations, conven- 
tions, schools, seminaries, Bible and publica- 
tion societies and the other instruments for 
co-operative work. Let us not preach merely, 
but also deléver the gospel once for all delivered 
to the saints to faithful men who shall come 
after us that they in turn may deliver it to 
others. Let us not merely evangelize; that 
would be to sweep over the land like a prairie 
fire, and the ashes of our expired efforts would 
but’ fertilize the rapidly maturing crop of 
errors, heresies and idolatries that spring up 
with each succeeding generation. Let us not 
only burn but build and leave a self-perpetuat- 
ing gospel behind us; then our work will need 
to be done but once. 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 225 


Again, let us remember that missionary 
heroism may be and has been shown as truly 
in sending the gospel as in carrying the gospel. 
How I would like to call the honor roll of the 
faithful ones who have stayed at home and 
‘held the ropes.”’ Many of them have earned 
the martyrs’ crown. God bless the unremem- 
bered men and women who have given and 
toiled and hoped and prayed. They have held 
the shield over the missionary in the foreign 
field and received in their own bodies the ar- 
rows of the archers. The antinomian scorned 
and said as Ryland* did to Carey: ‘‘When God 
almighty gets ready to convert the world, 
He can convert it without your help.’’ The 
worldling sneered and said, as Sidney Smith, 
of Carey’s plan: ‘It is but the dream of a 
dreamer who dreams that he is dreaming.” 
But these forgotten heroes of faith said to the 
missionary, You go on; we will pay the expen- 
ses; we will hold the ropes. They waited a 
year—two years—five years—and not a conver- 
sion. ‘They called to the missionary, ‘‘Watch- 
man, what of the night?’ He answers, It is 
dark, utterly dark; no interest; no conversion; 
no hope; and yet not dark, for we have God’s 
Word. O faithful helper, donot turn loose the 
rope. Iam inapit, delving for immortal souls 
and at present itis dark; but the future—the 
future is as ‘‘bright as the promises of God.’’ 
Only after seyen years does the news come that 


*Dr. Ryland was not really, or at least permanently, an 
Antinomian, although he gave utterance to this sentiment, 


226 THE GENESIS OF 


the first heathen has turned to thelight. But 
that faithful watcher had not been discouraged. 
In fifteen years there is a little church in Bur- 
mah, a pin-point of light in illimitable dark- 
ness. The missionaries die and more mission- 
aries are sent. ‘Then the first fruits began to 
be gathered. 
“The morning light is breaking, 
The darkness disappears; 
The sons of God are waking 
To penitential tears,” 


Over among the Karens a nation is born ina 
day and Pentecost is duplicated. Then the 
faithful ‘‘hopers toward God,’’ as the Psalmist 
so sweetly puts it, say: We will send mission- 
aries to yet other fields. While we are reap- 
ing in India, we will sow in other lands. We 
will lengthen our cords and strengthen our 
stakes and enlarge the place of our habitation. 
We are debtors both to Jew and Gentile, Greek 
and barbarian, wise and foolish, bond and free. 
We will send the gospel to papal as well as 
heathen fields: Mexico, South America, yes, 
and Italy, in the shadow of the Vatican. We 
are ‘‘ready to preach the gospel to you that are 
at Rome also.’? We speak of acentury of mis- 
sions; we have not had it. For eighty years 
the faithful few have been trying to get Bap- 
tists to make the missionary experiment. We 
have routed the anti-missionaries; our problem 
now is to vitalize the Omissionaries, and their 
name is legion. Ifall the members of Mission- 
ary Baptist churches were Missionary Bap- 
tists, we could send the gospel to all the world 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 227 


and have it preached to every creature inside 
of five years. This is not exaggeration, but 
sober fact; not Quixotic imagination, but ‘*plain 
duty;”’ not an idle dream, but a ‘‘manifest des- 
tiny.” Dr. Broadus says in his address on 
“Christianity E-sentially Missionary’”:* “You 
remember how Archimedes said when he was 
finding out the wonderful power of the lever: 
‘Give me a place to stand on, and with a lever 
I will move the world.’ Oh, men and women, 
foreign missions are the place to stand on for 
Christianity to do its work for the human 
race.’ Amen and amen. If we start the 
stream to the uttermost parts of the earth it 
will water, fertilize and fructify every other 
interest on its way. Baptists have the means. 
We have the men, we have the money, we have 
the organization; the doors are open; we have 
learned how ; the command of our Lord is ur- 
gent; let us go over then and possess the land, 
for there remains much land to be possessed. 
(Some will say, Why don’t you say some- 
thing about somebody else besides the Baptists? 
One reason is, that I did not start out with 
that intention. ‘They may even call me ‘‘not a 
a preacher but a propagandist,’”’ a partisan 
and not an unselfish lover of the gospel. Well, 
Iam glad that Christ is preached, for what- 
ever reason and by whomsoever will. I believe 
that half a gospel is better than no Bread of Life 
at all. Iam willing for all other organizations 
and denominations to do their own work in their 


*Centennary Missionary Addresses, p. 23. 


228 THE GENESIS OF 


own way, andinso far as they preach the Truth, 
wish them God-speed. But when the thorough- 
bred church of Jesus Christ has all the means 
at her command to carry a whole Gospel, why 
waste time in idle vaporings of affected sympa- 
thy for hybrid organizations that can carry at 
best but a mutilated messayve to the lost?) 

We have come to understand that the mis- 
sionary is not an isolated individual, and that 
even when he isin foreign lands he is ‘‘in ar- 
terial circulation with the churches.’’ Wecan- 
not be indifferent to anything that concerns 
him. The connection should never be broken. 
A missionary is not only one who goes, but one 
who is sent. ‘The churches at home must 
ever pray the Lord to send forth the laborers 
into the whitening harvest; must ever look 
to see on whose “face shines the token ‘that 
God has called him to go far hence to the 
Gentiles, must ever help him to equip himself 
for the struggle; must separate him to the 
work to which he is called; must support him 
and sympathize with him and rejoice with him. 
He does not live to himself alone, nor for the 
heathen alone, but for usand for Christ. ‘‘How 
cau they go except they be sent?’’ It is ours 
to.send them. We are the Philippians who 
must once and again minister to their necessity 
in order that after awhile we may receive the 
sweet message from our missionaries: ‘‘I am 
filled, having received from Epaphroditus the 
things which came from you, an odor of a sweet 
smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to 
God And my God shall supply every need of 


AMERICAN ANTI-MISSIONISM. 229 


yours according to his riches in glory in Christ 
Jesus. Now unto our God and Father be the 
glory for ever and ever. Amen. Salute every 
Saint in Christ Jesus. The brethren which are 
with me salute you. All the saints salute you, 
especially they that are of Caesar's household. 
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with 
weur spirit. * (Pink, 4: 18-23.) 


Gateway Seminary Library 


From the library of 
W. Morgan Patterson 


1925-2010 


Gift of Ernestine North Patterson 


MULT 
“alll S0-DGF-664 


