^  \  \\ 


\«A«^i* 


PRECIOUS  THINGS  OF  GOD 


BT 


OCTAYIUS  WINSLOW,  D.D. 


'  Fntdous  fruits  brought  forth  by  the  sun." 

Deut.  xxxiii  li. 


NEW    YORK: 

ROBERT  CARTER  AND  BROTHERS, 

No.  530   Bkoadwat. 

18G7. 


^\^ 


THE  NEW  YORK 
PUBLIC     LIBRARY 

ASTOR.   LFKOX   AND 

TM.D    N   FOUNDATIONS 

R  19»3  I 


PREFACE. 


A  SLiGiET  glance  at  the  contents  of  this  volume 
will  convey  an  idea  of  its  character  and  design. 
It  is  intended  to  be,  not  so  much  a  systematic 
treatise  of  theology,  as  the  companion,  in  his 
hours  of  dovotional,  meditative  retirement,  of  the 
experienced  and  spiritual  Christian.  The  truths 
which  it  cont!iins,  and  the- style  3ii:which  they 
are  presented,  are  perhaps  more  adapted  to  those 
peculiar  seasons  in  the.  J&hristian  experience  of 
the  believer,  in  whieh  >profgnild  «'iiscussion  and 
laboured  thought  would  not  only  be  distasteful, 
but  out  of  jslace.  Bearing  with  him  the  volume 
in  his  sequestered  walks  with  God,  or  making  it 
the  sharer  of  his  temporary  seclusion  from  the 


iv  PKEFACE. 

active  enga<j;ements  of  life,  the  *'  precious  things 
of  God  "  which  it  unfolds  may  serve  to  shed  the 
perfume  and  the  lustre  of  Jesus'  name  and  work 
around  his  lone  and  pensive  path — cheering 
solitude,  soothing  grief,  and  dissolving  doubt, 
depression,  and  gloom.  Many  and  costly  are 
the  precious  things  of  God  not  enumerated  in 
this  work;  blessed  are  they  who,  from  the 
volume  of  their  personal  and  spiritual  experi- 
ence, can  complete  the  catalogue,  and  supply 
the  Author's  lack.  These  pages  address  them- 
selves pointedly  and  strongly  to  that  essential 
principle  of  vital  religion — the  experimental. 
We  really  know  as  much  of  the  gospel  of 
Christ,  and .  bf  the  Chrict  of  the '  gospel,  as  by 
the  power  of  the  Holy  U  tost  ^e  have  the  experi- 
ence of  it  in;  oar  .souls,  .All  other  acquaintance 
with  Divine  trutfi^' iiiusfe'" 'fee '  regarded  as  merely 
intellectual,  theoretical,  speculative,  and  of  little 
worth.  But,  to  apprehend,  in  some  measure,  the 
value,  the  glory,  and  the  preciousness  of  the  Lord 


i>EEFACE.  W 

Jesus,  and,  as  a  consequence,  to  esteem  Him 
above  all  good,  to  reflect  His  image,  to  labour 
in  His  service,  and  to  be  found  preparing  and 
waiting  for  tlie  happy  moment  described  with 
such  exquisite  beauty  by  Doddridge,  and  as  he 
only  could  portray  it, — 

**  That  blessed  interview,  how  sweet! 
To  fall  transported  at  His  feet; 
Raised  in  His  arms,  to  see  His  face 
Through  the  full  beamings  of  His  grace ! " 

— this,  this  is  spiritual  life.  And,  compared 
with  the  heart-experience  of  this,  when  we  take 
a  close,  realising  survey  of  eternity,  all  other 
subjects  of  study  and  employments  of  time  ap- 
pear but  solemn  trifling  with  our  destiny. 

The  Author  regrets,  that  to  the  discussion 
of  themes  so  transcendently  important  and  pre- 
cious he  should  have  brought  so  much  human 
feebleness  and  infirmity.  His  work,  planned 
amid  the  happy  tranquillity  and  repose  of  a 
long  and  warmly-attached  pastorate,  and  finished 
amidst  the  scenes  of  anxiety,   excitement,  and 


Yl  PEEFACE. 

toil  incident  to  a  new  and  more  extended  sphere 
of  ministerial  labour,  has  necessarily  been  ex- 
posed to  much  that  was  unfavourable  to  that 
matured  thought,  careful  composition,  and  liter- 
ary finish  which  he  considers  efforts  of  this  kind 
should  possess.  His  hope,  however,  is,  that,  im- 
perfect as  is  his  production,  the  Divine  Spirit 
may  yet  deign  to  bless  it  to  the  saving  of  pre- 
cious souls,  give  it  acceptance  with  the  Church 
of  Christ,  and  use  it  for  the  advancement  of  the 
cause  of  God  and  truth  in  the  world, — and  the 
glory  sJiall  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son, 
and  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  three  Persons  in  th« 
One  God,  world  without  end.     Amen. 

B^TH,  Se;ptember  X8^. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  L 

rAoa 

IHB  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST,  ...  1 

CHAPTER  II. 

THE  PRECIOUSrESS  OF  FAITH,      ...  33 

CHAPTER  III. 

THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  TRIAL,      ....  74 

CHAPTER  IV. 

THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  THOUGHTS,       .  .  113 

CHAPTER  V. 

THE  PKECIOUSIJESS  OF  THE  DIVINE  PROMISES,       .  140 

CHAPTER  VI. 

THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST'S  BLOOD,        .  .  160 


TIU  CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  VIL 

PAGS 
THE  PRECIOUS  ANOINTING,  ....  189 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

THE  PREOIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  CHILDREN,       .  ,  214 

CHAPTER  IX. 

THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  WORD,     .  .  .  245 

CHAPTER  X. 

THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  PRAYER,  .  .  .  296 

CHAPTER  XI. 

THE  PRECIOUSNFSS  OF  CHRIST's  SYMPATHY  WITH 

OUR  INFIRMITIES, 356 

CHAPTER  XIL 

THE  DEATH  OF  THE  SAINTS  FRfiCIOCS,  .  .  394 


PEECIOTIS  THINGS  OF  GOD. 


CHAPTER  I. 

THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST. 

"  Unto  you  therefore  which  believe  He  is  precious."— 
1  Pet.  ii.  7. 

A  FELT  conviction  of  the  preciousness  of  the 
Saviour  has  ever  been  regarded  by  enlightened 
ministers  of  the  gospel  as  constituting  a  scrip- 
tural and  unmistakeable  evidence  of  the  existence 
of  divine  life  in  the  soul ;  and  in  moments  when 
neither  time  nor  circumstance  would  admit  of 
the  close  scrutiny  of  a  theological  creed,  or  a  nice 
analysis  of  spiritual  feelings  and  emotions,  the 
one  and  simple  inquiry  upon  which  the  whole 
matter  is  made  to  hinge  has  been — "  What  is 
your  experience  of  the  worth  of  the  Saviour  ?  is 
Christ  precious  to  your  heart  ? "    And  the  answer 


2  THE  PRECIOr'^.NESS  OF  CHRIST. 

to  this  question  has  been  to  the  examiner  the  test 
and  the  measure  of  the  sours  sjDiritual  and  vital 
cliano-e.  And  how  jumper  that  it  should  be  so. 
In  proportion  as  tlie  Holy  Spirit  imparts  a  real, 
intelligent  sense  of  personal  sinfulness,  there  will 
be  the  heart's  appreciation  of  the  value,  suffi- 
ciency, and  preciousness  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  An 
enlightened  and  thorough  conviction  of  the  nature 
and  aggravation  of  the  disease,  will  enable  a 
I>hysician  to  form  a  just  conception  of  the  reme- 
dial process  by  ;vhich  it  may  be  arrested  and 
cured.  We  estimate  the  force  of  a  motive 
power  by  the  strength  ».f  the  body  It  propels. 
'J'hus,  as  the  conviction  of  our  lost  and  uiidone 
condition  deepens,  as  sin's  "  exceeding  sinfulness  " 
unveils,  as  the  purity  and  extent  of  God's  law 
opens,  as  the  utter  heipiessncss  and  impotence 
of  self  is  forced  upon  the  mind,  the  glory,  the 
wurih,  the  suitableness,  ana  the  preciousness  of 
Jesus  will,  through  the  teaching  of  trie  Spirit, 
piosunt  itsolf  vividly  to  tliC  mind  and  heart,  as 
constituting  the  one  oj  jv  "oundation  and  hope  of 
the  soul.  The  Bible  rci-^gnises  but  two  specific 
and  distinctive  characters  —  the  Sinner  —  the 
Saviour  ;  and  all  others  are  but  modifications 
uf  these.      The  saint  is  but  the  .dinner  convertef]^ 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  CHETST.  3 

justified,  pardoned,  adopted,  sanctified,  saved, 
glorified.  And  all  the  official  relations  sustained 
by  Christ  in  the  economy  of  salvation  are  but  so 
many  varied  and  beautiful  forms  of  the  one 
Saviour,  of  whom  it  is  said,  "Neither  is  thei^e 
salvation  in  any  other :  for  there  is  none  other 
name  under  heaven  give7i  among  men  whereby 
we  must  he  saved."  Thus,  then,  as  you  feel 
your  sinfulness,  you  will  estimate  the  fitness  and 
suitableness  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  your 
Saviour.  There  will  be  a  perfect  agreement  be- 
tween your  consciousness  of  guilt  and  your  be- 
lieving apprehension  of  the  excellence  of  the 
Atonement  to  meet  your  case.  Your  sinnership 
and  Christ's  Saviourship  v/ill  harmonise  and  dove- 
tail in  exact  and  beautiful  fitness  and  proportion. 
Oh,  what  a  divine  and  blessed  arranoement  is  this ! 
With  what  grandeur,  yet  with  what  simplicity, 
does  it  invest  the  scheme  of  salvation  1  What 
solemnity,  yet  what  hope,  does  it  throw  around 
the  present  and  the  future  of  the  soul !  It  seems 
to  fathom  the  lowest  depth  of  my  sinfulness,  while 
it  lifts  me  to  the  loftiest  height  of  God's  grace. 

In  a  volume  designed  to  place  before  its  readers 
a  few  of  the  precious  things  of  God's  revealed 
word,  we  commence,  as  is  most  proper,  with  the 


4  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  CKIU.ST. 

foimdation  and  source  of  them  all — the  dignity, 
luortli,  siiitahility,  and  preciousness  of  Christ. 
The  great  truth  upon  which  we  are  about  to 
expatiate  is  announced  in  the  words  ])laced  at 
the  head  of  this  chapter — "  Uiito  yon  therefore 
which  believe  He  is  precious!'  In  the  unfolding 
of  this  subject  may  there  rest  upon  the  writer 
and  the  reader  the  fresh  anointing  of  the  Holy- 
Ghost,  even  Him  of  whom  Jesus  said,  "  He  shall 
glorify  Me :  for  He  shall  receive  of  Mine,  and 
sJiall  shew  it  unto  you  ; "  that,  while  we  treat  of 
a  j)recious  Saviour,  His  preciousness  may  be  felfc 
in  our  hearts,  filling  the  whole  soul  with  peni- 
tence, faith,  and  love.  We  propose,  in  the  pre- 
sent chapter,  to  group  our  thoughts  around  two 
specific  views  of  the  subject — the  preciousxess 
of  Christ  —  and  the  character  of  those  to 
whom  He  is  precious. 

We  commence  with  a  consideration  of  Christ's 
personal  preciousness — His  2:)reciousness  in  Him- 
self. It  is  the  conviction  of  Christ's  personal 
dignity  and  worth  that  gives  to  faith  such  a  sub- 
stantial realisation  of  the  greatness  and  jirecious- 
ness  of  His  work.  We  have  need,  beloved,  to 
be  cautioned  against  an  error  into  which  some 
liave  fallen — of  exalting  the  work  of  Christ  above 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST.  5 

the  person  of  Christ — in  other  words,  not  tracing 
the  efficacy  of  Christ's  sacrifice  to  the  essential 
dignity  of  Christ's  person.  The  Godliead  of  the 
Saviour  admitted — His  atoning  death  becomes  a 
fact  of  easy  belief  Once  concede  that  He  who 
died  upon  the  cross  was  "  God  manifest  in  the 
flesh,'"  and  the  mind  will  experience  no  difficulty 
in  admitting  that  that  death  was  sacrificial  and 
expiatory.  The  sufferings  and  death  of  a  Being 
so  illustrious  must  be  in  harmony  with  an  object 
and  in  connexion  with  a  result  of  equal  dignity 
and  momentousness ;  and  where  will  there  be 
found  such  an  object  and  such  a  result  as  the 
SALVATION  of  man  ?  The  brilliant  achievements 
of  a  general  rushing  to  the  rescue  of  a  belea- 
guered garrison  may  so  exalt  his  personal  genius 
and  valour  as  to  invest  his  name  with  a  glory 
peerless  and  immortal ;  but  the  reverse  of  this 
holds  good  with  Christ.  There  had  been  no 
glory  in  His  achievements,  no  significance  in  His 
work,  no  efficacy  in  His  blood,  had  there  been  no 
divine  dignity  and  worth  in  His  person.  And, 
had  He  not  taken  a  single  step  in  working  out 
the  salvation  of  man — had  He  rej^aired  no  breach, 
wept  no  tear,  endured  no  agony,  shed  no  blood 
in  the  redemption  of  His  Church, — had  He,  in 


6  THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST. 

a  word,  conferred  not  a  solitary  blessing  upon 
our  race — He  still  had  been  tlie  Eternal  Son 
OF  God,  divine,  peerless,  glorious — the  object  of 
supreme  love,  adoration,  and  worship  by  all  celes- 
tial beings  and  through  all  eternal  ages.  While, 
then,  His  sacrificial  work  illustrates  His  marvel- 
lous grace  and  love  to  sinners,  that  work  owes  all 
its  acceptance  and  efficacy  to  the  value  imparted 
to  it  by  the  essential  Deity  of  His  person.  Thus, 
it  is  the  personal  preciousness  of  Christ  that 
imparts  an  official  preciousness  to  His  work. 

Who,  then,  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?  In  com- 
mon parlance,  men  term  Him,  "  our  Saviour'* 
But  do  the  great  body  pause  and  reflect  who 
Christ  really  is?  Do  they  regard  Him  as  the 
Creator  of  this  world — of  all  worlds  ?  of  their 
being — of  all  beings?  Do  they  consider  that 
''all  things  were  made  hy  Him;  and  ivithout 
Him  ivas  not  anything  made  that  was  made  V 
If  so,  would  they  not  give  Him  divine  homage, 
since  that  which  creates  must  be  antecedent  to  and 
above  the  thirg  created,  and  therefore  must  be 
pre-existent  and  divine  ?  But  what  a  grand  and 
glorious  truth  is  this  to  the  believing  soul — the 
absolute  Deity  of  the  Saviour — the  essential  God- 
head of  Christ!     How  it  endears  Him  to  the 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST.  7 

heart  as  the  Eock  of  ages  upon  which  its  hope 
is  built !  How  precious  must  be  every  evidence 
of  the  divine  strength,  stability,  and  durability 
of  that  basis  upon  which  the  believing  sinner 
reposes  his  whole  salvation.  Precious,  then,  is 
Christ  as  God.  Precious  in  His  Deity — pre- 
cious as  a  distinct  person  in  the  adorable  God- 
head —  precious  as  "  God  over  all,  blessed  for 
evermore."  But  pause,  Christian  reader,  for  a 
moment,  in  wonder  and  praise  before  this  august 
truth.  If  there  be  a  spot  where  we  should  put 
off  the  shoes  from  our  feet,  surely  it  is  this. 
AYith  what  profound  reverence,  with  what  silent 
awe,  yet  with  what  adoring  love  should  we  con- 
template the  Godhead  of  our  Pvcdeemer !  But 
for  that  Godhead  we  had  been  for  ever  lost ! 
His  obedience  to  the  law,  His  satisfaction  to  the 
justice  of  Jehovah,  had  been  of  no  efficacy  or 
avail,  save  only  as  it  partook  of  the  authority, 
dignity,  and  virtue  of  His  higher  nature.  Do 
not  question  the  existence  of  the  fact  because  of 
the  mystery  of  its  mode.  How  Jehovah  could 
become  incarnate  is  a  w^onder  we  shall  never,  in 
this  state  of  limited  knowledge,  fully  understa,nd ; 
enoigh  that  it  is  so.  Let  reason  reverently  adore, 
and  faith  implicitly  trust. 


8  THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST. 

"  The  more  of  wonderful 
Is  heard  in  Him,  the  more  we  should  assent; 
Could  we  conceive  Him,  God  He  could  not  be. 
Or  He  not  God,  or  we  could  not  be  men." 

Hesitate  not,  then,  to  give  full  credence  to  al' 
the  glorious  truths  of  the  gospel,  and  to  place 
the  entire  weight  of  your  soul  upon  the  Atone- 
ment of  Jesus,  and  to  believe  that,  sinner  though 
you  are,  be  it  the  very  chief,  such  is  the  divine 
worth  and  sovereign  efficacy  of  His  sacrifice,  you 
will,  you  must,  you  shall  be  saved  to  the  utter- 
most, because  your  Creator  is  your  Saviour,  and 
your  Judge  is  your  Justifier. 

But  this  personal  representation  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  involves  also  the  preciousness  of  His  man- 
hood. His  personal  alliance  with  our  nature, 
His  condescending  stoop  to  our  humanity,  is  not 
the  least  endearing  feature  to  the  heart  of  His 
believing  saints.  We  have  claimed  for  the  Son 
of  God  absolute  Deity ;  we  now  claim  for  Him 
perfect  humanity.  "  Flesh,"  real  and  substantial, 
yet,  ''harmless,  undejiled,  and  separate  from 
sinners,"  was  He  "  made.''  A  humanity  iden- 
tical with  His  people  in  all  but  its  original  and 
actual  sinfulness.  "  He  knew  no  sin."  And  yet, 
what  a  sin-bearer  was  He !     All  the  transerres- 


THE  PEECIOUSHESS  OF  CHRIST.  9 

sions  of  His  elect  met  upon  Him  !  But  He  could 
only  bear  sin,  as  He  himself  was  essentially  free 
from  its  taint.  Had  there  been  the  remotest 
breath  of  pollution  adhering  to  Him — had  one 
drop  of  the  moral  virus  circuited  through  His 
veins,  it  had  rendered  Him  utterly  and  for  ever 
incapable  of  presenting  to  the  justice  of  God  an 
atonement  for  sin.  He  then  had  needed,  like 
the  high  priest  of  old,  to  have  offered  for  sins 
'* first  for  Himself,  then  for  the  people."  How 
precious,  then,  beloved,  is  our  Lord  Jesus  as 
"  hone  of  our  hone  and  flesh  of  our  flesh.''  Think 
of  His  perfect  humanity — a  humanity  free  from 
sin,  and  therefore  capa^ble  of  dying  for  the  un- 
godly,— a  humanity  laden  with  sorrow,  and  there- 
fore capable  of  sympathising  with  the  afflicted. 
Precious  to  our  hearts  as  God  —  j^recious  as 
Man — precious  as  both  united  in  one — incon- 
ceivably and  eternally  precious  is  He,  whose 
name  is  "  IVonderfid,"  to  His  believing  saints. 
Tell,  oh  tell,  how  precious  is  that  humanity  of 
the  Son  of  God  that  partook,  by  actual  partici- 
pation, and  still  bears,  by  the  most  perfect  sym- 
pathy, all  the  sinless  weaknesses,  infirmities,  temp- 
tations, and  sorrows  of  His  people.  Precious  hu- 
manity !  to  which,  v^dien  other  human  friendshipa 


10  THE  PRECIOUSKESS  OF  CUEIST. 

are  changed,  and  other  Imman  love  is  chilled,  and 
other  human  sympathy  is  exhausted,  you  may 
repair,  and  find  it  an  evergreen,  a  perennial 
stream,  a  gushing  fountain  of  unchanged  affec- 
tion, tenderness,  and  sympathy,  meeting  and 
satisfying,  to  their  utn:iost  capacity,  your  hearts' 
deep  pantings.  Precious  humanity  !  that  dries 
each  tear,  that  bears  each  burden,  that  is  touched 
with  each  infirmity,  that  soothes  each  sorrow, 
and  that  succour  ^  each  temptation  of  His  people. 
"  In  all  things  it  behoved  Him  to  he  made  like 
unto  His  brethren,  that  He  might  he  a  merciful 
and  faith  fid  high  priest  in  things  pertaining  to 
God,  to  make  reconciliation  for  the  sins  of  His 
'people.  For  in  that  He  himself  hath  suffered 
being  tempted,  He  is  able  to  succoir'  them  ihat 
ai'e  tempted."  Oh,  love  the  Lord,  then,  all  yo 
His  saints  ;  laud  Him,  all  ye  His  people  ;  and, 
in  all  your  deep  griefs,  your  lonely  sorrows,  your 
sore  trials,  your  fiery  temjjtations,  your  pressing 
wants,  your  daily  infirmities,  repair  to  the  suc- 
courings,  and  the  sympathies,  and  the  interces- 
sions of  His  luimanity,  and  liarn  Imw  precious 
Jesus  can  be  to  the  hearts  of  His  suiiering  and 
sorrowinor  ones.     Upon  this  rock  of  Clirist's  com- 


THi:  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST.  11 

plex  person  God  lias  built  His  Church,  and  the 
gates  of  hell  cannot  prevail  against  it. 

Precious  is  the  Lord  Jesus  in  His  work.  That 
must  be  a  costly  and  substantial  superstructure 
that  reposes  upon  a  basis  so  divine  and  perfect. 
No  wise  or  experienced  architect  would,  at  a  vast 
expenditure,  lay  a  deep,  broad  foundation  for  the 
purpose  of  rearing  upon  it  a  mean  and  fragile 
fabric.  Look  at  the  ground-work  of  our  salva- 
tion. "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  Behold,  I  lay 
in  Zion  for  a  foundation  a  stone,  a  tried  stone, 
a  precious  comer-stone,  a  sure  foundation." 
Upon  such  a  foundation  we  look  for  a  super- 
structure in  all  respects  worthy  of  its  costliness 
and  capability.  We  find  it  in  the  work  of  Jesus. 
Oh,  what  a  superstructure  is  it — nothing  less 
than  the  salvation  of  His  Church !  Such  a  work 
was  worthy  of  God,  and  of  all  the  glory,  wisdom, 
and  power  embarked  in  its  accomplishment. 
Nowhere  have  we  such  a  perfect  view  of  the 
Divine  glory  as  through  the  medium  of  the  cross. 
That  magnificent  sky  that  spreads  above  us, 
studded  and  glowing  with  countless  myriads 
of  ^vorlds,  pjiles  before  the  subdued  glory, 
the  softened  splendour  of  the  cross  of  Christ. 


12  THE  1  RECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST. 

Nowhere  does  Jehovah -Jesus  appear  to  the 
spiritual,  believing  mind  so  exalted  as  when  He 
stoops, — so  glorious  as  when  in  eclipse, — so  holy 
as  wlien  bearing  sin, — so  loving  as  when  endur- 
ing its  punishment,  —  so  triumphant  as  when 
vanquished  upon  the  cross.  Oh,  study  not  God 
in  the  jewelled  heavens — in  the  sublimity  of  the 
mountain — in  the  beauty  of  the  vale — in  the 
grandeur  of  the  ocean — in  the  murmurs  of  the 
stream — in  the  music  of  the  winds.  God  ina<lo 
all  this,  but  all  this  is  not  God.  Study  Him  i^i 
tlie  cross  of  Jesus!  Look  at  Him  through  this 
wondrous  telescope,  and  although,  as  through  a 
glass  darkly,  you  behold  His  glory — the  Godhead 
in  awful  eclipse,  the  Sun  of  His  Deity  setting  in 
blood — yet  that  rude  and  crim.soned  cross  more 
fully  reveals  the  mind  of  God,  more  harmoniously 
discloses  the  perfections  of  God,  and  more  per- 
fectly unveils  the  heart  of  God,  and  more  fully 
exhibits  the  glory  of  God,  than  the  combined 
power  of  ten  thousand  worlds  like  this,  even 
though  sin  had  never  marred,  and  the  curse  had 
never  blighted  it.  Study  God  in  Christ,  and 
Christ  on  the  cross.  Oh,  the  marvels  that  meet 
in  it — the  glory  that  gathers  round  it — the 
streams  of  blessing  that  flow  from  it — the  deep, 


THE  PEECIOrSNESS  OF  CHPJST.  13 

refreshing  shadow  it  casts,  in  the  happy  expe- 
rience of  all  who  look  to  Jesus  and  live — who 
look  to  Jesus  and  love — who  look  to  Jesus  and 
obey — who  look  to  Jesus  and  embrace  that 
blessed  "  Jiope  of  eternal  life  ivhich  God,  that 
cannot  lie,  jwovfiised  before  the  ivorld  began.'' 

A  worthy  structure  this  of  a  fonndalion  so 
divine !  What  could  be  more  worthy  of  God, 
whose  essence  is  "  love,"  than  the  salvation  of  His 
l^eople  ?  In  nothing  could  He  appear  more 
like  Himself.  Upon  no  jDlatform  could  He  so 
honourably  and  completely  withdraw  the  veil 
from  His  perfections,  and  stand  forth  in  His 
full-orbed  majesty,  "  mighty  to  save''  as  this. 
Humble  believer  in  Christ,  you  are  saved ! 
Happy  saint  of  God,  you  shall  be  in  heaven  ! 
Christ  has  paid  your  debt,  opened  your  prison, 
broken  your  chains,  and  set  you  free  from  the 
law's  curse,  from  sin's  condemnation,  and  from 
death's  penalty,  and  you  will  be  for  ever  with 
the  Lord  !  Is  not  this  enough  to  make  yonr 
whole  life,  clouded  and  chequered  though  it  be, 
a  sweet  psalm  of  praise — thus  learning  the  first 
notes  of  the  song  that  will  employ  your  tongue 
through  eternity? 

How  precious  is  the  righteousness  of  Cbrist 


14  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  CHKIST. 

— a  rigliteousness  tliat  fully  justifies  our  person, 
completely  coverini^  all  our  cleformit}-,  and  pre- 
senting us  to  God,  "  comely  through  His  comeli- 
ness put  upon  us;"  wherefore  tlie  renown  of  the 
tilothed  and  adorned  Church  goeth  fo]-th  through 
all  the  earth,  and  men  inquire,  "  Who  is  she  that 
looketh  forth  as  the  morning,  fair  as  the  moon, 
clear  as  the  sun,  and  terrible  as  an  army  luith 
banners  ?"  And  look  at  the  preciousness  of  His 
sacrifice,  which  is  as  a  "  sweet-smelling  savour 
unto  God,''  ascending  ever  from  off  the  golden 
altar  before  the  throne,  in  one  continuous  cloud 
of  incense,  wreathing  the  persons,  perfuming  the 
prayers,  accompanying  the  offerings,  and  present- 
ing with  acceptance  every  breath  of  devotion, 
every  accent  of  praise,  and  every  token  of  love 
which  His  people  here  below  lay  at  His  feet. 
"  By  one  offering  He  hath  perfected  for  ever 
iheui  that  are  sanctified.''  That  "  o»e  offering," 
offered  once  for  all,  was  so  divine,  so  holy,  so 
complete,  so  satisfactory,  it  has  for  ever  23er- 
fccted  the  pardon,  perfected  the  justification, 
perfected  the  adoj^tion,  and  will  perfect  the 
sanctiHcation  when  it  j^erfects  the  glory  of  all 
the  elect  of  Jehovah.  Beloved,  is  not  this 
enough  to  check  every  sigh,  to  quell  every  fear, 


THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST.  15 

to  annihilate  every  doubt,  and  to  fill  you  with 
peace  and  joy  in  believing  ^  What  shouts  of 
praise  to  Jesus  should  burst  from  every  lip  as 
each  believer  contemplates  the  sacrifice  that  has 
secured  his  eternal  salvation !  When  Titus 
liberated  the  imprisoned  Greeks,  they  clustered 
around  his  tent,  chanting  his  praises  and  ex- 
claiming, vi^ith  impassioned  fervour,  "A  saviour  ! 
a  saviour  1  a  saviour  ! "  Oh,  with  what  deeper 
emphasis  may  every  child  of  God,  freed  from 
the  chains  of  sin  and  of  death  by  the  "  liberty 
wherewith  Christ  hath  made  him  free,''  extol  the 
person  and  chant  the  praises  of  that  glorious 
Saviour,  and  exclaim,  "  Jesus  !  Jesus  !  Jesus ! 
He  hath  saved  His  people  from  their  sins!" 
Believer,  evince  your  sense  of  the  preciousness 
of  this  great  sacrifice  by  bringing  to  it  daily  sins, 
by  drawing  from  it  hourly  comfort,  and  by  lay- 
ing yourself  upon  it,  body,  soul,  and  spirit,  a 
''living  sacrifice  unto  God.' 

How  precious  is  Christ  in  all  the  offices  and 
relations  luhich  He  sustains  to  His  people. 
Precious  as  the  Head,  the  covenant-surety  Head, 
of  His  people,  the  source  of  life,  the  seat  of 
power,  the  fountain  of  all  blessing.  Eeader, 
hold  fast  the  Headship  of  Chiist.     Acknowledge 


16  THE  PKECIOUSXESS  OF  CIiRIST, 

no  louislative  head,  no  administrative  head,  no 
authontative  head,  no  reigning  head  of  the 
Cliurcli,  but  the  LoED  Jesus  Christ.  There  are 
nnder-ciirrents  of  priestly  domination  in  the 
Church  of  God  in  the  present  day,  subversive  of 
tills  cardinal  truth,  against  which  it  behoves  us 
to  be  on  our  guard.  Acknowledge  no  spiritual 
Head  and  King  in  Zion  but  the  Lord  Jesus  ;  and 
evince  your  recognition  of,  reverence  for,  and  love 
to,  His  government,  by  vindicating  His  Head- 
ship, bowing  to  His  authority,  and  obeying  His 
laws.  Oh,  how  blessed  to  be  under  the  holy, 
benign,  and  gentle  government  of  Christ,  whose 
sceptre  is  a  sceptre  of  righteousness,  so  mild  and 
loving  in  its  sway,  that  "  He  ivill  not  h^eah  the 
hruised  reed,  nor  quench  the  smoking  fax." 

Precious  is  He  as  the  Husband  of  H:s  Church, 
to  whom  He  is  united  by  the  closest  and  most 
indissoluble  ties,  pledged  to  discharge  all  her 
obligations,  to  supply  all  her  need,  to  soothe, 
by  sympathy,  her  every  sorrow,  and  to  increase, 
by  participation,  her  every  joy.  Precious  is  He 
as  a  Friend— ihc  Friend  whose  love  is  infinite 
and  boundless,  changing  not  with  circumstances, 
chilling  not  with  indifference,  nor  wearyijig  with 
lapse  of  years — a  Friend  who  sheweth  himself 


THE  PEECTOUSNERS  OF  CHRIST.  17 

friendly,  who  lovctli  at  all  times,  and  wlio  stick' 
eth  closer  than  a  brother.  Precious  as  a  Brother 
■ — oiir  Goel,  our  next  of  kin,  claiming  and  exer- 
cising, as  such,  the  right  of  redemption,  and 
proving  Himself,  by  His  help  and  succour  in  all 
the  calamities  of  His  brethren,  to  be  a  *'  Brother 
horn  for  adversity."  Thus  might  we  travel  over 
all  the  offices  and  relations  which  the  Lord  Jesus 
sustains  to  His  saints,  and  find  in  each  that  which 
endears  Him  to  their  souls,  enthroning  Him  upon 
their  hearts  as  the  "  chief  among  ten  thousand," 
and  exhibiting  Him  as  "  the  altogether  lovely.'' 

But  to  'whom  is  Christ  precious  /  This  is  a 
most  important  question.  He  is  not  so  to  all. 
It  is  a  privileged  class,  a  peculiar  people,  a  little 
flock,  few  and  scattered,  hidden  and  unknov/n, 
v.'ho  feel  the  Saviour's  preciousness.  Only  to 
the  believer  is  Christ  precious  ;  the  declaration 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  is,  "•  Unto  you  therefore 
which  LELIEVE  He  is  precious!'  This  is  pliilo- 
sophically  as  well  as  scripturally  true.  There 
cannot  possibly  be  a  felt  conviction  of  the  worth 
of  an  object  of  Vvdiich  we  have  no  intelligent  and 
clear  perception.  There  must  be  something  to 
create  interest,  to  av/aken  admiration,  to  inspire 
love  ;  the  object  must  be  seen,  known,  and  tried 
B 


18  THE  rr.ECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST. 

Now,  the  only  spiritual  faculty  that  discerns 
Christ,  and  in  discerning  Christ  realises  His  pre- 
ciousness,  is— faith.  Faith  is  the  optical  faculty 
of  the  regenei^ate,  it  is  the  spiritual  eye  of  the 
soul.  Faith  sees  Christ,  and  as  Christ  is  seen 
His  excellence  is  descried ;  and  as  His  excellence 
unfolds,  so  He  becomes  an  object  of  endearment 
to  the  heart.  Oh,  how  lovely  and  how  glorious 
is  Jesus  to  the  clear,  far-seeing  eye  of  faith! 
Faith  beholds  Him  the  matchless,  peerless  One ; 
His  beauty  eclipsing,  His  glory  outshining,  all 
other  beings.  Faith  sees  majesty  in  His  mean- 
ness, dignity  in  His  condescension,  honour  in 
His  humiliation,  beauty  in  His  tears,  tran- 
scendent, surpassing  glory  in  His  cross.  In 
natural  things,  as  the  beauty  of  an  object  un- 
veils to  t1ie  eye,  it  awakens  in  the  mind  a  cor- 
responding interest.  The  grey  mist  of  morning 
slowly  rising  from  off  the  face  of  nature,  reveal- 
ing a  landscape  of  rich  and  varied  beauty — the 
blending  of  mountain  and  valley,  the  green 
meadov/s  and  winding  streams — presents  an  ob- 
ject which,  in  every  mind  susceptible  of  the  sub- 
lime and  the  beautiful,  inspires  the  feeling  of 
admiration  and  delight.  Beloved,  in  pro23ortion 
as  the  personal  dignity,  beauty,  and  excellence  of 


THE  PIIECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST.  19 

tlie  Lord  Jesus  unfolds  to  the  believiug  eye,  He 
becomes  more  sensibly  and  deeply  enshrined  in 
the  heart's  warmest  love.  We  must  know  the 
Lord  Jesus  to  admire  Him,  and  must  admire  Him 
to  love  Him,  and  must  love  Him  to  serve  Him. 

The  believer,  too,  beholds  a  suitability  in  Christ, 
sees  Him  to  be  just  the  Saviour  adapted  to  the 
necessities  of  his  soul;  and  this  renders  Him 
peculiarly  precious.  "  I  see  Him,"  exclaims  the 
believer,  "to  be  exactly  the  Christ  I  need — His 
fulness  meets  my  emptiness — His  blood  cleanses 
my  guilt  —  His  grace  subdues  my  sin  —  His 
patience  bears  with  my  infirmities — His  gentle- 
ness succours  my  weakness — His  love  quickens 
my  obedience — His  sympathy  soothes  my  sorrows 
— His  beauty  charms  my  eye.  He  is  just  the 
Saviour,  just  the  Christ  I  need,  and  no  words  can 
describe  His  preciousness  to  my  soul." 

There  is  thus  an  appropriation  of  Christ  in 
the  personal  experience  of  every  believer  which 
endears  Him  to  the  heart.  A  Christ  unappro- 
priated is  a  Christ  whose  worth  is  undervalued, 
and  whose  preciousness  is  unfelt.  The  believer 
can  say,  "  Christ  is  miiie,  and  I  have  all  thin<rs 
in  one,  even  in  Christ,  who  is  my  all  and  in  all." 
This  simple,  trembling  faith,  sublime  in  its  sim- 


20  THE  PEECIOUSXESS  OF  CHRIST. 

])licity,  mighty  in  its  tremblings,  sweeps  all  the 
trensnies  of  the  everlasting  covenant  of  grace  and 
all  the  fulness  of  the  Surety  of  the  covenant  into 
its  hip,  and  exclaims,  "All  is  mine,  because  Christ 
is  mine,  and  I  am  Christ's."  Do  not  shrink,  be- 
lovc'l  reader,  from  what  the  quaint  divines  of 
o.licr  days,  and,  perhaps,  of  a  deeper  experience 
and  of  a  sounder  creed  than  ours,  were  wont  to 
term  a  "  Clnlst-appropriating  faith."  If  you  have 
fled  io  Jesus  as  a  poor,  empty,  believing  sinner, 
there  is  not  a  throb  of  love  in  His  loving  heart, 
nor  a  drop  of  blood  in  His  flowing  veins,  nor  a 
particleof  grace  in  His  mediatorial  fulness,  nor  a 
thought  of  peace  in  His  divine  mind,  which  is 
not  yours,  all  yours,  inalienably  yours,  as  much 
yours  as  if  you  were  its  sole  possessor.  And  in 
proportion  as  you  thus  deal  with  Christ,  indivi- 
dually travelling  to  Him,  living  upon  Him,  living 
out  of  Him,  dealing  as  personally  with  Him  as 
He  deals  personally  with  you,  He  will  insinuate 
Himself  in  your  regard,  and  will  become  grow- 
ingly  precious  to  your  soul. 

There  are  peculiar  circumstances  in  the  be- 
liever's experience  when  Christ  becomes  especially 
precious  to  the  soul.  For  example  :  in  the  deeper 
ploughings  of  the  heait's  hidden  sinfulness — when 


THE  lEECIOtJSNESS  OF  CHPJST.  21 

the  Holy  Gh<xst  reveals  more  of  the  innate  cor- 
ruption of  our  nature,  and  gives  a  more  spiritual 
perception  of  sin's  exceeding  sinfulness,  oh,  how 
precious  does  the  finished  work  of  Christ  then 
become  ! — how  precious  the  blood  that  cleanseth 
from  all  sin  !  If  God  is  leading  you  through  this 
stage  of  Christian  experience,  beloved,  be  not 
alarmed  ;  it  is  but  to  build  up  His  dear  Son  upon 
the  vv^reck  and  ruin  of  your  own  merit,  strength, 
and  sufficiency.  He  Vv^ill  have  us  love  His  Son 
with  a  love  like  His  own  —  a  love  of  divine, 
supreme,  ineffable  affection — and  this  can  on]y 
be  felt  in  the  remon  of  our  own  nothinoness. 

In  circumstances  of  spiritual  relapse,  liov/ 
precious  does  Christ  become,  as  the  Eestorer  of 
His  saints,  as  the  Shepherd  that  goeth  in  quest 
of  His  stray  sheep,  and  bringeth  it  back  to  the 
fold  with  rejoicing !  How  unspeakably  dear  is 
the  Saviour  to  the  v/andering  yet  restored  heart  1 
Our  backslidings  are  perpetual  and  aggravated,  our 
affections  fickle  and  truant,  our  faith  fluctuating, 
our  love  waning,  our  zeal  flagging,  our  walk  often 
feeble  and  unsteady ;  but  Jesus  Vv'ithdraws  not 
His  eye  from  His  own  v/ork  in  the  soul,  and  never 
for  a  moment  loses  sight  of  His  stray-going  sheep. 
M],  there  are  fev/  aspects  of  the  work  of  Jesus 


22  THE  PRECIOtTSNESS  OF  CHRIST. 

nioie  precious  in  the  experience  of  the  saints  of 
God  than  His  divine  and  o-racious  restoring.s. 
"  He  restoreth  my  soul"  is  a  declaration  of  David 
which  finds  its  response  in  every  believer.  Pre- 
cious, then,  is  that  Saviour  who  breaks  the  heart, 
checks  its  waywardness,  restores  its  wanderini;^-s, 
heals  its  backslidings,  rekindles  its  We,  and  once 
more  wakes  its  languid,  silent  chords  to  sweet- 
est harmony. 

How  precious  is  Christ  in  the  season  of  fiery 
temptation  !  When  the  arch-foe  comes,  robed  as 
an  angel  of  light,  with  gentle  tread,  and  oily 
tongue,  and  soft  persuasiveness,  seeking  to  en- 
snare and  beguile  the  unsuspicious  and  unwary 
— levelling  his  darts  at  the  very  foundations  of 
our  faith — insinuating  his  doubts  of  the  truth 
of  the  Bible,  of  the  being  of  God,  of  the  sufti- 
ciency  of  the  Saviour,  of  the  reality  of  a  future 
world — thus  seeking  to  shake  the  confidence,  ob- 
scure the  hope,  and  destroy  the  comfort  of  the 
Lord's  people — oh,  how  precious  then  is  Christ 
as  the  Conqueror  and  Spoiler  of  Satan ;  as  He 
who  enables  the  trembling  believer  to  quench  the 
fiery  dart  in  His  own  blood,  and  to  take  refuge 
beneath  His  outspread,  all-sheltering  wing  !  How 
doubly  precious  must  the  Saviour  have  been  to 


THE  PRECIOUSXESS  OF  CHPJST.  23 

the  tempted  Peter,  when  Christ  assured  him  that, 
by  an  anticipated  intercession.  He  had  blunted 
the  keen  edge  of  the  sword  by  which  the  subtle 
enemy  sought  the  downfall  of  his  disciple.  Temp- 
ted believer,  the  Tempted  One — He  who,  alone 
and  unaided,  battled  with  Satan  those  forty  days 
and  nights  in  the  solitary  wilderness — is  He  who 
was  "  in  all  "points  tempted  like  as  we  ai-ej'  and 
"  hioweth  how  to  deliver  the  godly  out  of  temp- 
tation" and  will  shortly  bruise  Satan,  crushed 
and  conquered,  under  your  feet. 

In  the  hour  of  adversity,  of  trial,  of  sorrow, 
oh,  how  precious  is  Christ  in  the  experience  of  the 
believer  !  It  would  seem,  beloved,  as  though  v/e 
had  never  really  known  Him  until  then.  Cer- 
tainly, we  never  knew  from  experience  that  there 
was  so  much  that  was  human,  tender,  and  com- 
passionate in  His  heart  until  sorrow  touched 
our  own.  We  had  no  conception  what  a  fount 
of  sympathy  was  there.  A  new  bend  in  your 
})ath,  a  new  epoch  in  your  history,  or  a  nev/ 
stage  in  your  journey,  has  frosted  with  the  snow- 
flake  and  swept  with  the  storm-blast  of  winter 
the  entire  landscape  of  life ;  fortune  gone  — - 
friends  removed — health  failing — poverty  threat- 
ening— want  pressing,  oh,  how  dreary  and  lonely 


24  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST. 

seems  the  path  you  tread  !  But  pause — it  is  not 
all  v.'inter  1  Jesus  approaches !  He  uuveiis  a 
bosom  once  pierced,  shews  a  heart  once  sad,  and 
drawing  you  within  its  blest  pavilion,  hides  you 
from  the  wind  and  covers  you  from  the  tempest. 
You  never  thought  Jesus  had  a  heart  of  such  ex- 
quisite tenderness  until  now.  I  do  but  give  utter- 
ance to  the  experience  of  many  a  timid  believer, 
many  an  afflicted  Christian,  when  I  say  that,  look- 
ing back  upon  all  the  way  the  Lord  our  God  has 
led  us,  we  can  thank  Him  for  the  swellino;  surge, 
can  bless  Him  for  the  wintry  blast,  can  praise  Him 
for  the  falling  blow  tjiat  veiled  the  sky,  and  draped 
the  landscape,  and  smote  the  idol,  since  that  was 
the  last  occasion  of  making  the  Saviour  better 
known  to  you,  and  of  endearing  him  unutterably 
to  your  heart.  "  Thou  hast  known  my  soul  in 
adversities."  And  that  adversity  was  the  time 
in  which  you  were  more  fully  brought  to  hnoiu 
Him.  Chastening  seasons  are  teaching  seasons ; 
suffering  times  are  Christ-endearing  times  ;  try- 
ing dispensations  are  purifying  processes  in  the 
experience  of  the  godly.  The  Vvdiirlvvind  that  swept 
over  you  has  but  cleared  your  sky  and  made  it 
all  the  brighter,  but  deepened  your  roots  and 
made  them  all  the  firmer.     Earth  may  have  lost 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  CUEIST.  25 

a  tie,  but  heaven  has  gained  an  attraction.  The 
creature  has  left  a  blank,  but  Christ  has  come 
and  filled  it.  Ee verse  has  made  you  poor,  but 
the  treasures  of  divine  love  have  enriched  you. 
In  the  Lord  Jesus  you  have  more  tlian  found 
the  loved  one  you  have  lost ;  and  if  in  the  world 
you  have  encountered  tribulation,  in  Him  you 
have  found  peace.  0  sweet  sorrow!  0  sacred 
grief,  that  enthrones  and  enshrines  my  Saviour 
more  pre-eminently  and  deeply  in  my  soul ! 
■  There  is  a  supremacy  in  th.Q  feeling  of  Christ's 
preciousness  to"  the  believer,  which  is  worthy  of 
a  remark.  Christ  has  the  pre-eminence  in  the 
aflection  of  the  regenerate.  "  Whom  have  I  in 
heaven  hut  thee  ?  and  there  is  none  upon  earth 
that  I  desire  beside  thee.'"  Listen  to  His  own 
words,  asserting  His  claim  to  a  single  and  su- 
preme affection :  "  Whoso  loveth  father  or  mother, 
brother  or  sister,  wife  or  children,  more  than 
Me,  is  not  worthy  of  Me!'  There  are  natural 
ties  of  afiection — the  parental,  the  conjugal,  the 
filial;  there  are  ties,  too,  of  human  love  and 
friendship,  linking  heart  to  heart ;  but  not  one 
word  does  He  who  inspired  those  affections,  who 
formed  those  ties,  breathe,  denying  their  exist- 
ence or  forbidding  their  exercise      Nay,  the  reli* 


26  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  CnRIST. 

gion  He  came  to  inculcate  distinctly  recogTiises 
these  human  relations,  and  seeks  to  strengthen 
and  intensify  by  purifying,  elevating,  and  immor- 
talising them.  But  mark  the  emphatic  Vv^ord  em- 
ployed by  Christ — "  MORE  than  Me  /"  All  these 
affections  are  to  have  full  play  and  exercise,  but 
ever  to  be  maintained  in  i^rofound  subordination 
to  Himself,  and  to  be  so  sanctified  and  employed 
as  to  become  auxiliaries  and  aids  to  the  higher 
and  purer  affection  of  supreme  attachment  to  the 
Saviour.  In  a  word,  Christ  should  become  more 
supreme  and  precious  to  our  hearts  by  all  the 
sweet,  sacred  relations  and  affections  of  life. 
"VVe  should  enjoy  the  creature  in  Him,  and  glorify 
Him  in  the  creature. 

Christ  is  not  only  supremely,  but  He  is  in- 
creasingly precious  to  the  believer.  It  must  be 
so,  since  a  closer  intimacy  with  a  j^erfect  being 
increases  our  knowledge  of  His  perfection,  and, 
in  the  same  ratio,  our  admiration  and  love.  The 
further  the  believer  advances  in  the  divine  life, 
the  more  he  must  necessarily  become  acquainted 
with  Christ ;  for  his  religious  progress  is  the 
measure  of  his  growing  knowledge  of  the  Lord 
Jesus.  We  can  only  really  advance  in  grace, 
truth,  and  holiness,   as  we  have  close  relations 


THE  PBECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST.  27 

witli  Jesus,  constant  transactions  with  the  Savi- 
our. Christ  is  our  life ;  and  our  growth  in 
spiritual  life  is  Christ  increasing  within  us.  It 
is  as  utterly  impossible  to  cherish  a  holy  desire, 
to  conceive  a  heavenly  thought,  to  perform  a 
good  action,  to  conquer  a  single  infirmity,  or  to 
bafHe  a  solitary  temptation,  apart  from  a  direct 
communication  with  Christ,  as  for  the  lungs  to 
expand  without  air,  or  light  to  exist  without  the 
sun.  Oh,  yes !  Christ  is  increasingly  precious 
to  the  believer.  The  absence  from  His  beatific 
presence — distance  from  His  blest  abode — the 
vicissitudes  of  hfe — the  fluctuations  of  time — 
the  advance  of  infirmities — the  increase  of  anxie- 
ties and  cares — and  the  formation  of  new  friend- 
ships, render  not  the  Saviour  less  precious  to 
the  believing  soul.  Other  objects  often  lose 
their  attraction,  their  desire  to  interest,  or  their 
power  to  charm  us,  by  the  lapse  of  years  ;  but 
Jesus  is  that  glorious  object  who  grows  more 
precious  to  the  heart  in  time,  as  His  capacity 
unfolds  of  making  us  supremely  happy ;  and  in 
eternity  will  become  increasingly  the  object  of 
our  love,  and  the  theme  of  our  song,  and  the 
source  of  our  bliss,  as  growing  ages  unveil  His 
loveliness,  His  glory,  and  His  grace.      Beloved 


28  THE  TEECIOUSNESS  OF  CHEIST. 

reader,  is  Jesus  increasingly  precious  to  your 
soul?  Each  day's  history,  each  day's  trial,  each 
day's  sin,  each  day's  want,  should  endear  the 
Saviour  to  your  heart,  because  in  each  and  all 
of  those  circumstances  you  should  have  direct 
and  close  dealings,  daily  and  personal  transac- 
tions, with  Christ ;  and  you  cannot  cultivate  an 
intimacy  with  Christ  and  not  be  enamoured  of 
His  beauty,  charmed  with  His  graciousness,  and 
absorbed  with  His  love. 

Be  cautioned  against  an  eclipse  of  the  Saviour. 
Let  no  object  come  between  your  heart  and 
Christ.  Be  not  presumptuous  in  high  spiritual 
frames,  nor  be  depressed  in  low  ones.  Let 
not  your  conscious  shortcomings,  failures,  and 
stumblings  estrange  your  affections  from  Jesus. 
Nor  suffer  pride  or  carelessness  to  insinuate 
itself  if  the  Lord  confers  upon  you  some  espe- 
cial favour  or  proof  of  His  regard.  Tlie  foot 
is  more  apt  to  slide  in  the  smooth  than  in  the 
rough  path ;  and  it  is  more  difficult  to  carry 
with  a  steady  hand  the  brimmed  than  the  empty 
cup.  AYalk  humbly  with  God  in  all  circum- 
stances, especially  after  seasons  of  peculiar  near- 
ness to  Him  in  your  soul.  Forget  your  spiritual 
attire,  and  your  ornaments,   and  tliink  of   and 


THE  PEECTOUSKESS  OF  CHEIST.  29 

love  only  Him  who  clothed  you  so  beautifully 
and  who  adorned  j'ou  so  magnificently.  Do  not 
toy  with  your  graces,  but  look  to  Him  who  gave 
them.  Let  all  your  thoughts,  affections,  and 
admiration  be  concentrated  in  that  precious 
Saviour,  who  took  all  your  sins,  deformity,  and 
sorrow  upon  Himself,  and  who  transferred  all 
His  righteousness,  beauty,  and  blessing  upon  you. 
Oh,  let  your  heart  and  Christ's  heart  be  one 
heart ! 

Receive  as  precious  everything  that  flov/s  from 
the  government  of  Jesus.  A  precious  Christ  can 
give  you  nothing  but  v/hat  is  j)recious.  Wel- 
come the  rebuke — it  may  be  humiliating ;  wel- 
come the  trial — it  may  be  painful ;  welcome  the 
lesson — it  may  be  difficult ;  welcome  the  cup — ■ 
it  may  be  bitter ;  welcome  everything  that  comes 
from  Christ  in  your  individual  history.  Every- 
thing is  costly,  salutary,  and  precious  that  Jesus 
sends.  The  rude  tones  of  Joseph's  voicj,  v/hen 
he  spake  to  his  brethren,  were  as  much  tlie 
echoes  of  his  concealed  affection,  as  the  softest, 
gentlest  accents  that  breathed  from  his  lips.  The 
most  severe  disciplinary  dispensations  in  the 
government  of  Christ  are  as  much  the  fruit  of 
His  eternal,  redeeming  love,  as  was  the  tender- 


.so  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  CHPJST. 

est  and  most  touching  expression  of  that  love 
uttered  from  the  cross.  All  is  precious,  wise,  and 
salutary  in  the  dealings  of  Christ.  His  teach- 
ings, His  woundings.  His  withholdings.  His  with- 
drawings,  His  slayings,  His  changed  countenance, 
His  altered  tones, — when,  in  a  word,  His  uplifted 
hand  lights  heavily  upon  us,  smiting  us  seven 
times,  even  then,  oh,  how  precious  should 
Christ  be  to  the  believing  soul!  Then  it  is 
we  learn  by  experience  what  a  balsam  exudes 
from  His  pierced  heart  for  the  very  wound  His 
own  hand  inflicted  ! — what  a  covert  from  the 
stormy  wind,  and  what  a  hiding-place  is  He  from 
the  fiercft  tempest  which  His  ovni  providence 
created  I — what  a  succouring,  appropriate  to  our 
sorrow,  springs  from  the  very  hand  that  winged 
the  dart  which  pierced  us  throu  h  and  through  1 
Oh,  precious  Christ !  so  divine,  so  all-sufficient, 
so  indescribably  precious,  may  we  not  Vv'elcome 
with  thankfulness  and  receive  with  submission 
all  that  Thou  dost  send — the  mingled  ingredients 
of  bitter  and  sweet,  the  blended  tints  of  light 
and  sliade,  of  all  the  wise,  righteous,  and  salu- 
tary dispensations  of  Thy  wise,  loving,  and  ever 
watchful  providence  ? 

But  there  is  approaching  a  period — ah,  how  it 


THE  PEECIOUbisESS  OF  CHRIST.  3] 

speeds ! — which  will  be  tiie  most  solemn  and 
severe,  yet  the  sweetest  and  truest  test  of  the 
sustaining,  soothing  power  of  Christ's  precious- 
ness  in  the  experience  of  His  saints  —  the  last 
sickness  and  the  closing  scene  of  life.  Imagine 
that  moment  to  have  arrived  !  All  of  earth's 
attraction  ceases,  all  of  creature-succour  fails. 
Everything  is  failing — heart  and  strength  failing 
— mental  power  failing — medical  skill  failing — • 
human  affection  and  sympathy  failing ;  the  lihn 
of  death  is  on  the  eye,  and  the  invisible  realities 
of  the  spirit-world  are  unveiling  to  the  mental 
view.  Bending  over  you,  the  loved  one  who 
has  accompanied  you  to  the  margin  of  the  cold 
river,  asks  a  sign.  You  are  too  weak  to  con- 
ceive a  thought,  too  low  to  breathe  a  v/ord, 
too  absorbed  to  bestow  a  responsive  glance. 
You  cannot  now  aver  your  faith  in  an  elabo- 
rate creed,  and  you  have  no  profound  experience, 
or  ecstatic  emotions,  or  heavenly  visions  to  de- 
scribe. One  brief,  but  all-emphatic,  all-expres-" 
sive  sentence  embodies  tlie  amount  of  all  that 
you  now  know,  and  believe,  and  feel ;  it  is  the 
pi'ofession  of  your  faith,  the  sum  of  your  ex- 
perience, the  ground  of  your  hope — "  Christ  is 
PEECIOUS  TO  MY  SOUL  1 ''     Enough  !     The  dying 


32  THE  PEECIOUSXESS  OF  CHRIST. 

Christian  can  give,  and  the  inquiring  friend  can 
wish  no  more.  Dearest  Saviour,  be  Thou  close 
to  nie  in  that  solemn  moment !  Tread  the  valley 
by  my  side,  pillow  my  languid  head  upon  Thy 
bosom,  speak  these  words  of  heart-cheer  to  my 
struggling,  panting,  departing  soul,  "Feae  not, 
I  AM  viiTR  THEE;" — then,  it  will  be  happiness  for 
me  to  die, — death  Vv^ill  liave  no  venom — the  grave 
no  gloom — eternity  no  dread ;  and,  from  the 
measured  experience  of  Thy  preciousness  on 
earth,  I  shall  pass  in  triumph  through  the 
shadowy  portal  into  the  full  sunshine  and 
perfect  realisation  and  eternal  enjoyment  of  all 
that  faitli  believed,  and  love  desired,  and  hope  ex- 
pected, of  Thy  full-orbed  glory  and  preciousness 
in  heaven.     "  In  Thy  peesence  is  fulness  of 

JOY;  AND  AT  ThY  EIGHT  PEAND  THEEE  AEF 
pleasuees  foe  EYEEMOEE." 

'•'Precious  Jesus!  0  how  lovely  art  Thou  to  my  longing 

heart : 
Never,  never  let  me  grieve  Thee,  ne'er  from  Thee  let  ui© 

depai't. 
Precious  Jesus  !  all  in  all  to  me  Thou  art." 


CHAPTER  II 

THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  FAITH. 
"Precious  faith."— 2  Pet.  i.  1. 

The  indispensableness  of  faith  as  an  essential 
element  of  salvation,  and  as  an  influential  instru- 
ment in  all  well-doing  for  God,  is  very  clearly 
and  impressively  set  forth  in  the  apostle's  decla- 
ration, "  Without  faith  it  is  imijossihle  to  j^lease 
Him.'  And  yet,  what  crude  and  superficial 
views  of  th^'s  eminent  grace  of  the  Spirit  do  the 
most  of  us  entertain.  To  believe  is  by  many  re- 
garded as  a  most  facile  and  commonplace  thiiig. 
Tlir^y  suppose  that  an  individual  can  believe 
when  he  will,  and  may  believe  what  he  will; 
that  faith  is  the  mere  assent  of  the  judgment  to 
a  certain  creed;  and  that  with  this  intellectual 
reception  of  the  truth,  there  requires  no  other 
operation  of  faith  to  give  its  mould  to  the 
character,  and  to  impart  r^ot  and  acceptableness 
0 


34  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  FAITH. 

to  the  acti^jgs  of  the  Christian's  life.  And  have 
not  even  the  most  enh"ghtenecl  and  spiritual  of 
God's  people  to  mourn  over  their  deficiencies 
touching  their  conviction  of  the  nature,  worth, 
and  preciousness  of  this  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
apart  from  which  nothing  is  well-pleasing  to  God  ; 
but  sjDringing  from  which,  the  lowliest  action, 
the  faintest  desire,  the-  gentlest  throb  of  the 
spiritual  believing  soul,  is  infinitely  precious  in 
the  viev/  of  Jehovah  ? 

Having  in  the  preceding  chapter  considered 
the  preciousness  of  the  Object  of  faith,  it  seems 
pro^Dcr  that  our  thoughts  should  next  be  directed 
to  a  consideration  of  the  preciousness  of  faith 
itself.  We  desire,  as  God  the  Holy  Ghost  shall 
guide  us,  so  to  unfold  the  nature  and  operations  of 
this  cardinal  grace  of  the  Christian  character,  as 
that  the  unbelieving  reader  may  learn  the  true 
nature  of  saving  faith,  and  that  the  reader  who 
through  divine  grace  does  believe,  may  have  his 
views  of  faith  so  cleared,  and  faith  itself  so  nou- 
rished and  invigorated,  as  shall  result  in  a  deeper 
experience  of  the  power  and  preciousness  of  the 
doctrine  of  faith.  The  faith  of  which  we  are  now 
to  speak  is  described  by  the  apostle  in  the  passage 
from  whence  our  motto  is  taken,  as  beino-  "  like 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  FAITH.  85 

precious  faith  luith  US."  The  "  fa.it  li  of  God's  elect" 
in  all  a-ges  of  the  world,  and  in  all  dispensations 
of  the  Church,  is  essentially  and  identically  the 
same.  There  is  a  divine  unity  in  faith  which  no 
distance  of  time,  or  differences  of  nation,  or  stan- 
dards of  theological  opinion,  or  modes  of  religious 
worship,  or  forms  of  ecclesiastical  polity  can  touch. 
True  faith  is  essentially  and  unchangeably  the 
same,  in  every  age,  and  in  every  Church,  all  the 
world  over.  Just  as  the  sun  that  now  pours  its 
golden  beams  by  day,  and  in  the  m^oon's  soft  lustre 
sheds  its  reflected  silver  rays  by  night,  is  the 
same  that  shone  on  Eden's  bowers,  that  veiled  its 
face  in  sackcloth  when  its  Incarnate  Creator  died, 
and  that  illumines  all  creation,  so  the  "  precious 
faith  of  God's  elect,"  that  now  pulsates  in  the 
lowliest  breast  of  the  believer,  is  essentially  the 
same  as  that  which  poured  the  joy  and  lustre  of 
a  glorious  hope  upon  the  trembling  spirit  of  our 
primeval  parent,  when  God,  in  evening's  twi- 
light, revealed  to  Adam  the  promise  of  a  Saviour. 
We  propose,  in  the  present  chapter,  to  unfold 
the  preciousness  of  faith  in  two  or  three  par- 
ticulars. 

We  have  already  expatiated  upon  the  precious- 
Bess  of  the  Object  of  faith ;  but  we  revert  to  it 


S6  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  FAITH. 

again,  for  a  moment,  as  iHustrating  the  precions- 
ness  of  the  character  of  the  grace  of  faith. 

The  believing  sonl,  while  it  reposes  on  the  three 
persons  in  the  ever  adorable  Trinity,  fixes  its  eye, 
in  the  great  matter  of  salvation,  especially  npon 
Cue — the  central  Person  of  the  Godhead — em- 
bracing Vvdiom,-  it  includes  in  its  faith,  and  enfolds 
in  its  affection,  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost. 
There  is  a  unity  and  simplicity  in  all  Jehovah's 
works.  In  nothing  is  this  more  traceable  than 
in  the  salvation  of  man,  the  master-work  of 
God.  The  object  which  the  gospel  presents  for 
liis  belief  is,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  "  Believe  in 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shcdt  he  saved.'' 
Thus,  a  simple  and  not  a  complex  object  is 
uplield  to  his  eye.  There  is  here  nothing  to 
divide  the  attention,  and  thus  bewilder  the  mind. 
As  tlie  pole  which  Moses  erected  in  the  v/ilderness 
Vv^as  single — no  other  object  commandhig  the  look 
of  faith — so  single  and  simple  is  the  object  of 
salvation  presented  in  the  gospel.  '"Look  unto  me, 
and  be  ye  saved '' — "  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved,"  is  the  united 
voice  of  ihe  tvro  witnesses  for  Christ,  the  Old 
and  the  New  Testam3nt,  touching  tlie  one  Object 
of  faith — a  crucihed  Saviour, 


THE  PSECIOUSNESS  OF  FAITH.  S7 

Tlius,  while  liuman  religions,  be  tliey  Romish 
or  Protestant,  present  a  plurality  of  objects  for 
belief — false  saviours  many — to  the  eye,  the  Bible 
presents  but  One — Christ  crucified.  It  is  interest- 
ing and  instructive  to  trace  the  interweaving  of 
this  blessed  doctrine — the  tmity  of  the  Object  of 
faith — like  a  thread  of  gold,  throughout  the 
entire  Scriptures  of  truth.  In  the  Levitical 
economy,  every  type  hov^ever  varied,  every  sym- 
bol however  mysterious,  every  shadow  however 
profound,  had  JesuS  for  its  object — all  conspired 
to  exalt,  and  all  pointed  to,  the  Lamb  of  God  as 
the  one  object  of  saving  faith.  Thus,  too,  with 
the  prophetical  writings  of  Scripture, — "  To  Him 
gave  all  the  prophets  witness."  And  in  the  New 
Testament  the  agreement  is  perfect  touching  this 
typical  and  prophetical  testimony  to  the  unity  of 
the  object  of  faith — "And  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up 
from  the  earth,  will  draw  all  men  unto  me!' 
In  another  place,  the  same  Divine  Saviour  says, 
"  This  is  the  work  of  God,  that  ye  believe  in  Him 
whom  He  hath  sent"  ''And,  as  Moses  lifted  up 
the  serpent  in  the  luilderness,  even  so  shall  the 
Son  of  man  be  lifted  up,  that  vjhosoever  believeth 
in  Him  should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting 
life!'  Oh,  rejoice,  beloved  reader,  that  iu  the  greafe 


38  THE  PEECIOTJSNESS  OF  FAITH. 

matter  of  your  salvation,  your  faith  has  to  look  to 
one  object  only ;  that,  amidst  your  own  fluctua- 
tions of  spiritual  feeling,  and  the  conflicting 
judgments  of  men,  you  can — like  the  roving- 
dove,  sweej^ing  with  drooping  wing  the  troubled 
waters  and  finding  no  repose,  until,  weary  and 
panting,  she  behies  herself  to  the  ark, — turn  to 
a  full  and  perfect  rest  in  that  one,  precious 
object  of  faith — the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  You 
find  creed  contradicting  creed,  opinion  conflicting 
with  opinion,  church  opposed  to  church,  and  your 
heart  sickens  within  you ;  but,  amidst  your  em  - 
barrassment  and  depression,  you  bethink  yourself 
of  Jesus,  and  betake  yourself  to  His  feet ;  and 
in  that  one  object,  for  ever  blessed  and  precious, 
and  in  this  lowly  posture,  your  fluttering,  believ- 
ing heart  finds  j^erfect  rest.  Oh,  thank  God  that 
the  object  of  saving  faith  is  one;  that,  in  knowing 
Jesus,  in  looking  to  Jesus,  in  trusting  in  Jesus, 
in  confiding  your  soul  to  Jesus,  you  have  no 
fear,  misgiving,  or  doubt ;  but,  in  the  confidence 
of  a  humble,  yet  unwavering  faith,  can  exchum, 
"  /  knoiu  in  whom  I  have  believed,  and  am  jier- 
suaded  that  He  is  able  to  keejj  that  which  I 
have  committed  unto  Him  against  that  day." 
Thus,  then,  does  faith  derive  a  preciousness 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  FAITH.  89 

from  the  preciousness  of  its  Object — precious  in 
His  jDerson,  to  wliicli  faith  looks  ;  precious  in  His 
atonement,  to  wliich  faith  leads ;  precious  in  His 
fulness,. from  which  faith  draws  ;  precious  in  His 
intercession,  in  which  faith  relies ;  precious  in 
His  example,  by  which  faith  walks.  Thus,  let 
faitli  contemplate  the  Lord  Jesus  in  any  one  of 
His  ten  thousand  forms  of  beauty — as  the  sun 
unvails  the  landscape's  loveliness,  while  the  land- 
scape endears  th§  lustre  of  the  sun — its  precious- 
ness is  enhanced  by  contemplating  Christ's  beauty, 
while  the  loveliness  of  the  Saviour  illustrates  the 
costliness  of  faith.  Precious  faith  dealing  with 
a  precious  Christ  enriches  the  believer  with  the 
two  most  precious  things  of  God. 

But  faith  is  not  only  relatively,  it  is  intrinsi- 
cally precious — precious  in  itself.  It  is  empha- 
tically denominated,  ^'  precious  faith!'  And  with 
this  description  of  its  character  will  correspond 
the  experience  of  every  true  believer  in  the  Lord 
Jesus.  As  the  universal  testimony  of  men  will 
confirm  the  value  of  gold,  •  all  evidencing  by 
their  earnest,  and  many  by  their  covetous,  pursuit 
of  the  metal,  its  intrinsic  value ;  so  shall  each 
believer,  though  possessing  but  the  smallest  por- 
tion of  this  divine  gift,  witness  to  its  essential 


40  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  FAITH. 

and  priceless  worth.  One  grain  of  this  precious 
grace,  in  his  estimation,  hath  in  it  more  of  real 
vakie,  more  of  positive  good,  than  all  the  wealth 
which  ever  hath  been,  or  which  yet  may  .be,  dug 
from  the  mines  of  the  earth.  Glance  at  some  of 
tliose  essential  features  which  stamp  the  precious- 
ness  of  faith. 

Paith  is  a  divine  grace,  consequently  precious. 
•It  has  not  its  origin  here.  It  is  a  plant  indige- 
nous not  to  our  fallen  humanity.  Paith  in  that 
which  is  created,  springs  from  the  creature  ;  faith 
in  that  which  is  human,  is  human ;  but  the  faith 
which  deals  with  God,  believes  His  word,  trusts 
in  His  Son,  beholds  the  invisible,  and  is  the 
"  substance  of  things  hoped  for,  the  evidence  of 
things  not  seen,"  must  be  divine.  It  deals  with 
the  spiritual,  and  itself  is  spiritual ;  it  has  to  do 
vfitli  the  divine,  and  itself  is  di\ane.  We  are  not 
born  behevers.  A  parent,  as  Cecil  did,  may  ex- 
plain to  his  child  by  a  simple  and  ingenious  illus- 
tration the  nature  of  faith,  but  the  faith  itself  he 
cannot  give.  A  minister  may  enforce  upon  his 
hearers  the  necessity  of  faith  (and  it  is  his  duty 
so  to  do),  but  he  forgets  not  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
has  -written,  "  Faith  is  the  gift  of  God."  Thus, 
then,  faith  is  a  superhuman  grace.     It  cometb 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  FAITH.  41 

from  God,  it  desceiideth  from  above  ;  and  because 
it  L«  a  supernatural  and  heavenly  grace — proceed- 
ing from  heaven,  and  leading  to  heaven — it  is  of 
itself  inconceivably  precious.  Think  not  lightly, 
then,  beloved  reader,  of  the  faith  which  you  may 
have,  measured  though  it  may  be  in  its  degree  and 
feeble  in  its  exercise — it  is  divine  and  precious ; 
and  although  of  this  gold  from  Clod's  mint  you  may 
possess  but  the  smallest  coin,  yet  that  coin,  bear- 
ing the  superscription  of  God,  will  secure  your 
admission  into  glory,  and  will  put  you  into  the 
full  and  eternal  possession  of  that  "inheritance 
which  is  incorruptible,  undefiled,  and  luhich 
fadeth  not  away,  reserved  in  heaven  for  yoit 
who  are  kept  by  the  power  of  God  through 
faith  unto  salvation." 

But  faith  is  precious  being  the  product  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  As  a  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  it  is  pre- 
eminently costly.  "  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is — 
faith."  As  He  is  the  Author  of  all  that  is 
divine,  and  holy,  and  sanctifying,  He  is,  and 
must  be,  the  Author  of  that  divine  root  of  all 
holiness  in  the  heart — the  grace  of  faith.  The 
jow^liest  fruit  of  the  Spirit  in  the  regenerate  soul 
is  of  priceless  worth.  And  how  low  and  feeble 
that  work  may  be,  v/ho  can  tell  I    How  hidden— 


42  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  FAITH. 

how  unsuspected — how  faint  ?  Yet,  be  it  but  a 
tear  of  godly  surrovv'  falling  in  secret- — a  sigh  soft 
as  an  infant's,  and  breathed  to  the  lone  winds  of 
heaven — the  eye  smiting  the  earth  with  its  down- 
cast glance  of  conscious  sin — it  is  truly  an  ema- 
nation of  the  Spirit,  and  is  as  essentially  the  oiT- 
spring  of  faith  as  is  the  'abundant  entrance'  into 
the  kingdom  of  grace  with  which,  when  in  full  sail, 
faith  wafts  the  believing  soul.  How  full  is  God's 
v/ord  of  this  1  The  imagery  of  the  Bible,  illus- 
trative of  this  truth,  is  exquisitely  beautiful.  We 
read  of  the  lily  springing  amongst  thorns — of 
the  lamb  browsing  amongst  wolves — of  the  tre- 
mulous touch  of  the  hem — of  the  dim  look — • 
of  the  bruised  reed — of  the  smoking  flax — of  the 
faith  that  doubts  Christ's  power  while  it  believes 
His  willingness — of  the  faith  that  disbelieves  His 
■willingness,  yet  reposes  in  His  power.  Why 
these  varied  and  expressive  images,  but  to  teach 
us  that  grace  in  the  soul  may  be  limited  in  its 
degree,  and  yet  real  in  its  character, — that  faith 
may  bo  weak  in  its  actings,  yet  divine  in  its 
nature, — that  God  despiseth  not  the  day  of  small 
things  in  the  spiritual  experience  and  exercises  of 
a  gracious  soul?  Is  there  a  single  product  of 
^^od  in  nature  upon  which  He  looketh  down  with 


THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  FAITH.  43 

disdain?  is  there  a  spire  of  grass — a  sliaded 
flower — a  buzzing  insect — a  winged  s^^arrow — 
a  line  of  beauty — a  gleam  of  light — a  morning's 
dew-drop,  or  an  evening's  zephyr  mmoticed  or 
disregarded  by  Him?  No !  He  despiseth  nothing 
that  He  haa  made.  How  much  less  will  He 
regard  with  indifference,  or  look  with  a  frown 
npon  the  weakest,  obscurest,  faintest  putting 
forth  of  the  faith  of  His  own  Spirit  in  the  soul ! 
If  the  lowliest  product  of  nature — fading  in  its 
beauty,  and  evanescent  in  its  duration — is  arrtiyed 
with  loveliness  and  invested  with  interest  wor'chy 
of  His  notice,  how  much  more  the  tenderest  bud, 
the  lowliest  flower  of  divine  grace  in  the  renewed 
heart ! 

Not  only  is  faith  precious  in  itself,  but  the 
trial  of  faith  is  precious.  The  Holy  Ghost  thus 
asserts  this  truth :  "  The  trial  of  your  faith 
being  much  more  precious  than  gold  that  perish- 
eth,  though  it  he  tried  with  fire"  The  process 
as  here  described  is  severe — it  is  the  trial  of  fire. 
Yet  that  is  the  element  by  which  the  refiner  tests 
and  separates  his  precious  metal.  God  conde- 
scends, as  it  were,  to  borrow  from  man  an  illus- 
tration of  His  wonder-workings  in  regard  to  our 
faith.      He  places  it  in  the  furnace  heated  bv 


44  THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  FAITH. 

fire.  Thus  we  find  how  frequently  and  i^ointedly 
the  figure  is  em2:)loyed  in  the  Bible.  AYe_read  of 
a  '' fiery  furnace"  (Dan.  iii.  6);  of  the  'fiery 
darts  of  the  ivicked"  (Eph.  vi.  16) ;  of  the  "fiery 
trial"  (1  Pet.  iv.  12) ;  of  "the  baptism  of  fire" 
(Matt.  iii.  11) ;  and  in  the  words  already  quoted 
— "  the  trial  of  your  faith,  though  it  be  tried  luith 
fire."  And  yet,  severe  and  painful,  and,  to  all 
appearance,  destructive  as  this  process  is  to 
which  the  faith  of  God's  elect  is  subjected,  it  is 
described  as  one  of  the  precious  things  of  God  in 
the  experience  of  the  saints.  Why  so  ?  Let  us  see. 
The  trial  of  faith  is  precious  because  it  attests 
its  reality.  Apart  from  its  trial,  what  an  uncer- 
tainty attaches  to  faith  !  Untried  faith  is  uncer- 
tain faith,  just  as  unsmelted  ore  is  suspicious  ore. 
A  believing  man  knows  not  upon  what  he  is  really 
leaning  until  God  brings  his  dependence  to  the 
proof.  Has  he  v/ealth  ?  has  he  strength  ?  has  he 
friends  ?  has  he  influence  1  has  he  interest  ?  has 
he  gifts  ?  How  far  he  may  be  secretly  and  un- 
su.spectingly  leaning  upon  one  or  more  of  these 
and  not  upon  God,  he  cannot  know  until  God 
tries  him.  But  when  all  these  creature-depend- 
encies, these  human  supports,  tremble  and  fall 
from  beneath  him — ^when  the  flood-tide  of  sor- 


THE  PEECTOUSNESS  OF  FAITH.  45 

row  has  swejDt  them  a^YRJ,  or  the  vv^intry  blast 
of  adversity  has  scattered  them,  then  comes  the 
grand  test  of  his  true  suppoit, — he  stands  or 
falls,  raises  his  head  in  hope  or  droops  it  in 
despair,  just  as  is  the  reality  and  strength  of 
his  faith  in  God.  Trace  in  some  of  its  illus Prions 
examples  the  sustaining  power  of  real  faith  in 
■the  hour  of  its  severe  trial.  "I  had  fainted,'' 
says  the  Psalmist,  ^'unless  I  had  believed  to 
see  the  goodness  of  the  Lord  in  the  land  of  the 
living."  In  an  earlier  stage  of  his  tried  expe- 
rience we  read,  concerning  this  man  of  God,  that, 
*'  David  was  greatly  distressed ;  for  the  people 
spake  of  stoning  him,  ....  hut  David  encou- 
raged himself  in  the  Lord  his  God."  In  the 
prophecy  of  Habakkuk,  there  occurs  a  remark- 
able and  beautiful  instance  of  a  like  result  of  a 
severe  trial  of  faith  :  "Although  the  fig-tree  shall 
not  blossom,  neither  shall  fruit  be  in  the  vines '; 
the  labour  of  the  olive  shall  fail,  and  the  fields 
shall  yield  no  meat;  the  flock  shall  be  cut  off 
from  the  fold,  and  there  shall  be  no  herd  in  the 
stalls  :  yet  will  I  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  L  will  joy 
in  the  God  of  my  salvation."  Trace  the  power 
of  real  faith  v/hen  brought  to  the  trial  of  that  most 
certain  and  solemn  of  all  tests — a  dying  hour: 


4)6  THE  rEECI0lTS2TESS  OE  FAITH. 

*'  My  flesh  and  my  heart  faileth  :  hut  God,  is  the 
sti^ength  of  my  heart  and  my  portion  for  evex!* 
It  would  seem  impossible  to  surpass  these  in- 
stances of  the  supporting,  sustaining  power  of 
real  faith  in  the  hour  of  extreme  trial.  And  *yet 
there  is  one — the  most  illustrious — that  distances 
tliciii  all,  extraordinary  and  precious  though  they 
are.  When  suspended  upon  the  cross,  amidst  its 
agony  and  gloom,  in  the  exercise  of  a  faith  that 
doubted  not,  staggered  not,  Jesus  clung  to  a 
frov/ning,  hiding,  deserting  Father,  exclaiming — 
"My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  V 
Behold  the  Man — the  God-man — the  Author, 
the  Giver,  the  Sustainer,  and  the  Finisher  of 
your  faith,  treading  the  path  of  faith's  trial,  and 
leaving  you  an  example  that  you  should  follow 
His  steps.  TJiank  God,  then,  believer  in  Jesus, 
for  every  fresh  evidence  of  the  reality  of  that  faith, 
which  is  "  like  precious  faith  "  with  tlie  faith  of 
the  Son  of  God.  The  test  may  be  severe,  the  trial 
may  be  fiery,  yet  if  it  confirms  you  in  the  blessed 
assurance,  "  /  hnoiu  in  whom  I  have  believed," 
you  cannot  afford  to  lose  it,  scorching  and  pain- 
ful as  the  furnace  may  have  been  ;  that  trial  may 
be  as  severe  as  Abraham's,  when  commanded  to 
slay  his  son — as  David's,  when  tho  people  talked 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  FAITH.  4? 

of  stoning  him — as  Job's,  wlien  liurled  from  the 
pinnacle  of  health,  affluence,  and  adulation  to  the 
lowest  depth  of  sickness,  pover.ty,  and  contempt 
— as  Daniel's,  when  cast  into  the  lion's  den — 
as  the  three  children,  when  thrown  into  the  fiery 
furnace — or  as  Paul's,  when  the  messenger  of 
Satan  buffetted  him — nevertheless,  it  is  the  an- 
cient path  to  glory,  and  severe  though  the  trial, 
blessed,  eternally  blessed,  will  be  the  result. 

The  trial  of  faith  is  precious,  because  it  puri- 
fies faith.  In  its  ov*m  nature  faith,  as  it  comes 
from  God,  is  pure  and  without  alloy.  Essen- 
tially there  is  no  admixture  whatever  with  the 
faith  the  Holy  Ghost  inspires — it  is  as  pure,  sin- 
less, and  untainted  as  was  our  humanity  when  it 
first  came  from  the  hands  of  God.  But,  as  the 
mountain  stream  which  starts  from  its  hidden 
source  pure  and  sparkling,,  partakes  of  the  earthi- 
ness  and  tint  of  the  soil  through  which  it  courses 
its  way  into  the  vale  beneath,  so  the  faith 
which  proceeds  from  God  holy  and  immixed, 
mingles  with  the  hidden  corruption  and  unbelief 
of  the  heart  in  which  it  dwells,  and  thus  becomes 
alloyed  and  impaired.  Hence  the  necessity  and 
the  preciousness  of  its  trial.  The  ftre  separates — 
the  furnace  purifies — the  crucible  refines;  and 


48  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  FAITH. 

SO,  in  the  liapjDy  experience  of  the  believer,  the 
trial  of  faith  becomes  "  much  more  precious  than 
gold,  though  it  be  tried  as  by  fire."  Oh  to  have 
the  dross  of  carnality,  and  the  alloy  of  unbelief, 
which  S'O  dims  the  lustre  and  paralyses  the  vigour 
of  faith  destroyed  1  Nothing,  after  the  fiery  trial, 
may  be  left,  of  all  that  looked  so  divine,  so  holy, 
and  so  spiritual,  but  one  grain  of  the  pure  gold  of 
faith — yet  that  one  grain  of  faith,  obscure,  in- 
finitesimal as  it  may  seem,  outweighs  in  its  real 
value  mfllions  of  worlds,  and  it  shall  never,  never 
perish. 

But  we  may  illustrate  the  preciousness  of  faith 
by  its  actings  nud  fruits.  Faith  is  a  wonderful 
plant  in  the  garden  of  the  soul — it  yields  all 
manner  of  precious  fruits,  and,  like  the  tree  of  life 
in  the  midst  of  the  streets  of  the  New  Jerusalem, 
it  bears  fruit  all  the  year.  Dear  reader,  there  is  no 
holiness  in  the  soul  but  faith  is  its  root.  Spring- 
ing from,  resting  in,  and  looking  to  Jesus,  from 
whom  its  fruit  is  found,  faith  produces  love,  joy, 
peace,  patience,  holiness,  humility,  and  every  grace 
that  adorns  the  character,  and  beautifies  the  walk 
of  a  believer  in  Jesus.  Faith  is  precious,  too,  in 
its  wonder- workings.  It  hath  a  powerful  faculty 
of  sight  and  of  extraction.     It  can  see  both  sides 


THE  PEECIOUSKESS  OF  FAITH.  49 

of  the  guiding  pillar — the  cloudy  and  the  origlit. 
It  can  extract  a  smile  from  God's  frown,  love  from 
God's  displeasure,  mercy  from  God's  jad,£jment,  en- 
couragement from  Goi's  refusal,  hope  from  God's 
delays  ;  can  find  a  door  of  hope  in  the  valley  of 
Achor,  and  can  sing  as  sweetly  in  the  dreary  night 
season  as  in  the  bright  and  sunny  day.  Wonder- 
ful triumph  of  faith  that  can  say,  *'  The  Lord  gave, 
and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away,  blessed  he  the 
name  of  the  Lord  /"  Thus  faith,  laying  one  dis- 
pensation over  against  another — placing  in  the 
scales  apparent  opposites  and  contradictions  in 
God's  government — can  see  light  in  darkness,  can 
produce  harmony  from  discord,  and  can  gather 
encouragement  from  defeat ;  and,  dipping  its 
pencil  in  the  darkest  colours  of  sad  and  gloomy 
providences,  can  trace  upon  the  canvas  of  the 
Christian's  life  some  of  its  most  brilliant  and 
cheerful  pictures. 

From  this  general  view  of  the  fruits  of  faith, 
let  us  specify  two  or  three  in  particular. 

What  is  peace  but  a  blessed  fruit  of  faith? 
The  peace  which  God  gives,  which  the  Holy  Ghost 
creates,  Vvdiich  the  Atonement  of  Christ  secures, 
and  which  in  its  nature  and  blessedness  "passeth 
all  under stanimg,"  is  only  received  from  precious 

D 


50  THE  PEECI0USNES3  OF  FAITH. 

faith  dealing  with  a  precious'  Christ.  Were 
you,  my  reader,  banished  like  John  to  some  lone 
isle,  bearing  with  you  but  a  fragment  of  the 
Bible — that  fragment  the  single  but  full  and  sub- 
lime declaration,  ''Being  justified  by  faith,  we 
have  peace  iviih  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus 
Ghrist " — it  were  enough  to  calm,  cheer,  and  assure 
your  mind,  amidst  all  the  dreadful  consequences 
of  sin,  with  the  hope  of  a  full  acceptance  with  God 
through  Christ.  Oh,  how  real  and  tranquillis- 
ing  the  peace  which  simple  faith  brings  into  the 
soul  the  moment  Jesus  is  seen  as  the  ''Prince  of 
peace''  as  " making  peace,''  as  " our  peace"  and 
as  bequeathing  "peace,"  His  last  legacy  of  love  to" 
His  saints  !  All  peace  is  contained  in  that  one 
word  —  Reconciliation.  Reconciled  to  God 
through  the- peace-making,  peace-speaking  "hlood 
of  the  everlasting  covenant,"  there  is  no  longer 
any  ground  of  condemnation,  nor  fear  of  hell. 
"  If  God  he  for  us,  luho  can  he  against  tis  ? " 
God  pacified  towards  us,  no  matter  who  accuses 
or  condemns  ;  the  believing  sinner,  at  peace  with 
God  through  Christ,  can  afford  to  be  at  war 
v/ith  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil.  Be- 
loved, bring  all  your  sin  and  guilt  to  the  atoning 
blood  of  Jesus,  and  the  "  God  of  peace"  will  give 


THE  PSECIOFSNESS  OF  FAITH.  51 

you  peace;  and  " ivlien  He  giveth  quietness,  who 
then  can  make  trouble  I " 

And  what  is  true  py — -a  twin  grace  with  peace 
• — but  a  precious  fruit  of  faith  ?  The  apostle  re- 
minds us  of  this — ''  Noiu  the  God  of  hope  fill  you 
with  all  joy  and  peace  in  believing.''  In  the  same 
proportion  to  the  directness  and  simplicity  with 
which  your  faith  deals  with  Christ,  looks  to  Christ, 
lives  upon  the  fulness  of  Christ,  rests  in  the  com- 
plete salvation,  the  finished  work  of  Christ,  draws 
all  its  evidences  and  hopes  from  Christ,  will  be 
your  ''joy  in  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ" 
Nothing  can  enkindle  this  holy  joy  in  the  heart 
but  a  believing  view  of  what  the  Lord  Jesus  is, 
and  what  He  has  done.  It  is  only  a  sense  of  full 
pardon,  of  free  justification,  of  gracious  adoption, 
of  the  hope  of  glory,  that  can  awaken  real  joy  in 
the  soul  of  a  believing  sinner.  What  joy  can 
there  be  in  the  heart  of  a  convicted  felon,  or  of  a 
.condemned  criminal,  or  of  a  convict  paying  the 
sad  penalty  of  his  crime  in  lonely  exile,  toil,  and 
degradation?  None  whatever.  But  convey  to 
him  a  free  pardon,  unbar  his  prison,  break  his 
manacles,  and  bid  him  go  free  ;  restore  him  to  his 
country,  his  faniil}^,  his  home,  and,  bruised  and 
broken  though  that  heart  be  with  a  consciousnesa 


52  THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  FAITH. 

of  guilt  and  a  sense  of  shame,  you  }'et  have  awokea 
in  its  sad  chambers  the  sweetest  chimes,  and  joy, 
entrancing  joy,  thrills  and  dilates  his  bosom. 
Such  is  the  picture  of  a  soul  cleansed  from  the 
ouilt  of  sin,  and  freed  from  the  condemnation 
of  the  law  by  a  believing  accejDtance  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  That  moment  Christ  is  re- 
ceived into  the  lowly,  penitent,  and  believing 
heart — the  instant  that  Christ  is  seen  paying  the 
great  debt,  suffering  the  penalty,  enduring  the 
condemnation — a  joy  springs  up  in  the  soul  such 
as  never  thrilled  an  angel's  heart,  and  all  this  joy 
is  "joy  in  believing/'  ''In  tliis  rejoice  not" 
says  the  Saviour,  "that  the  spirits  are  subject 
unto  you  ;  but  rather  rejoice,  because  your  names 
are  luritten  in  heaven."  Oh,  how  much  more 
joyful  would  the  saints  of  God  be  did  they  deal 
less  with  themselves,  and  more  with  Jesus ! 
They  look  at  their  sins,  pore  over  their  unfitness, 
pine  at  their  leanness,  and  succumb  to  their  fail- 
ures and  infirmities,  their  poverty  and  emptiness, 
and  so  all  sweet,  sacred  joy  droops  and  dies  with- 
in their  souls.  But,  "  tJie  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your 
Strength."  "  The  meek  shall  increase  their  joy 
in  the  Lord."  And  seeing  that  the-.  Lord  has 
''clothed  them  with  the  garments  of  salvation. 


THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  FAITH.  53 

tind  has  covered  them  with  the  robe  of  righteous^ 
ness,'"  it  is  the  privilege  of  their  soul  "greatly  to 
rejoice  in  the  Lord,  and  to  he  joyful  in  their 
God"  (Isa.  Ixi.  10).  But,  beloved,  remember  that 
Christ's  joy  can  only  remain  in  you,  and  your  joy 
be  full,  as  in  childlike  faith  you  look  directly,  and 
only,  and  constantly  to  Christ.  "  Vie  joy  in  God, 
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom  vje  have 
now  received  the  atonement."  Oh  for  a  higher 
tone  of  holy  joy  amongst  the  Lord's  redeemed  I 
Wlio  in  this  vast  universe  have  such  reason  to 
make  the  valley  resound  and  the  mountain  echo 
with  the  glad  notes  of  praise,  as  you  who  are 
freed  from  servitude,  who  are  delivered  from  hell, 
and  who  are  on  your  way  to  heaven,  to  spend  your 
eternity — "for  ever  with  the  LordV  Beloved 
reader,  if  you  are  saved — if,  in  the  exercise  of  the 
lowliest  faith,  you  can  cherish  the  hope  of  accept- 
ance, as  a  poor  sinner,  with  God  through  Christ — 
you  may  rejoice  in  tribulation,  and  glory  in  infir- 
mity, and  count  the  sufferings  of  this  present  time 
not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory  that 
will  be  revealed  in  you.  ''Rejoice  in  the  Lord, 
and  again  I  say,  Rejoice." 

This  precious  faith  is  equally  the  parent  of  all 
holmess,  and  in  this  view  is  not  less  precious  to 


6i  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  FAITH. 

the  child  of  God.  There  is  no  true  holiness  apart 
from  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus — it  is  the  root  of 
all  real  sanctifi cation.  "  Purifying  their  hearts 
hy  faith''  (Acts  xv.  9).  "Faith,  that  purifieth 
the  heart  and  ivorketh  by  love"  (G-al.  v.  6).  How 
much  is  there  in  the  outward  religion  of  many 
that  has  all  the  appearance  of  holiness,  but  v/hich 
is  yet  unholy  in  the  sight  of  a  holy  God!  .  The 
religious  worship,  practices,  and  duties  of  some, 
clothed  with  an  air  of  sanctity  so  profound,  and 
which  awaken  the  awe,  win  the  admiration,  and 
elicit  the  applause  of  so  many,  pass  for  no- 
thing with  that  infinitely  holy  Being  concerning 
whom  it  is  written  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  "  Without 
faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  God."  Faith  is  a 
revealing,  emptpng,  impov^ishing  grace — it  gives 
its  real  possessor  to  see  the  'depravity  of  his  own 
nature,  the  vileness  of  his  own  heart,  the  worth- 
lessness  of  his  own  righteousness,  and  the  innu- 
merable flaws,  spots,  and  failures  of  all  holy  spi- 
ritual doings.  It  opens  the  eye,  too,  to  Christ, 
and  by  its  gentle  and  persuasive  influence  leads 
the  soul,  thus  emptied  an-d  impoverished,  to  Him, 
as  having  all  fulness  of  righteousness,  all  riches 
of  grace,  all  soothings  of  love  treasured  up  for 
the  "poor  in  spirit,"  and  for  those  who  "  hunger 


THE  PEECIOTJSNESS  OF  FAITH.  55 

and  ihirvi  after  righteousness.''  Faith  resting 
ill  Christ,  beholding  Him  who  is  invisible,  will 
mould  and  influence  the  believer's  entire  walk. 
It  begets  holy  principle,  and  holy  principles  in- 
spire holy  practice,  and  a  holy  practice  will  be 
'''filled  with  the  fruits  of  righteousness,  which 
are  hy  Jesus  Christ,  unto  the  glory  and  praise 
of  God''  (Phil.  i.  11).  This  precious  faith  wiU 
influence  a  man  to  walk  prayerfully,  circum- 
spectly, and  vigilantly.  His  daily  prayer  will  be, 
^'Let  integrity  and  uprightness  preserve  me."  In 
his  worldly  calling  he  will  seek  to  glorify  God.  The 
false  balance,  the  scanty  measure,  the  exaggera- 
tion of  the  seller,  the  depreciation  of  the  buyer, 
the  rash  speculation,  the  prodigal  expenditure,  the 
grasping  covetousness,  love  for  the  world,  its 
pleasures,  attire,  and  show,  an  uncharitable,  un- 
forgiving, censorious,  malicious  spirit,  with  all 
the  corruptions  and  sinful  infirmities  of  our  fallen 
nature, — true  faith,  looking  to  Christ  and  dealing 
with  eternal  realities,  will  constrain  the  believer 
to  war  against,  crucify,  and  conquer.  "  This  is  the 
victory  that  overcometh  the  ivorld,  even  our  faith.'' 
Oh  for  more  of  this  heart-purifying,  soul-elevat- 
ing, Christ-assimilating,  God-glorifying,  heaven- 
attracting  faith  '    When  your  worldly  business  op- 


56  THE  PEECI0USNES3  OF  FAITH. 

poses  God's  glory,  your  interests  Christ's  honour, 
your  temper  the  Spirit's  witness,  your  conduct  the 
high  and  heavenly  calling  you  profess,  remember 
that  true  faith  will  not  cause  a  moment's  hesita- 
tion as  to  your  duty.  Oh  that  at  that  moment, 
the  most  critical  it  may  be  of  your  life,  when  the 
balance  cjuivers  between  self-interest  and  the 
Divine  honour,  your  faith  may  take  one  close 
view  of  the  cross,  one  piercing  glance  into  eter- 
nity, and  so  bring  you  off  more  than  a  conqueror, 
covered  with  the  deathless  acclaim  and  reward  of 
a  Clnist-exalting  triumph ! 

Precious,  indeed,  is  that  faith  that  leans  upon 
God  in  adversity,  that  goes  to  Jesus  in  trial,  and 
that  repairs  to  the  Spirit  in  sorrow.  Precious 
faith,  that  finds  a  promise  for  every  condition,  a 
_  helper  in  every  emergency,  a  soother  for  every 
sorrow, — that  can  hope  against  hope,  taste  a  sweet 
disguised  in  every  bitter,  and  see  a  bright  light 
veiled  by  each  dark  cloud.  This  is  the  true  gold 
that  j)rocures  all  blessings  and  enriches  its  posses- 
sor with  all  good.  He  that  has  faith  in  God  has 
every  desire  of  his  heart  fulfilled.  He  can  dive 
into  the  treasures  of  God's  word  and  say,  "  All 
these  are  mine,  for  they  are  my  father's  epistles 
of  love."      He  can  turn  to  the  Eedeemer's  ful- 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  FAITH.  5? 

ness  and  exclaim,  "  It  pleased  the  Father  that  all 
this  fulness  of  grace,  and  truth,  and  love,  should 
dwell  in  Jesus  for  me."  He  can  repair  to  the 
throne  of  grace  and  say,  "  Here  I  am  permitted 
to  draw  near  to  God,  burdened  with  sin,  laden 
with  want,  oppressed  with  trial,  assailed  by  temp- 
tation, crushed  with  sorrow,  casting,  by  an  act 
of  faith,  all  my  care  upon  Him."  Is  not  that 
precious  faith  that  enriches  my  poverty,  that 
dignifies  my  meanness,  that  guides  my  perplexi- 
ties, that  cheers  my  lonehness,  that  calms  my 
grief,  that  defeats  my  foes,  that  paints  a  bow  upon 
every  cloud,  and  that  brings  -all  heaven  into  my 
soul  ?  Yet  such  is  the  fruit  of  that  faith  of  which 
God  is  the  giver,  the  Spirit  the  author,  Christ 
the  object,  and  a  poor,  empty,  unworthy  soul  the 
happy  possessor! 

But  rich  and  inviting  as  this  subject  is,  we 
must  conduct  the  present  chapter  to  a  close.  In 
doing  so,  sufi'er  me  to  exhort  you  not  to  despair 
when  God  sees  fit  to  deal  with  you  as  He  did 
with  the  father  of  the  faithful — assure  you  of  a 
promise,  and  then  put  death  into  all  the  means 
leading  to  its  fulfilment.  Be  it  so — that  promise, 
lifeless  though  it  may  seem,  yet  stands  good 
against  all  that  mihtates  against  its  accomplish- 


58  THE  PRECIOUSNFSS  OF  FAITH. 

nient.  One  affirmative  of  God  may  be  weighed 
against  ten  million  negatives  of  man, — one  Divine 
promise  against  a  universe  of  human  improbabi- 
lities and  impossibilities, — a  grain  of  faith  against 
a  pyramid  of  unbelief.  ''Let  God  he  true,  and 
every  man  a  liar."  With  second  causes  faith 
has  nothing  to  do.  It  sees  God  only,  deals  with 
God  only,  believing  that  "with  God  all  things 
are  possible'' 

Beware  of  making  a  Christ  of  your  faith,  pre- 
cious as  it  is.  If  you  are  staying  away  from  the 
Saviour  because  your  faith  is  weak,  you  are  sub- 
stituting your  faith  for  Christ — the  channel  for 
the  Fountain  of  comfort,  peace,  and  salvation.  If 
I  have  a  mission  to  the  sovereign  of  these  realms 
— some  petition  to  jDrefer — and  I  linger  upon 
the  steps  that  conduct  me  to  the  royal  presence, 
or  in  the  corridor  that  leads  me  into  the  royal 
chamber,  what  marvel  if  I  have  no  audience,  and, 
consequently,  no  response  to  my  request  ?  That 
lofty  flight  of  steps,  that  magnificent  corridor,  are 
but  introductions  to  my  approach  to  the  sove- 
reign, not  the  sovereign  herself.  Such  is  faith! 
Divine  and  precious  as  it  is,  faith  is  but  the  ]  ath 
that  leads  us  to  the  King.  And  although  it  is 
often  with  hesitation  and  weakness  we  tread  tliia 


THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  FAITH.  59 

royal  piitliway,  yet  each  new  step  upon  wliicli  we 
place  our  foot  brings  us  nearer  to  Jesus.  We  must, 
however,  beware  of  Kngering  upon  the  steps,  or 
of  loitering  in  the  ante-rooms,  substituting  our 
going  to  Christ  for  our  having  actually  come  to 
Christ.  Onward  we  must  press,  discouraged  not 
by  our  slow,  nor  elated  by  our  rapid  progress — 
counting  nothing  of  our  faith  but  as  a  mean  to  an 
end — that  end  our  full  reception  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
—until  we  find  ourselves  in  the  royal  presence, 
"beholding the  King  in  His  beauty''  It  follows, 
then,  that  faith  does  not  save  you,  it  being  but 
the  instrument  of  salvation ;  that  your  weak  faith 
is  no  reason  why  you  should  stay  away  from 
Christ,  and  that  your  strong  faith  is  no  plea  re- 
commending you  to  Christ.  It  is  Christ,  and 
Christ  only,  from  first  to  last,  that  saves  ;  and 
your  faith  is  precious  and  valuable  only  as  it 
brings  you  to  Him  to  be  saved  through  His  im- 
puted righteousness  alone.  The  truth  we  are  en- 
deavouring to  explain  is  so  vital  and  important"  we 
would  venture  to  simplify  and  enforce  it  by  another 
illustration.  The  ship  riding  in  the  roads  heaves 
not  her  anchor  in  order  to  aid  the  little  boat 
which  has  just  put  out  from  the  shore,  and  con- 
tending with  wind,  and  tide,  and  wave,  struggles 


60  THE  Pr.EClOUSNESS  OF  FAITH. 

to  approach  her.  But  casting  forth  a  line,  she 
bids  the  frail  vessel  grasp  it  and  draw  itself  to  the 
ship.  Thus,  it  is  not  the  ship  that  approaches 
the  boat,  it  is  the  boat  tha't  approaches  the  ship. 
Trembling  soul !  setting  out  for  Christ,  quitting 
the  shore  of  a  sinful,  delusive  world,  and  loosening 
yourself  from  the  strong  grasp  you  have  long  had 
of  your  own  righteousness,  let  me  remind  you 
that  Christ  is  in  heaven,  and  that  He  cometh 
not  down  again  from  above  to  meet  the  soul 
battling  with  sin,  and  guilt,  and  unbelief  in  its 
struggles  to  come  near  to  Him.  What,  then,  doth 
He  ?  He  giveth  an  exceeding  great  and  precious 
promise — "  Him  that  cometh  unto  me  I  will  in 
no  wise  cast  out;"  and  bidding  the  sinner  take 
hold  of  that  promise  by  faith,  He  invites  it  to 
approach  Him  and  receive  all  the  blessings  of  sal- 
vation, and  all  the  treasures  of  grace  of  which  He 
is  the  Author,  the  Head,  and  the  Giver.  Faith  does 
not  bring  Christ  to  the  soul  (the  blessed  Redeemer 
is  self-moved — moved  by  His  own  graciousness 
and  love),  but  faith  brings  the  soul  to  Christ. 
Faith  fastens  itself  upon  Sq^u^,'' exalted  a  Prince 
and  a  Saviour  to  give  repentance  unto  Israel, 
and  remission  of  sins,"  and  so  it  draws  the  soul 
to  Christ.     "  Say  not  in  thine  heart,  IKAo  shaU 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  FAITH.  61 

ascend  into  heaven  ?  (that  is,  to  bring  Christ 
down  from  above  ;)  or,  ]Vho  shall  descend  into 
the  deep  ?  (that  is,  to  bring  up  Christ  again 
fronn  the  dead).  But  luhat  saith  it  ?  The  word 
is  nigh  thee,  even  in  thy  mouth,  and  in  thy  heart : 
that  is,  the  laord  of  faith,  luhich  ive  preach;  that 
if  thou  shalt  confess  with  thy  mouth  the  Lord 
Jesus,  and  shalt  believe  in  thine  heart  that  God 
hath  raised  him  from  the  dead,  thou  shalt  be 
sav-ed."  Here  is  the  divine  cord  that  draws  the 
sinner  to  Jesus,  and  will,  if  taken  hold  of  in  sim- 
ple earnestness,  assuredly  bring  the  weakest,  most 
trembling,  .and  unworthy  soul  to  the  Saviour. 
"  If  thou  wilt  B'ELIEYE  in  thine  heart,  ....  thou, 

SHALT  be  SAVED." 

Then,  let  no  sin-distressed  soul,  bendin*x  over 
this  page,  despair  of  being  saved.  Numberless, 
aggravated,  great  as  your  sins  may  be — death  and 
condemnation  staring  you -full  in  the  face — con- 
fronted as  if  by  the  grim,  gloomy  instrument  ol 
your  execution — behold,  here  is  a  full  and  free 
pardon  askiug  but  the  acceptance  of  your  faith. 
"  Only  believe.''  When  the  trembling  jailor  of  Phi- 
lippi  rushed  into  the  cell  of  Paul  with  the  memo- 
rable inquiry,  "  What  shall  I  do  to  be  &aved  ?" 
did  the  apostle  send  him  to  religious  ordinanceSj 


62  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  FAITH. 

or  to  duties,  or  to  pious  doings — to  baptism,  to 
tlie  Lord's  supper,  to  prayer,  and  fasting,  and 
charities  ?  Oil  no  !  These  were  proper  in  their 
place,  but  sadly  out  of  place  here,  and  therefore 
most  improper.  But  what  is  the  work  the  apostle 
puts  the  anxious  penitent  upon? — the  work  of 
believing.  ''Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christy 
and  thou  shalt  be  saved.''  This  is  the  work, — 
"And  this  is  the  luoi^k  of  God,  that  ye  believe  in 
Jlim  whom  He  hath  sent."  And  when  a  poor 
woman  came  and  j^oured  an  alabaster  box  of  pre- 
cious ointment  upon  His  head,  what  did  Jesus 
say  to  her?  what  was  the  act  which  He  commend- 
ed? He  mentions  not  her  tears,  though  she 
wept  ;  He  speaks  not  of  her  fondness,  though  she 
kissed  His  feet ;  He  commends  not  her  liberality, 
though  her  anointing  was  very  costly  and  j)recious. 
He  does  not  say,  Your  repentance  has  saved 
you,  your  love  has  saved  you,  your  liberality  has 
saved  you ;  but  He  says,  "  Woman,  thy  faith 
hath  saved  thee  ;  go  in  peace!'  He  passes  by  all 
her  other  qualities,  and  places  the  crown  of  ac- 
ceptance upon  the  head  of  her  faith.  Dear 
reader !  Jesus  is  just  the  same  at  this  moment 
that  He  was  then — as  ready  to  receive,  accept, 
and  save  you — as  ready  to  crown  your  feeble. 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  FAITH.  63 

trembling  faith  with  sucli  a  cliadem  of  glory  as 
angels  never  wore.  "  Go  in  lyeace,  thy  faith 
hath  SAVED  thee."  Oh  that  with  the  believino-, 
weej^ing  father  in  the  Gospel,  you  may  exclaim, 
"  Lord,  I  believe  ;  help  thou  mine  unbelief." 

Is  it  v/ith  you  a  season  of  great  strait,  diffi- 
culty, and  want  ?  Now  is  the  time  to  set  faith  to 
work.  Your  faith  may  long  have  been  inactive 
and  dormant.  The  sword  has  so  long  reposed  in 
its  scabbard  that  you  can  with  difficulty  withdraw 
it,  now  that  it  is  a  time  of  need ;  and  your  arm 
has  become  so  enfeebled  from  disuse  that  you  can 
scarcely  wield  the  sword  even  when  drawn.  But 
God  has  sent  this  pressure  in  order  to  restore  and 
quicken  your  confidence  in  Himself.  Oh,  have 
faith  in  God  that  He  will  appear  in*  your  behalf, 
and  glorify  Himself  in  you.  His  name  is  A!^.ighty 
— God  all-sufficient.  Listen  to  the  language  of 
one  who  thus,  from  a  chapter  in  his  own  deep 
experience,  unfolds  the  blessedness  of  that  simple, 
believing  confidence  in  God  to  which  we  would 
urge  you  in  this  hour  of  need  : — "  I  have  seemed 
to  see  a  need  of  everything  God  gives  me,  and 
want  nothing  that  He  denies  me  ;  there  is  no  dis- 
pensation, though  afflictive,  but  either  in  it  or 
after*  it  I  could  not  have  done  without  it.     Whe- 


64  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  FAITH. 

ther  it  be  taken  from  me  or  not  given  to  ma 
sooner  or  later  God  quiets  me  in  Himself  without 
it.  I  cast  all  my  concerns  on  the  Lord,  and  live 
securely  on  the  care  and  wisdom  of  my  heavenly 
Father.  My  ways  are  in  a  sense  hedged  up  with 
thorns,  and  grow  darker  and  darker  every  day ; 
but  yet  I  distrust  not  my  good  God  in  the  least, 
and  live  more  quietly  in  the  absence  of  all,  by 
faith,  than  I  should  do,  I  am  persuaded,  if  I 
possessed  them  all.  I  think  the  Lord  deals 
kindly  with  me  to  make  me  believe  for  my  mercies 
before  I  have  them.  The  less  reason  hath  to 
work  on,  the  more  freely  faith  casts  itself  on 
the  faithfulness  of  God.  I  find  that  while  faith 
is  steady  nothing  can  disquiet  me,  and  when 
faith  totters  nothing  can  establish  me.  If  I 
tumble  out  amongst  means  and  creatures,  I  am 
presently  lost,  and  can  come  to  no  end  ;  but  if  I 
stay  myself  on  God,  and  leave  Him  to  work  in 
His  own  way  and  time,  I  am  at  rest,  and  can  sit 
down  and  sleep  on  a  promise  when  a  thousand 
rise  up  against  me ;  therefore  my  way  is  not  to 
cast  beforehand,  but  to  work  with  God  by  the 
day.  '  Sufficient  unto  the  day  is  the  evil  thereof.'^ 
I  find  so  much  to  do  with  my  calling  and  my 
heart  that  I  have  no  time  to  puzzle  myself  with 


THE  PEECI0T7SNESS  OF  FAITH.  65 

peradventiires  and  futurities.  Faith  lies  at  anchor 
in  the  midst  of  the  waves,  and  believes  the  ac-. 
complishment  of  the  promises  through  all  these 
overturning  confusions  and  seeming  impossibili- 
ties. Upon  this  God  do  I  live,  who  is  our  God 
for  ever,  and  will  be  our  guide  unto  death.  Me- 
thinks  I  lie  becalmed  in  His  bosom ;  as  Luther, 
in  such  a  case,  I  am  not  much  concerned,  let 
Christ  see  to  it.  I  know  prophecies  are  still  dark, 
and  the  books  are  sealed,  and  men  have  all  been 
deceived,  and  every  cistern  fails.  Yet  God  abideth 
faithful,  and  faithful  is  He  that  hath  promised, 
who  also  will  do  it.  Many  things  now  I  might 
say,  but  enough ;  0  brother !  keep  close  to  God,  and 
then  a  little  of  the  creature  will  go  a  great  v/ay. 
Maintain  secret  communion  with  God,  and  you 
need  fear  nothing.  Lay  up  all  your  goods  in 
God,  so  as  to  be  able  to  overbalance  the  sweetness 
and  bitterness  of  all  creatures.  Spend  no  time 
anxiously  in  forehand  contrivances  for  this  world ; 
they  will  never  succeed ;  God  will  turn  His  dis- 
pensations another  way.  Self-contrivances  are 
the  effects  of  unbelief  I  can  speak  by  expe- 
rience, would  men  spend  those  hours  they  run 
out  in  plots  and  contrivances  in.  communion  with 
E 


66  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  FAITH. 

God,   and  leave  all   to  Him   by  believing,   they 
would  have  more  peace  and  comfort." 

Sucli,  then,  is  the  precionsness  of  faith — it  is 
so  precious  that  none  but  God  can  bestovv^  it,  and 
when  bestowed  it  is  so  precious  that  it  brings  into 
the  soul,  as  the  queen-grace,  untold  blessings  in  its 
royal  retinue.  It  has  been  remarked  by  an  eminent 
minister  of  Christ,  now  in  glory,  that  were  God 
to  limit  him  to  one  prayer  it  would  be  the  apostle's 
— "  Lord,  increase  our  faith."  And  this  is  no 
exaggerated  sentiment,  because  the  increase  of 
faith  brings  with  it  an  increase  of  love,  joy,  peace, 
obedience,  and  every  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
But  while  not  content  with  any  limit  to  your 
growth  in  this  grace  of  faith,  yet  remember  for 
your  encouragement  who  think  you  have  no  pre- 
cious faith,  that  it  may  exist  in  the  soul,  and 
for  the  most  part  does,  in  the  smallest  degree. 
Who  will  affirm  that  he  has  yet  attained  unto 
faith,  small  even  as  the  grain  of  musrard  seed  ? 
Then  we  ask  such  a  boaster  that  he  say  to  this 
mountain.  Be  ye  cast  into  the  sea;  to  this  syca- 
more tree.  Be  thou  plucked  up:  for  our  blessed 
Lord  has  told  us  that  "  if  we  have  faith  as  a  grain 
of  mustard  seed,  nothing  shall  be  impossible  unto 
us/'   Thank  God,  then,  for  the  least  d^rec  of  faith. 


THE  PEEGIOUSNESS  OF  FAITH.  67 

tliough  it  be  less  than  the  grain  of  muntard  seed, 
for  the  smallest  measure  will  conduct  you  fully 
into  heaven.  And  yet  forget  not  that  there  is  no 
difficulty  that  faith  in  God,  however  small,  cannot 
surmount,  no  mountain  it  cannot  level,  no  tree  it 
cannot  uproot,  simply  because  it  deals  with  the 
power  of  God.  Calling  to  its  aid  omnipotence, 
allying  itself  with  the  Ahnighty,  it  can  thrash  the 
mountains  small,  and  make  the  hills  as  chaff, 
it  can  leap  over  a  wall  and  run  through  a  troop,' 
and  though  often  lame  and  halting,  it  yet  can 
take  the  prey. 

We  conclude  the  present  chapter  with  a  brief 
glance  at  the  crowning  act  of  precious  faith — the 
glory  it  brings  to  Jehovah; — and  this  is  the 
crown  of  its  preciousness.  If  the  faith  of  a  child 
of  God  terminated  in  himself — even  thouoh  it 

o 

were  to  put  him  in  the  full  possession  of  heaven 
— it  would  come  short  of  its  highest,  holiest, 
noblest  end.  It  is  worthy  of  God  that  He  has  made 
all  things  to  centre  in  Himself.  "  The  Lord  hath 
made  all  things  for  himself"  (Prov.  xvi.  4).  "I 
have  created  him  for  my  glory"  (Isa.  xliii.  7).  In  no 
being  in  the  universe  has  God  put  forth  so  much 
of  His  glory,  and  by  none  will  He  finally  appear 
60  illustrious  as  a  believer  in  the  Lord  Jesus 


68  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  FAITH. 

Christ.  God  lias  done  more  for  tliat  saved  soul, 
and  will  more  magnify  His  great  name  in  him, 
than  for  all  the  unfallen  intelligences  of  heaven. 
He  will  appear  more  glorious,  His  perfections 
will  shine  forth  with  more  full,  harmonious,  and 
complete  lustre  in  one  sinner  saved,  than  in  the 
final  and  eternal  destruction  of  the  m3^riads  Y\dio 
people  the  regions  of  the  lost.  In  the  case  of  the 
lost,  justice  and  holiness  appear  in  awful  severity; 
but  in  them  that  are  saved,  justice  and  holiness — 
yet  more  aw^fully  illustrated  in  the  soul-sorrow 
and  dying  agonies  of  Jesus — are  seen  blended  with 
love,  mercy,  and  grace  ;  so  that  men  and  angels  see 
more  of  the  divine  glory  in  the  salvation,  than  in 
the  condemnation  of  man.  It  is  the  glory,  then, 
of  faith,  and  the  perfection  of  its  "preciousness, 
that  it  gives  glory  to  God.  ''The  reason  why 
faith  is  said  to  give  glory  to  God  is,  because  faith 
answers  God's  faithfulness.  Great  faith  is  said 
to  give  glory  to  God :  one  of  the  special  commen- 
dations of  Abraham's  faith  is,  '  He  was  strong  in. 
faith,  giving  glory  to  God'  (Rom.  iv.  20).  God 
magnifies  His  name  of  faithfulness  al)Ove  all  His 
name  ;  the  believer  magnifies  his  faithfulness  by 
his  believing ;  therefore  he  gives  glory  to  God. 
There  are  three  honourable  ser  voices  that  some 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  FAITH.  G9 

men  get  pub  into  their  hands,  and  which  are 
denied  to  anoels.  There  is  preaching  of  Christ, 
suiTerino'  for  Christ,  and  believino:  in  Christ.  Let 
US  consider  wherein  there  is  an  honouring  of  God 
by  believing  ;  for  it  is  a  point  very  rarely  believed. 
Who  is  there  of  believers  that  think  that  by  bare 
believing  they  give  God  more  glory  than  any 
other  way  they  Can  do  ? 

"Faith  gives  glory  to  God,  because  it  brings 
nothing  to  Him  hut  j^overty,  tvant,  and  emptiness. 
All  graces  bring  something  to  God,  but  faith 
brings  nothing.  Love  brings  a  flaming,  burning 
heart  to  God ;  re2:)entance  brings  a  bleeding, 
broken  heart  to  God  ;  obedience  brings  a  v/orking 
hand  to  God  ;  patience  brings,  as  it  were,  a  broad 
back  to  God,  let  Him  lay  on  what  He  will ;  poor 
faith  brings  just  nothing, "hvit  the  poor  man's  bare 
hand  and  empty  dish.  The  poorer  man  comes  to 
God  the  more  glory  to  God.  It  is  remarkable  that, 
in  those  cases  wherein  we  brinsj  somethino^  to 
God,  we  are  very  apt  to  carry  away  something  of 
the  glory  that  belongs-  to  Hmi :  faith  brings  no- 
thing at  all  to  God ;  it  brings  no  more  than 
broken  bones  and  sores  to  the  great  Physician 
(Eom.  iii.  27). 

"  Faith  giorifier,  God,  for  it  seeks  all  in  Hi7}\ 


70  THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  FAITH. 

and  from  Him :  as  it  brings  nothing  t,)  Him,  so 
it  expects  everything  from  Him,  whatever  its 
wants  be.  The  language  of  faith  is,  'All  my 
wants  be  upon  Thee,  0  Lord ; '  there  is  no 
other  way  of  bearing  them ;  it  expects  all  from 
Him,  and  from  the  single  warrant  of  His  word. 
(John  iii.  33.) 

"  Faith  always  glorifies  God,  for  it  ventures  its 
all  upon  His  word.  The  believer  is  still  in  this 
frame,  in  the  exercise  of  faith  :  '  Now,  here  I  have 
God's  faithful  promise  ;  and  if  it  should  fail  me, 
I  should  certainly  sink  for  ever.  My  soul,  body, 
reputation,  privileges  of  the  gospel,  all  my  con- 
cerns whatsoever,  are  all  laid  upon  the  faithful- 
ness of  God ;  they  are  all  put  in  that  bottom 
of  the  ship ;  if  I  miscarry,  I  am  gone  for  ever." 
Who  is  there  of  believers  that  believes  this, 
that  a  bare  adventuring  of  thy  eternal  salvation 
upon  the  Son  of  God,  by  virtue  of  the  promise  of 
God,  brings  more  glory  to  God  than  all  things 
else  can  do?  (1  Cor.  i.  30,  31.)  "* 

If  this  be  true — and  most  true  it  is^then,  be- 
loved, besiege  the  ihrone  of  grace  for  more  of  this 
Christ-crowning,  Spirit-honouring,  God-glorify- 
ing grace  of  faith.     Oh,  it  is  the  mightiest  grace 

*  TraiU. 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  FAITH.  71 

of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  soul,  and  because  it 
is  so,  it  brings  the  richest  revenue  of  praise  to 
the  Triune  Jehovah !  Behold,  how  like  a  queen 
she  enters  the  soul,  her  train  composed  of  the 
costliest  material,  her  train-bearers  the  sister- 
graces  of  the  Spirit.  "The  king's  daughter  is 
all  glorious  within ;  her  raiment  is  of  wrought 
gold."  Seek,  0  seek  it,  then  ;  earnestly,  diligently, 
importunately  seek  it.  Every  new  deposit  of 
this  precious  coin  augments  your  real  wealth ; 
and  every  new  victory  this  grace  of  faith  achieves 
adds  another  precious  stone  to  the  diadem  of 
glory  with  which  your  Saviour  is  crowned. 
Whatever  may  be  your  present  circumstances, 
"have  faith  in  God."  Stand  still,  and  see  His 
wonder-working  on  your  behoof.  He  will  smite 
that  rock — He  will  part  that  sea — H^  will  level 
that  mountain — He  will  exalt  that  valley — He 
will  roll  from  off  the  tomb  of  thy  buried  niercy 
the  stone  thou  canst  not.  move.  Only  have  faith 
in  Him  !  "  Commit  thy  way  unto  the  Lord,  trust 
also  in  him,  and  he  shall  bring  it  to  pass." 
Thus,  your  soul,  in  the  exercise  of  this  "  precious 
faith  "  that  looks  from  self,  ceases  from  man,  and 
trusts  alone  in  God,  shall  repose  in  Him,  acqui- 
escent, tranquil,  and  safe  as  an  infent   on  its 


•  72  THE  PKECIOUSKESS  OP  FAITH. 

mother's  breast.  Then  will  the  Psalmist's  enviabie 
experience  be  yours — "  Surely  I  have  behaved 
and  quieted  myself,  as  a  child  that  is  weaned 
of  his  mother:  my  soul  is  even  as  a  weaned 
child/' 

"  Leave  God  to  order  all  thy  ways. 

And  hope  in  Him,  whate'er  betide; 
Thou'lt  find  Him  in  the  evil  days. 

Thy  all-sufficient  strength  and  guide; 
Who  trusts  in  God's  unchanging  love, 
Builds  on  the  rock  that  nought  can  move. 

^  "What  can  these  anxious  cares  avail, 
These  never-ceasing  moans  and  sighs  ? 

What  can  it  help  us  to  bewail 
Each  painful  moment  as  it  flies  ? 

Our  cross  and  trials  do  but  press 

The  heavier  for  our  bitterness. 

"  Only  thy  restless  heart  keep  still. 
And  wait  in  cheerful  hope ;  content 
To  take  whate'er  His  gracious  will. 
His  all-discerning  love  hath  sent. 
Doubt  not  our  inmost  wants  are  known 
To  Him  who  chose  us  for  His  own. 

*'He  knows  when  joyful  hours  are  best. 

He  sends  them  as  He  sees  it  meet; 

When  thou  hast  borne  the  fiery  test. 

And  art  made  free  from  all  deceit, 

He  comes  to  thee  all  unaware, 

.  And  makes  thee  own  His  loving  cavft 


THE   PRECIOUSNESS   OF   FAITH  73 

"  Sing,  pray,  and  swerve  not  from  His  waya^ 

But  do  tlijne  own  part  faithfully, 
Trust  His  rich  promises  of  grace, 

So  shaU  they  be  fulfiU'd  in  thee; 
God  never  yet  forsook  at  need 
Sb©  soul  that  trusted  Hun  indeed."  * 

*is.  Newmarcb,  16ia. 


CHAPTER  III 

THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  TEIAL. 

'"  Tha  trial  of  your  faith,  being  much  more  precious  than  oi 
gold  that  perisheth." — 1  Pet.  i.  7. 

It  is  the  preciousness  of  trial  in  general,  including 
the  preciousness  of  the  trial  of  faith  in  particular, 
to  which  the  apostle  thus  refers.  We  propose, 
thereft  re,  to  amplify  the  truth,  and  tq  illustrate 
in  t]ie  present  chapter  the  preciousness  of  all 
those  tiials  of  which,  more  or  less,  the  saints  of 
God  arc  partakers.  This  view  may  present  the 
subject  of  trial  in  a  point  of  light  more  sootliing 
and  sanctifying  than  the  reader  has  been  wont  to 
contemplate  it.  You  have  thought  of  trial,  have 
anticipated  trial,  have  met  trial,  have  shrunk  from 
trial  as  the  patient  recoils  from  the  surgeon's 
lance,  forgetting  that  that  very  trial  was*  the 
needed  process  by  which  God  was  about  to  work 
out  some  great  good  in  your  personal  experience ; 
and  that,  so  far  from  being  dreaded,  it  should  be 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  TRIAL.  75 

wdcomed  as  amongst  the  most  precious  things  of 
God,  the  richest  blessings  of  the  everlasting  cove- 
nant. The  points  we  propose  to  illustrate  are — ■ 
trial — the  preciousness  of  trial — and  the  blessings 
that  spring  from  trial. 

The  term  is  expressive.  It  refers  to  a  f)roccs3 
by  which  the  character  or  strength  of  a  thing  is 
tested.  The  engineer  tries  the  base  of  his  arch, 
.the  architect  tries  the  foundation  of  his  building, 
the  refiner  tries  the  nature  of  his  ore.  The  word 
trial  thus  acquires  a  significant  import  in  relation 
to  that  disciplinary  process  by  which  God  proves 
His  people.  Trial,  then,  becomes  a  necessary 
element  in  the  schooling  and  training  of  the*  chil- 
dren of  God  for  duty  and  service  upon  earth,  and 
for  enjoyment  and  glory  in  heaven.  Exempt 
the  Church  of  God  from  trial,  and  she  is  ex- 
cluded from  a  process  the  results  of  which  are 
incalculable  in  her  experience. 

It  will  tend  to  open  this  subject  more  forcibly, 
if  we  consider  ivho  the  Lord  tries  in  the  sense  in 
which  the  term  is  now  employed.  There  is  one 
passage  in  God's  book  which  contains — as  many 
brief  sentences  of  inspired  truth  do — a?,  volume  in 
a  word,  and  it  will  supply  the  answer  to  the  ques- 
tion, "Who  does  the  Lord  try  ?    "  The  Lord  trieth 


76  THE  PRECIOTJSNESS  OF  TRIAL. 

the  righteous."  The  furnace  in  whicli  God  places 
His  people — in  other  words,  the  process  of  trial 
by  which  He  jDroves  them — is  not  the  same  by 
which  the  ungodly  world  is  tried.  "The  fire 
in  Zion,  and  His  furnace  in  Jerusalem,"  are 
only  for  His  own  elect.  He  has  the  crucible 
for  gold,  and  the  crucible  for  earth — the  fire 
of  love,  and  the  fire  of  wrath ;  and  in  nothing 
will  He  more  distinguish  His  own  people  from 
the  ungodly,  —  the  gold  from  the  "  reprobate 
silver," — than  in  the  mode  by  which  both  are 
thus  dealt  with.  He  tries  the  righteous  be- 
cause they  are  righteous  ;  He  ciiastens  His  sons, 
because  they  are  sons ;  He  reproves,  rebukes, 
afflicts  them,  because  He  loves  them,  having 
''chosen  them  in  the  furnace  of  affliction!' 
What  touchinjy  words  of  Christ  are  these — who 
can  read  them  without  emotion  ? — ''As  many  as 
I  love  I  rebuke  and  chasten."  Again,  "  Whom  the 
Lord  loveth  he  chasteneth,  and  scour geth  every 
son  ivhom  he  receiveth."  Thus,  it  is  His  own 
people.  His  righteous,  His  holy  ones,  on  whom 
His  afflictive  hand  is  often  the  most  sorely  and 
heavily  laid.  "  Tlie  Lord  trieth  the  eighteous." 
But  what  does  the  Lord  try  ?  It  is  not  our 
fallen  "nature  that  He  tries,  the  existence  of  whose 
deprav  ity  is  clear  and  unmistakeable.   There  want- 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OP  TRIAL.  77 

eth  no  proof  that  we  are  sinful  and  corrupt,  and 
that  "  in  our  flesh  there  dwelleth  no  good  thing," 
But  the  Jjord  tries  His  own  wondrous  luork  of  grace 
in  the  soul.  He  tries  everything  that  is  divine, 
and  good,  and  holy  in  the  regenerate.  He  tries 
their  principles,  He  tries  their  motives,  He  tries 
their  graces,  Ho  tries  their  knowledge,  He  tries 
their  experience,  He  tries  His  own  work.  Take, 
for  example,  a  few  of  the  spiritual  graces  which 
He  more  especially  brings  to  the  test  of  trial.  He 
tries  the  believer's  love.  "  Lovest  thou  me  more 
than  this  V  is  often  the  probing  question  of  Jesus 
to  His  disciples.  He  will  test  the  reality,  tlie 
sincerity,  the  strength  of  our  love  to  Him — 
whether  it  can  confide  in  Him  when  He  smites, 
cling  to  Him  when  He  retires,  obey  Him  when  He 
commands — whether  it  will  entv/ine  around  Him 
the  closer  that  the  storms  seek  to  tear  it  from  its 
hold.  "  Canst  thou  resign  this  blessing  ?  wilt  thou 
undertake  this  service?  art  thou  able  to  drink 
this  cup,  or  bear  this  cross  for  me?"  is  the  signi- 
ficant language  of  many  a  trial  with  which  the 
Lord  trieth  the  aghteous.  Happy  if  thy  love 
sustains  the  test  of  its  sincerity,  and  thy  lieart 
replies,  "  Yea,  Lord  ;  Thy  love  inspiring  my  love, 
Thy  grace  helping  my  infirmity,  Thy  strength 
perfected  in  my  weakness,  I  can — I  luill — T  do," 


78  THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  TRIAL. 

Tlie  Lord  tries  also  tlie  patience  of  His  people. 
There  is,  perhaps,  no  grace  of  the  Spirit,  or  adorn- 
ment of  the  Christian  character  more  overlooked 
than  this,  and  yet  there  is  not  one  more  pre- 
cious, God-honouring,  and  beautifying.  To  find 
this  divine  and  rare  pearl,  we  must  often  pass  from 
the  surface  of  society,  and  seek  it — where,  indeed, 
the  piety  and  taste  of  few  lead  them — amid 
scenes  of  suffering,  of  grief,  of  adversity.  In  some 
secluded  apartment,  on  some  couch  of  languor, 
or  bed  of  sickness,  shaded  by  penury  and  loneli- 
ness, this  divine  grace  may  exist — no  eye  behold- 
ing its  sparkling  amid  the  surrounding  gloom,  but 
His  whose  "  eyes  are  over  the  righteous,  and  whose 
ear  is  open  to  their  cry."  There  may  be  seen 
the  patient,  quiet  spirit  of  a  humble  believer  in 
Jesus,  enduring  without  a  murmuring  word,  bear- 
ing without  a  rebellious  feeling,  siifFering  without 
a  hard  thought  of  Him  who  has  smitten — with  a 
calm,  submissive,  dignified  surrender  to  the  Divine 
disposal — the  will  of  God.  And  yet,  who,  in  what- 
ever path  he  walks,  finds  not,  in  some  circum- 
stances of  his  daily  history,  the  ''need  of  patience?" 
Ti)e  trying  circumstances  of  life — the  chafings  of 
tiie  hourly  cross — the  constant  contact  vritli  dissi- 
milar tastes,  uncongenial  minds,  unsympathising 


TEE  PRECIOTJSNESS  OP  TRIAL.  79 

hearts — the  delays  in  answer  to  prayer — tlie  cease- 
less pain — the  restless  head — the  nervous  tem- 
perament, to  which  the  buzzing  of  a  fly  is  agony 
— above  all,  the  hidings  of  God,  the  tarrying  of 
Jesus,  the  suspension  of  the  Spirit's  consolation — 
all,  all  demand  the  exercise  of  that  patience  with 
which  the  believer  possesses  his  soul.  This  is  the 
grace  the  Lord  tries !  Ah  !  how  little  knovf  we  of 
the  impatience  of  our  spirit — the  petulance  and  un- 
submissiveness  which  will  brook  no  delay,  which 
frets  against  the  Lord,  and  rebels  against  His 
dealings — until  the  Lord  tries  us.  But  He  tries 
our  patience  only  to  increase  it.  Humbled  under 
the  conviction  how  rebellious  and  repining  is  our 
spirit,  we  are  led  to  cry  mightily  to  God  to  vouch- 
safe to  us  this  grace,  meekly  to  endure,  silently 
to  suffer,  and  cheerfully  to  do  His  w^ill.  "The 
Lord  direct  your  hearts  into  the  patience  of^ 
Christ."  "  Ye  have  need  of  patience,  that,  after 
ye  have  done  the  will  of  God,  ye  may  receive  the 
'promise."  We  are  exhorted  to  "  let  patience  have 
her  perfect  worh,  that  ye  may  he  perfect  and  en- 
tire, wanting  nothing."  ''Here  is  the  patience 
of  the  saints." 

I  have  spoken  of  the  trial  of  faith.     Without 
recalling  the  train  of  thought  already  pursued,  it 


80  THE   PRECIOUSNESS  OF  TRIAL, 

may  be  well  briefly  to  remark,  that  faith  being 
the  queen-grace  of  the  graces — all  others  consti- 
tuting her  regal  attendants — the  Lord  especially 
tries  this  grace  of  the  believer,  and  by  so  doing 
He  indirectly  tries  and  so  strengthens  all  the  cog- 
nate graces  of  the  soul.  Thus,  we  read,  "  The 
trial  of  your  faitli  worketh  jpatience.^^  And  what 
are  the  ends  to  be  accomplished  in  the  trial  of 
faith  ?  The  Lord  tries  our  faith  to  test  its 
genuineness,  to  promote  its  purity,  to  invigorate 
its  power — thus  to  bring  us  into  a  more  intimate 
acquaintance  with  Himself.  Never  should  we 
try  God  as  we  do  did  He  not  try  us  as  He  does. 
"We  should,  alas!  be  content  to  travel  many  a 
stage  without  Him.  No  child-like  sense  of 
dependence — no  holy  communings — no  seeking 
His  will — no  trying  of  His  love,  faithfulness  and 
wisdom.  How  seldom  would  the  Lord  see  our 
uplifted  face,  or  our  outstretched  hands,  or  hear 
the  plaint  accents  of  our  voice,  did  He  permit  this 
grace  to  lie  sluggish  and  stagnant  in  the  soul. 
But  it  is  "living  water'' which  Christ  has  deposited 
within  the  regenerate,  and  trial  is  needed  to  keep 
it  pure,  sparkling,  and  ascending.  Be  ye  sure  ol 
this,  tlien,  beloved,  that  the  Lord  thus  exercises 
your  faith  only  to  make  you  a  richer  possessor 


THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  TRIAL.  81 

of  this  most  enriching  of  the  graces.  It  is  a  kind 
process  of  Jesus  by  which  He  seeks  your  greatest 
good.  The  more  your  faith  is  tried,  the  more  it 
deals  with  God,  and  travels  to  Christ ;  and  it  is 
impossible  for  you  to  spend  one  minute  with  God, 
or  to  catch  one  glimpse  of  Christ,  and  not  be 
sensibly  and  immeasurably  the  gainer.  The  more 
your  faith  leads  you  to  the  throne  of  grace,  the 
more  precious  will  prayer  become.  The  more 
your  faith  deals  with  the  atonement  of  Christ, 
the  more  will  the  glory  of  His  work  unfold  to 
your  mind.  The  more  your  faith  takes  hold  of 
the  Divine  promises,  the  more  will  it  be  confirmed 
in  the  truth  of  God's  word.  Thus  faith — so  super- 
natural and  wondrous  a  grace  is  it — transmutes 
everything  it  touches  into  most  precious  gold,  and 
so  conferreth  upon  its  tried  but  happy  possessor 
"greater  riches  than  the  treasures  of  Egypt!' 

But  who  can  travel  the  circle  of  all  the  trials 
to  which  the  saints  of  God  are  subject  ?  How 
great  their  variety !  how  peculiar  often  vheir 
character !  Each  child  of  God  seems  to  move  in 
a  groove  peculiar  to  himself, — to  revolve  round 
the  great  centre  in  an  orbit  of  his  o\yti.  The  Lord 
deals  with  us  as  individuals  that  we  may  have  in- 
di\ddual  dealings  with  Him.     Therefore,  among 


82  THE  PEECIOITSXESS  OP  TRIAL. 

the  catalogue  of  the  Christian's  trials,  those  of  an 
individual  nature  may  take  the  precedence  of  all 
others.  It  is  a  great  mercy  when  we  can  retire 
from  the  crowd  and  deal  with  God  individually 
— when  we  can  take  the  precious  promises  to  our- 
selves individually — when  we  can  repair  to  Jesus 
with  individual  sins,  infirmities,  and  sorrows,  feel- 
ing that  His  eye  bends  its  glance  upon  us,  His 
ear  bows  down  to  us,  His  hand  is  outstretched 
to  us.  His  whole  heart  absorbed  in  us,  as  though" 
not  another  claimant,  suitor,  or  sufferer  unveiled 
a  sorrow  or  preferred  a  request — as  if,  in  a  word, 
we  were  the  solitary  object  of  His  love.  Oh,  deal 
with  Christ  personally,  even  as  He  deals  person- 
ally with  you.  His  invitation  is,  "  Gome  unto 
ME," — and  He  would  have  you  come, — and  you 
cannot  honour  Him  more — recognising  His  ])q^y- 
sonality,  and  His  personal  relation  to  yourself, 
and  disclosing  your  personal  circumstances,  mak- 
ing confession  of  personal  sin,  presenting  personal 
wants,  and  unveiling  personal  infirmities,  back- 
si  idings,  and  sorrows. 

But,  in  addition  to  personal,  there  are  often  re- 
lative trials,  which  many  are  called  to  experience. 
It  is  impossible  for  feeling  hearts  not  to  make 
the  circumstances  of  those  to  whom  they  are  bound 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  TEIAL.  83 

by  close  and  tender  ties  of  love  and  friendship  in 
a  measure  their  own.  The  religion  of  Jesus  is  the 
religion  of  sympathy.  It  teaches  us  to  "weep  with 
those  that  weep,  and  to  rejoice  with  those  that 
rejoice" — to  "bear  one  another's  burdens,  and  so 
fulfil  the  law  of  Christ/'  And  what  a  touching 
exemplification  of  this  our  religion  did  its  great 
Author  present  wdien  bending  over  the  grave  of 
Lazarus  ;  as  the  evangelist  tells  us  —  "  Jesus 
-wept/'  He  had  griefs  of  His  own — oh,  how 
bitter  ! — but  He  buried  them  deej^ly  and  silently 
within  His  breast,  and  seemed  to  feel  and  to  weep 
only  for  the  griefs  of  others.  "  In  all  their  afflic- 
tions he  was  afflicted."  And  thus,  too,  it  often  is 
with  the  Christ-like  believer.  Concealing  his 
personal  sorrows,  and  bearing  in  lonely  and  un- 
complaining silence  his  own  burden,  he  is  often 
found,  from  his  unselfishness  and  sensibility,  to 
be  more  deeply  afilicted  and  oppressed  by  the  sor- 
rows and  burdens  of  others.  "  Who  is  weak,  and  I 
am  not  weak  ?  luho  is  offended,  and  I  hum  not  ?" 
•But  there  are  spiritual  trials  peculiar  to  the 
children  of  God.  The  world,  as  it  cannot  sympa- 
thise with  the  joy  of  the  believer,  so  it  cannot 
participate  with  his  spiritual  sorrow.  The  Lord 
tries  the  righteous  as  righteous.     What  knows  tha 


84  THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  TRIAL. 

world  of  trials  springing  from  the  indwelling  of 
sin,  from  the  temptations  of  Satan,  from  spiritual 
darkness,  from  the  conflict  of  unbelief,  from  the 
infiriniQes  of  prayer,  from  leanness  of  soul,  cold- 
ness of  love,  hardness  of  heart,  perpetual  tendency 
to  spiritual  relapse  ?  Nothing  whatever !  But 
such  are  the  soul  exercises  of  many  a  saint  of 
God,  and  these  constitute  his  sorest  trials. 

But  it  is  not  so  much  on  the  fact  of  the  Chris- 
tian's trials  that  we  would  dwell,  as  upon  a  parti- 
,  cular  aspect  of  those  trials  which — especially  in  the 
actual  process  of  trial — we  are  prone  to  overlook — 
their  |)/'ec20iiS7ie55.  The  apostle  clearly  intimates 
this — "  The  trial  of  your  faith  being  much  more 
precious  than  of  gold."  It  is  to  the  precious- 
nes3  of  the  trial  of  faith,  not  so  much  to  the  pre- 
ciousness  of  faith  itself,  to  which  he  refers.  Let 
us  briefly  pursue  this  idea,  and  see  in  what  res23ects 
the  child  of  God  may  contemplate  his  trials  as 
among  the  precious  things  of  God. 

Trial  is  precious,  because  that  luhich  it  tries  is 
so.  The  work  which  God  brings  to  the  test  .of 
affliction  is  worthy  of  all  the  pains  He  takes  to 
prove  its  reality,  to  promote  its  purity,  and  to 
advance  its  growth.  Nothing  is  so  precious,  so 
costly,  so  indestructible  as  the  work  of  the  Holy 


THE  PRECIOTJSNESS  OF  TRIAL.  85 

Gliost  in  the  soul.  If,  beloved,  you  have  a  broken 
heart  for  sin,  if  you  possess  faith  less  even  than 
a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  if  there  glovrs  in  your 
heart  a  solitary  spark  of  Divine  love,  or  there  beats 
in  your  soul  a  throb  of  spiritual  life, — if,  in  a 
word,  there  is  the  outline  of  the  restored  moral 
image  of  God;  faint  and  imperfect  though  it  is, 
no  figure  can  illustrate  its  beauty,  nor  words  de- 
scribe its  worth.  It  distances  aU  idea  in  its 
intrinsic  preciousness.  Now  this  is  the  work  the 
Lord  tries.  These  are  the  Divine  principles,  holy 
emotions,  heavenly  feelings  He  brings  to  the 
test.  He  tries  it  because  it  is  worth  the  trial,  and 
so  the  trial  itself  becomes  a  precious  thing  be- 
cause it  has  to  do  with  a  precious  work. 

Trial  also  derives  a  value  from  its  being  the 
discipline  of  a  loving  Father.  The  moment  faith 
can  see  the  extraction  of  any  drop  of  the  curse 
from  the  cup  of  sorrow,  and  trace  in  its  ingre- 
dients nothing  but  the  elements  of  love,  wisdom, 
goodness,  faithfulness,  righteousness,  it  realises 
the  costliness  of  the  discipline.  The  very  rod  is 
loved  because  it  is  the  rod  of  Him  who  is  "  Love!' 
The  chastening  is  sweet  because  it  is  parental. 
And  the  true  believer  exclaims,  "My  Father  de- 
signs by  this  to  teach  me  some  salutary  lesson,  to 


86  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  TEIAL. 

inculcate  some  divine  truth,  to  rebuke  me  for 
some  folly,  to  correct  me  for  some  sin,  to  recall 
my  truant  heart,  to  restore  my  wandering  soul,  to 
endear  Himself,  and  by  detaching  my  afiections 
and  sympathies  from  earth's  attractions,  to  allure 
and  bind  them  closer  to  heaven.  Precious  trial 
that  is  the  dictate  of  a  wise  and  holy  discipline, 
that  leaveth  traces  of  a  Father's  hand,  that  is 
loving  in  its  origin,  loving  in  its  nature,  loving  in 
its  results !" 

Trial  is  precious  because  it  increases  the  pre- 
ciousness  of  Christ.  It  is  in  adversity  that  human 
friendship  is  tested.  When  the  wintry  blast  sweeps 
by,  when  fortune  vanishes,  and  health  fails,  and 
position  lowers,  and  popularity  wanes,  and  in- 
fluence lessens,  then  the  summer  birds  of  earthly 
friendship  expand  their  wings  and  seek  a  warmer 
clime !  The  "same  test  that  proves  the  hollowness 
of  the  world's  affection  and  constancy  confirms 
the  believer  in  the  reality,  power,  and  preciousness 
of  the  friendship  of  Jesus.     To  know  fully  what 

f  Christ  is  we  must  know  something  of  adversity. 

i  We  must  be  tried,  tempted,  and  ojjpressed — we 
must  taste  the  bitterness  of  sorrow,  feel  the  pres- 
sure of  want,  tread  the  path  of  solitude,  and  often 
be  brought  to  the  end  of  our  own  strength  and  ol 


/  \PEECIOUSNESS  OF  TRIAL.  87 

y  and  counsel.  Jesus  slimes  tlie 
..J  faith's  eye  when  all  things  are  dark 
areary.  And  when  others  have  retired  from 
our  presence,  their  patience  wearied,  their  sym- 
pathy exhausted,  their  counsel  baffled,  perchance 
their  affection  chilled  and  their  friendship 
changed,  then  Christ  approaches  and  takes  the 
vacant  place  ;  sits  at  our  side,  speaks  peace  to  our 
troubled  heart,  sootlies  our  sorrows,  guides  our 
ludo^ment,  and  bids  us  "Fear  not."  Beloved 
reader,  when  has  Christ  appeared  the  nearest  and 
most  precious  to  your  soul  ?  Has  it  not  been  in 
seasons  when  you  have  the  most  stood  in  need  of 
His  guiding  counsel  and  of  His  soothing  love  ? 
In  the  region  of  your  heart's  sinfulness  you  have 
learned  the  value,  completeness,  and  preciousness 
of  His  atoning  work,  of  His  finished  salvation. 
But  the  tender,  loving,  sympathetic  part  of  His 
nature,  you  have  been  brought  into  the  experience 
of  only  in  the  school  of  sanctified  trial.  Oh,  how 
precious  has  that  trial  made  Him !  Into  what 
sacred  intimacy  and  close  fellowship  and  conscious 
nearness  has  it  brought  you.  When  He  has  ap- 
proached with  an  expression  so  benignant,  with  a 
look  so  winning,  with  words  so  soothing,  with  an 
^lfluence  so  tranquillising,  and  told  you  that  He 


88  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  TRIAL. 

was  acquainted  with  your  sorrow,  entered  into  your 
loss,  felt  all  the  keen,  delicate  touches  of  your 
grief ;  ^nd  then  spake  words  of  comfort  to  your 
spirit,  bound  up  your  broken  heart,  gently  drew 
you  into  a  sweet,  holy,  cheerful  submission  to 
His  will  and  full  justification  of  His  dealings,  oh, 
has  He  not  enthroned  Himself  upon  your  soul 
at  that  moment  more  supremely  and  firmly 
than  ever  ?  You  once  thought  you  knew  Him, 
and  you  did  in  some  degree,  but  now,  in  the 
depth  of  your  hallowed  sorrow,  a  sorrow  into 
which  the  Man  of  sorrows  and  the  Brother  born 
for  adversity  has  enshrined  His  whole  self,  you 
exclaim,  "I  have  heard  of  thee  by  the  hearing 
of  the  ear ;  but  now  mine  eye  seeth  thee."  We 
ask.  Is  not  trial  a  precious  discipline,  a  precious 
correction,  a  precious  school,  that  leads  you  more* 
fully  into  the  heartfelt  experience  of  the  precious- 
ness  of  the  Saviour  ?  Shrink  not  from,  nor  rebel 
against,  that  which  makes  you  more  intimately 
acquainted  with  your  best  Friend,  your  dearest 
Brother,  the  tender,  sympathising,  Beloved  of  your 
soul.  You  will  know  more  of  Jesus  in  one  sanc- 
tified trial  than  in  wading  through  a  library  of 
volumes  or  in  listening  to  a  lifetime  of  sermons. 
It  is  impossible  either  to  contemplate  the  costljf 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  TRIAL.  89 

results  of  trial,  and  not  find  an  evidence  of  its 
preciousness.  Trial  is  a  fruitful  pre  cess;  and, 
though  often  painful  as  the  incisions  of  the  ampu- 
tating knife,  the  results,  like  those  incisions,  are 
salutary  and  healthful.  Sanctified  trial  opens  an 
outlet  for  the  escape  of  much  soul-distemper.  Deep- 
rooted,  hidden,  and  long  pent-up  evil,  the  existence 
of  which  has  been  as  a  fretting  sore,  inflaming, 
irritating,  and  impairing  the  whole  spiritual  con- 
stitution of  the  soul,  has  by  this  process  been 
thrown  off,  and  thus  a  more  wholesome  state  and 
healthful  action  has  supervened.  Oh,  what  sel- 
fishness, what  carnality,  what  rebellion,  what 
worldliness,  v/hat  secret  declension,  has  God's  lan- 
cet brought  to  light,  revealing  it  but  to  inspire 
self-abhorrence,  sin-loathing,  and  sin-forsaking — - 
and  all  this  the  costly  fruit  of  a  deeply  sanctified 
affliction ! 

Trial,  too,  stirs  us  up  to  lay  hold  upon  God 
in  jyrayer.  Nothing,  probably,  in  all  the  Lord's 
means  of  grace  and  dispensations  of  providence 
so  leads  us  to  prayer,  incites  us  to  call  upon 
the  Lord,  as  the  pressure  of  affliction.  And  so 
hioh  a  privilege  is  access  to  God,  so  sweet  a  spot 
is  the  throne  of  grace,  so  great  and  holy  the  bless- 
ings that  spring  from  a  waiting  of  soul  upon  the 


90  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  TEIAL. 

Lord,  that  must  be  a  wholesome  discij)line  that 
leads  to  such  results.  Oh,  count  it  a  precious 
trial,  a  golden  affliction,  that  brings  your  heart 
into  a  closer  communion  with  Christ !  Your  Elder 
Brother's  voice  may,  like  Joseph's,  sound  harshly 
and  alarmingly  upon  your  ear,  filling  you  with 
fear  and  foreboding ;  yet  it  is  the  voice  of  your 
Brother,  the  "  voice  of  the  Beloved,"  and  it  speaks 
but  to  rouse  you  to  a  more  full,  confiding  opening 
of  your  heart  in  prayer.  Oh,  precious  trial !  Oh, 
heaven-sent  affliction  !  that  breaks  down  the  bar- 
riers, removes  the  restraints,  thaws  the  conjealings 
that  intercept  and  interrupt  my  fellowship  with 
God,  and  with  His  clear  Son  Christ  Jesus.  Our 
heavenly  Father  loves  to  hear  the  voice  of  His 
children  ;  and  when  that  voice  is  still,  when  there 
is  a  suspension  of  heart-communion,  and  the  tones 
are  silent  which  were  wont  to  fiill  as  music  upon 
His  ear,  He  sends  a  trial,  and  then  we  rise  and 
give  ourselves  to  prayer.  Perhaps,  it  is  a  per- 
plexity, and  we  go  to  Him  for  counsel ;  or  it  is  a 
want,  and  we  go  to  Him  for  supply ;  or  it  is  a 
grief,  and  we  go  to  Him  for  soothing ;  or  it  is  a 
burden,  and  we  look  to  Him  for  upholding ;  it  is 
an  infirmity,  and  we  rej^air  to  Him  for  grace ;  it 
ia  a  temptation,  and  we  fly  to  Him  for  succour ; 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  TEIAL.  91 

it  is  a  sin,  and  we  repair  to  Him  for  pardon;, 
but,  be  its  form  what  it  may,  it  has  a  voice — 
/    "  Eise,  and  call  upon  thy  God ! "  and  to  God  it 
brings  us. 

Hov/  much,  too,  does  deeply  sanctified  trial  cor- 
rect our  false  judgments.  We  conceive  dark 
thoughts  of  God's  character,  wronor  views  of  His 
dealings,  crude  interpretations  of  His  word — our 
judgments  often  miscarry  in  tbeir  opinions  of 
persons,  of  actions,  and  events ;  but  when  under 
God's  hand  how  much  of  this  is  corrected.  The 
passing  tempest  has  swept  the  clouds  away,  cleared 
our  intellectual,  and  purified  our  moral  atmosphere, 
and  a  brighter,  serener  sky  has  smiled  upon  us 
from  above,  and  our  path  has  become  easier  and 
pleasanter.  We  see  God's  character  and  our  own 
in  a  different  light — His  so  glorious,  our  own  so 
vile.  •  We  interpret  His  dealings  difi*erently  and 
more  favourably,  and  begin  to  learn  that  there  is 
no  individual  who  has  not,  perhaps,  more  in  his 
character  to  admire  and  love  than  to  censure  and 
condemn ;  and  that  there  is  no  event  in  Divine 
Providence  that  has  not  a  lesson  of  truth  and  a 
miissage  of  love. 

We  are  deeply  indebted  to  trial — and  it  thus 
fully  sustains  its  character  as  among  the  precious 


92  THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  TRIAL. 

things  of  God — as  authentic  atinrj  the  fact  of  our 
divine  sons! dp.  Erase  sanctified  trial  from  the 
catalogue  of  the  Lord's  dealings  with  you,  and 
you  would  cancel  one  of  the  strongest  evidences 
of  your  adoption.  What  earthly  father  corrects 
not  the  waywardness,  self-will,  and  disobedience 
of  his  child  ?  and  shall  not  our  heavenly  Father, 
in  the  exercise  of  a  wisdom  and  love  yet  greater, 
employ  a  holy  and  wholesome  discipline  towards 
His  children  ?  Every  stroke  of  His  rod  is  a  proof 
of  His  love,  and  every  correction  of  His  hand  an 
evidence  of  our  sonship.  How  tender  and  touch- 
ing the  admonition,  ''My  son,  despise  not  thou 
the  chastening  of  the  Lord,  nor  faint  when  thou 
art  rebuked  of  him.  For  whom  the  Lord  loveth 
he  chasteneth,  and  scourgeth  every  son  whoin,  he 
receiveth."  Thus,  then,  our  hallowed  afflictions 
and  trials  are  among  the  choice,  precious  things 
of  God,  because  they  are  signs  and  seals  of  our 
gracious  adoption  into  His  family.  Be  not  cast 
down,  0  tried  believer!  as  though  some  strange 
and  untoward  thing  had  happened  to  you.  ]\Iis- 
interpret  not  the  dealings  of  God,  as  though  your 
present  sorrows,  difficulties,  and  trials,  were  marks 
of  His  displeasure,  and  evidences  against  your  true 
and   divine    relationship.      Many  of  the  Lord's 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  TEIAL.  93 

people  who  appear  exempt  from  those  trials  by 
which  others  are  sorely  afflicted  are  prone  to 
argue  from  thence  against  their  being  the  true 
children  of  God.  Most  true  is  it  that  the  relioion 
of  Jesus  is  the  religion  of  the  cross,  and  that 
there  never  was  a  true  Christian  without  a  cross. 
And  yet  the  painful  misgiving,  arising  from 
exemption  from  the  crosses  which  others  bear, 
may  itself  be  the  cross  the  Lord  appoints  you. 
The  heart-searching  and  prayer,  the  earnest- 
ness and  anxiety,  which  this  conviction  produces, 
may  be  just  the  self-discipline  which  those 
peculiar  trials— from  the  absence  of  which  you 
augur  ill  against  yourself — are  designed  to  effect. 
God  can  as  richly  teach,  and  as  deeply  sanctify  us 
by  the  absence  as  by  the  presence  of  a  trial.  But 
ah !  are  there  no  crosses  other  than  reverse  of  cir- 
cumstances, loss  of  health,  chilled  affection,  changed 
friendship,  heart-crushing  bereavement?  Yes, 
beloved  reader  ;  this  body  of  our  humiliation,  the 
power  of  indwelKng  sin,  the  assaults  of  Satan,  the 
seductions  of  the  world,  the  wounding  of  the 
saints,  spiritual  becloudings  and  despondencies, 
is  enough,  in  the  absence  of  all  external  trial,  to 
discipline  the  heart,  to  humble  the  soul,  and  keep 
the  believer  near  to  the  cross  of  Jesus.     Thus, 


94  THE  PRE(:!IOUSNESS  OF  TEIAL. 

there  is  no  believer  without  a  trial,  and  no  Chris- 
tian is  without  the  cross. 

"A  lady  of  rank  and  great  piety  complained 
that,  whereas  in  Scripture  the  cross  is  everywhere 
spoken  of  as  useful  and  necessary  for  the  children 
of  God,  yet  she,  for  her  part,  must  acknowledge 
that  hitherto  the  Lord  had  never  deemed  her 
worthy  of  one,  and  that  this  often  raised  within 
her  melancholy  thoughts  and  doubts  whether  she 
was  one  of  His  children  or  not.  Gotthold  said 
to  her — I  confess  that  complaints  like  yours  are 
not  common,  inasmuch  as  few  Christians  have 
any  ground  to  lament  a  lack  of  the  cross,  while 
others,  whose  share  of  it  is  exceedingly  small, 
nevertheless  imagine  that  it  is  quite  as  large  as 
they  are  able  to  bear ;  and  in  particular,  those 
who  are  yet  unaccustomed  to  it,  are  prone,  to 
fancy  tliat  their  cross  is  too  great  and  heavy  for 
them.  As  for  your  case,  however,  it  seems  to  me 
that  you  are  actually  bearing  a  cross  without  be- 
ing conscious  of  it.  You  are  vexed  witli  gloomy 
thoughts  because  you  have  no  cross.  These 
gloomy  thoughts,  however,  appear  to  me  to  be 
themselves  a  considerable  cross,  and  also  a  very 
salutary  one,  for  they  not  only  evince,  but  nourish 
and  augmejit  your  desire  to  resemble  the  Lord 


THE  PEEOIOUSNESS  OF  TRIAL.  95 

Jesus,  and  to  take  up  your  cross  and  follow  Him. 
Besides,  tlie  words  of  our  Saviour,  'Whosoever 
dotli  not  bear  his  cross,  and  come  after  me,  can- 
not be  my  disciple,'  relate  not  merely  to  the 
common  hardships  of  human  life,  but  are  also 
and  especially  to  be  understood  of  the  crucifixion 
of  the  old  man,  of  his  sinful  lusts  and  desires,  of 
self-denial  and  the  subjugation  of  the  will.  For 
the  rest,  we  cannot  and  ought  not  to  make  crosses 
for  ourselves,  for  this  would  end  in  hypocrisy. 
The  Lord  holds  the  cup  of  affliction  in  His  own 
hand,  and  pours  out  of  it  when  and  as  much  as 
He  will.  That  He  has  spared  you  hitherto,  acknow- 
ledge with  humble  gratitude  ;  He  is  the  Searcher 
of  hearts,  and  perhaps  knew  that,  with  the  cross, 
your  heart  would  not  have  felt  towards  Him  as.  it 
has  done  without  it.  Eecolle"ct,  however,  that  the 
drama  of  your  life  has  not  yet  been  played  to  the 
end,  and  that,  for  ought  you  know,  your  gracious 
God  may  still  have  some  little  cross  in  reserve  for 
you,  to  be  imposed  in  due  time.  The  fiercest 
tempests  often  come  in  the  evening  of  the  finest 
summer  days,  and  it  is  after  the  pure  wine'  has 
been  run  ofi  that  the  lees  are  wont  to  follow.  It 
ought  to  be  another  ground  of  gratitude  to  God, 
that  He  has  given  you  time  to  prepare  for  all 


96  THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  TRIAL 

emergencies,  and  provide  yourself  with  the  armour 
necessary  for  your  defence."* 

It  is  not  the  least  hallowed  result  of  sanctified 
trial,  thus  increasing  its  preciousness,  the  deeper 
acquaintance  into  ivhich  it  brings  us  ivith  God's 
word.  In  trial  we  fly  to  the  Scriptures  as  the 
unfailino-  source  of  rruidance  and  comfort.  What- 
ever  may  be  the  nature  of  our  sorrow,  or  the 
singularity  of  our  path,  we  are  sure  of  finding  in 
God's  word  light,  sympathy,  and  soothing  corre- 
sponding thercAvith.  God  sends  us  into  this  school 
of  affliction  to  learn.  Thus  He  dealt  with  David 
— "  It  is  good  for  me  that  I  have  been  afflicted, 
that  I  might  learn  thy  statutes."  God's  word  at 
all  times  should  be  our  study  and  delight.  "Let 
the  word  of  Christ  dwell  in  you  richly  in  all 
wisdom.''  But  there  is,  through  outward  distrac- 
tions and  inward  conflicts,  a  tendency  to  neglect 
the  word,  to  lose  our  relish  for  its  sweetness, 
or  to  turn  from  its  faithful  rebukes.  And  as  a 
parent  or  a  teacher  sometimes  employs  the  rod 
to  stimulate  his  pupil  to  learn,  so  our  Heavenly 
Father,  our  Divine  Teacher,  often  senrls  His  rod 
of  correction  to  drive  us  to  the  study  of  the  truth  ; 
then  we  testify,  ''  It  is  good  for  me  that  I  have 

*  "  Gottbold's  Emblems." 


THE  PRECTOUSNESS  OF  TEIAL.  97 

been  afflicted  (corrected,  chastened,  rebuked),  that 
I  might  learn  thy  statutes."  And  oh,  with  what 
increased  clearness  and  beauty  does  the  Bible 
often  unfold  to  us  in  the  time  of  precious  trial ! 
We  understand  the  Scriptures  now  as  y/e  never 
did  before.  We  may  have  consulted  critics  and 
expositors,  and  by  our  own  ingenuity  and  skill 
have  endeavoured  to  penetrate  the  sacred  mys- 
teries of  the  word,  and  yet  but  to  little  perception 
of  the  truth.  But  the  rod  of  correction  has  proved 
our  best  expositor  under  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit 
of  truth  1  "  Then  opened  He  their  understand- 
ing, that  they  might  understand  the  Scriptures." 
Dark,  mysterious,  and  trying  providences — trials 
which  we  thought  so  untoward — have  been  our 
best  commentaries  on  the  deep  things  of  the  word. 
What  a  honied  sweetness,  in  our  personal  experi- 
ence, has  the  bitterness  of  trial  imparted  to  it!  We 
did  not  know  that  there  was  so  much  sweetness 
in  the  word  until  we  found  *so  much  bitterness  in 
the  world;  nor  so  much  fulness  in  the  Scriptures 
until  we  found  so  much  emptiness  in  the  creature. 
We  see  the  Bible  now  to  be  fall  of  Jesus — Christ 
its  revelation,  its  glory  and  sweetness,  its  Alpha 
and  Omega,  its  be^ginning  and  end.  Satiated 
with  creature  comforts,  and  surfeited  with  self- 
G 


98  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  TRIAL. 

satisfaction,  we  had  loathed  the  manna  of  the 
word,  and  it  had  no  more  relish  to  our  spiritual 
than  the  most  insipid  element  to  our  natural  taste. 
But  sweet,  sanctified,  precious  trial  has  led  us  to 
tlie  Book  of  the  tried — God's  own  word — and  we 
have  "rejoiced  at  it  as  one  that  findeth great  spoil!' 
With  the  Psalmist  we  have  testified,  "Hoiu  sweet 
are  thy  words  to  my  taste  I  yea,  sweeter  than 
honey  to  my  mouth."  "  This  is  my  comfort  in 
my  affliction:  for  thy  word  hath  quickened  me." 
Oh  welcome,  then,  cheerfully  and  submissively  the 
precious  trial  that  renders  more  precious  in  your 
experience  the  preciousness  of  God's  word. 

The  time  of  trial  often  sets  us  upon  a  closer 
examination  of  our  Christian  progress  and 
hope.  In  the  season  of  worldly  sunshine  and 
j^rosperity,  gliding  along  upon  the  smooth  and 
calm  current,  how  much  do  we  take  for  granted 
as  to  our  true  spiritual  state.  We  deem  all  right 
within  because  all  is  smiling  without.  The  world 
smiles,  friends  approve,  ministers  commend,  the 
heart  flatters,  and  the  candle  of  the  Lord  ^hineth 
round  about  us — alas  !  alas  !  with  what  sliglifc 
evidences  of  conversion,  with  what  dubious  marks 
of  grace,  with  what  a  slender  hope  of  heaven,  are 
we  then   satisfied!      How   shallow   our  seli-ac- 


THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  TRIAL.  99 

quaintance,  Low  imperfect  our  knowledge  of 
Christ.  But  the  trial  comes,  bearing  the  disguise 
of  a  foe,  yet  in  reality  a  friend.  And  now  tlie 
first  blast  of  adversity  scatters  the  fig-leaf  cover- 
ing, and  destroys  the  beautiful  tresselledwall  which 
our  own  hands  had  constructed  for  our  beauty 
and  defence.  What  we  thought  was  substance 
proves  but  a  shadow,  what  we  imagined  was  a 
reality  proves  but  an  appearance.  The  faith  we 
thouo;ht  so  strono^,  the  love  we  thouoiit  so  fervent, 
the  grace  we  thought  so  real,  the  growth  we 
thought  so  unmistakeable,  all,  all  vanish  before 
the  dealings,  the  probings,  the  siftings  of  the 
Searcher  of  hearts  in  the  day  of  trial.  Trial  has 
brought  us  to  our  right  place — the  feet  of  Jesus. 
There,  in  the  spirit  of  self-examination,  of  self- 
loathing,  of  self-renunciation,  we  have  been  led  to 
ask,  "  Will  this  evidence  serve  me  when  I  come  to 
die  ?  will  this  love  give  me  boldness  in  the  day  of 
judgment  ?  will  this  faith  present  me  faultless 
before  the  throne  of  God  and  the  Lamb?"  Thus 
relinquishing  our  vain  fancies,  our  foolish  dreams, 
our  dubious  evidences,  we  have  been  enabled  to 
take  a  renev/ed  hold  of  Christ,  to  fly  afresh  to  the 
fountain  of  Kis  blood,  and  to  enfold  ourselves  more 
closely  within  the  robe   of   His    righteousness. 


100  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  TEIAL. 

Thus  emptied,  humbled  at  His  feet,  we  i^raisc  and 
adore  Him  for  the  discipline  that  consumed  tha 
dross,  scattered  the  chaff,  swept  from  beneath  us 
the  sand,  and  that  strenojthened  our  evidences, 
brightened  our  hope,  unfolded  the  Spirit,  and 
enthroned  the  Eedeemer,  more  vividly  and  su- 
premely within  our  soul.  0  precious  trial !  dark 
though  thou  art,  that  yet  bearest  beneath  thy 
sombre  wing  blessings  of  grace  so  sacred  and 
costly  as  these ! 

As  a  moral  discipline  it  would  seem  impossible 
to  overrate  the  preciousness  of  trial.  No  be- 
liever has  been  placed  in  a  true  position  for  the 
formation,  development,  and  completeness  of  his 
Christia.n  character  who  has  not  j^assed  in  some 
degree  through  this  discipline.  'Not  more  essen- 
tial is  it  that  the  vessel  of  the  artificer  should  be 
exposed  to  the  heat  of  the  furnace,  in  order  to 
impart  transparency  to  the  material,  consolidation 
to  its  form,  and  brilliance  and  permanence  to  the 
colours  his  pencil  has  traced  upon  it,  than  it  is 
for  a  "  vessel  of  mercy  whom  God  has  afore  pre- 
23ared  unto  glory,"  to  be  tried  though  it  be  as  by 
fire.  From  this  moral  discipline  there  is  in  the 
family  of  God  no  exception.  It  is  a  remark  of 
the  seraphic  Leighton — true  as  it  is  beautifid— » 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  TEIAL.  101 

that,  "  God  had  but  one  Son  v,dtliout  sin,  and 
never  one  without  suffering."  How  touching 
and  conclusive  the  argument  and  appeal  of  the 
apostle — himself  purified  in  this  crucible  and 
instructed  in  this  school — "  Ye  have  forgotten 
the  exhortation,  which  speaketh  unto  you  as  unto 
children,  My  son,  despise  not  thou  the  chastening 
of  the  Lord,  nor  faint  v/hen  thou  art  rebuked  of 
him :  for  whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  chasteneth, 
and  scourgeth  every  son  whom  he  receiveth.  If 
ye  endure  chastening,  God  dealeth  with  you  as 
with  sons :  for  what  son  is  he  whom  the  father 
chasteneth  not  ?  But  if  ye  be  without  chastise- 
ment, whereof  all  are  partakers,  then  are  ye  bas- 
tards, and  not  sons.  Furthermore,  we  have  had 
fathers  of  our  flesh  which  corrected  us,  and  we 
gave  them  reverence :  shall  we  not  much  rather 
be  in  subjection  unto  the  Father  of  spirits,  and 
live  ?  For  they  verily  for  a  few  days  chastened 
us  after  their  own  pleasure ;  but  he  for  our  profit, 
that  we  might  be  partakers  of  his  holiness.  Now, 
no  chastening  for  the  present  seemeth  to  be  joyous, 
but  grievous :  nevertheless  afterward  it  yieldeth 
the  peaceable  fruit  of  righteousness  unto  them 
which  are  exercised  thereby."  Thus  is  it  clear 
that  chastisement  or  trial  is  an  evidence  and  seal 


102  THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  TRIAL. 

of  adoption  ;  and  that  Avithoiit  it  we  should  lack 
that  spiritual  discipline,  apart  from  which  there 
is  no  proper  symmetry  and  completeness  of  Chris- 
tian character.  Who  has  not  marked  the  wide 
and  striking  difference  in  the  character  and  de- 
portment of  a  child  trained  beneath  the  whole- 
some discipline  of  a  parent,  and  a  child  who  has 
grown  up  without  that  discipline,  left  to  its  own 
self  ?  To  what  is  that  difference  to  be  traced  but 
the  forming  influence  of  discipline  in  the  one, 
and  its  entire  absence  in  the  other  ?  There  is  a 
development  and  strength  of  character,  a  matu- 
rity of  mind  and  mellowed  refinement  of  feeling 
and  address  in  the  child  thus  schooled,  which  you 
in  vain  look  for  in  the  child  neglected.  "  A  wise 
son  heareth  the  instruction  of  his  father."  In  the 
Hebrew  this  passage  may  be  literally  rendered,  "  A 
wise  son  is  the  chastisement  of  his  father."  On 
this  text,  thus  rendered,  in  all  probability  the  Jews 
founded  their  proverb,  '*  If  you  see  a  wise  child, 
be  sure  that  his  father  has  chastised  him."  Now, 
how  gracious  and  tender  is  jur  heavenly  Father 
to  condescend  thus  to  deal  with  us  !  In  every- 
thino;  would  He  sustain  the  relation  He  stands  to 
us  as  a  Father.  Not  only  in  loving  us,  thinking 
of  us,  providing  for  us,  guiding  and  keeping  us, 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  TEIAL.  103 

but  also  chastising  us.  He  has  undertaken  a 
father's  office,  and  He  will  fully  and  faithfully 
discharge  it,  even  though  it  may  compel  the 
frequent  and  painful,  though  loving  and  righteous, 
use  of  the  rod.  Oh  to  be  assured  that  this  stroke 
is  a  fresh  seal  of  adoption !  Who  would  not 
cheerfully  exclaim,  "The  cup  which  my  Father 
hath  given  me,  shall  I  not  drink  it  ? " 

And  yet  we  think  there  is  a  yet  higher  end 
accomplished  by  precious  trial,  even  than  this 
authentication  of  our  adoption.  We  refer  to  the 
Divine  holiness  to  which  it  assimilates  us.  "He 
for  our  profit,  that  we  might  be  partakers  of  his 
holiness."  Next  to  his  justification,  sanctification 
must  be  the  grand  aim  of  the  believer  ;  and  what- 
ever is  promotive  of  this  must  be' precious.  God 
would  make  us  haj)py,  but  He  can  only  make  us 
happy  by  making  us  holy.  Happiness  and  holi- 
ness are  cognate  truths  :  they  are  relative  terms ; 
they  are  twin  sisters.  He  must  be  happy  who  is 
holy.  Sin  is  the  parent  of  all  misery ;  holiness 
the  root  of  all  hapj)iness.  Now  the  holiness  which 
God  would  bring  us  into  sympathy  with,  and  make 
us  partakers  of,  is  His  own  holiness.  There  is 
much  that  j)asses  in  the  religious  world  for  holi- 
ness which  is  spurious  in  itr»  nature,  and  which  is 


104!  THE  PRECIOTJSNESS  OF  I'EIAL. 

diso-wned  by  God.  There  is  no  real  holiness  but 
that  which  moulds  us  into  the  Divine  image — that 
which  makes  us  God-like.  We  cannot  possess  God's 
essential  holiness,  but  we  may  j^artake  of  His  im- 
parted holiness.  In  the  same  sense  in  which  we 
are  said  to  be  "  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature  " 
(2  Pet.  i.  4),  we  are  "  partakers  of  the  Divhie  holi- 
ness." What  a  portrait  is  a  child  of  God  purified, 
sanctified,  and  disciplined  by  trial !  God  is  the 
divine  original ;  he  is  the  human  copy.  Upon 
that  heart  softened,  upon  that  spirit  subdued, 
upon  that  will  laid  low,  the  holy  Lord  God  has 
imprinted,  inlaid,  His  own  likeness.  And  as  the 
jDolished  mirror  reflects  the  likeness  of  the  man 
who  looks  into  it,  and  as  the  glassy  lake  images 
the  sun  tliat  beams  down  upon  it,  so  does  the  dis- 
ciplined child  of  God, — the  grossness  of  the  fleshly 
eliminated  from  the  spiritual — the  dross  of  the 
natural  separated  from  the  divine — his  purified 
soul  reflects,  and  sparkles,  and  shines  with  the  holi- 
ness of  God.  Oh,  to  be  like  God,  who  would  not 
welcome  the  trial,  exclaiming  with  the  psalmist, 
"I  know,  0  Lord,  that  thy  judgments  are  right, 
and  that  thou  in  faithfulness  hath  afflicted  me." 
How  tenderly,  soothingly,  lovingly  does  your  Father 
address  you,  His  tried  child — "My  son,  despise 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  TEIAL.  105 

not  tliou  the  chastening  of  the  Lord."  Is  there 
rigour  in  the  discipline  i — tliere  is  love  in  the  rod. 
Is  there  bitterness  in  the  cup  ? — there  is  sweetness 
upon  its  brim.  Is  there  acuteness  in  the  suffer- 
ing? there  is  soothing  in  the  relation — "My 
son  ! ''  Never  can  He  forget  in  the  severest  dis- 
cipline, in  the  most  painful  correction,  that  He 
is  our  Father,  and  we  His  children.  "  Is  Ephraim 
my  dear  son  ?  is  he  a  pleasant  child  ?  for  since  I 
spake  against  him,  I  do  earnestly  remember  him 
still:  therefore. my  bowels  are  troubled  for  him; 
I  will  surely  have  mercy  upon  him,  saith  the  Lord." 
Never  does  God  emplo}?-  a  rebuke  without  a  cor- 
dial, or  the  pruning  knife  without  the  balm. 
How  frequently  the  mercy  precedes,  and  thus 
prepares  for,  the  judgment.  It  was  so  in  the  case 
of  our  first  parents.  Ere  God  pronounces  the 
awful  sentence.  He  breathes  the  gracious  pro- 
mise. Mercy  digs  the  channel  of  judgment — 
prepares  and  paves  its  way.  Thus,  God's  correc- 
tions, rebukes,  and  chastisements  come  tempered, 
softened,  and  subdued ;  and  like  the  smitins^s 
and  reproofs  of  the  righteous,  are  a  "  kindness," 
and  "an  excelleiit  oil,  which  shall  not  break  the 
head."  Thus  it  is  that  the  tried  believer  can 
look  into  the  face  of  his  Father  and  say,  "  Eight- 


106  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  TEIAL. 

eons  art  thou,  0  Lord,  when  I  plead  with  thee ; 
yet  let  me  talk  with  thee  of  thy  jndgmcnts"  (Jer. 
xii.  1).  How  sweetly  and  tenderly  did  Jesus 
blend  the  warning  with  the  consolation,  "  In  the 
world  ye  shall  have  tribulation,  but  in  me  ye 
shall  have  peace!"  Our  Lord  wisely  and  gra- 
ciously j^resents  the  world  to  us  as  a  scene  of 
sorrow,  trial,  and  tribulation,  but  the  counterpart 
shall  be  that  in  its  midst  we  shall  experience  His 
presence,  love,  and  grace  as  our  peace.  Thus 
the  remark  of  a  quaint  writer  holds  good,  "  Afflic- 
tion's rods  are  made  of  many  keen  twigs,  but 
they  are  all  cut  from  the  tree  of  life.  It  is  a 
great  mercy  to  have  a  bitter  put  into  that  draught 
which  Satan  has  sweetened  as  a  vehicle  for  his 
poison."  Never  is  the  believer  so  near  to  Christ's 
heart,  and  the  Spirit's  comforts,  and  Heaven's 
joys,  as  when  the  flood  of  dark  and  broken 
waters  is  surging  beneath  and  around  him,  lift- 
ing him  upon  their  crested  billows.  The  higher 
the  ark  which  bore  the  Church  of  old  rose  upon 
the  flood,  the  nearer  it  mounted  toward  heaven. 
As  earth  receded,  heaven  approached  ;  and  tlie 
vessel,  floating  away  upon  the  bosom  of  the  swell- 
ing deep,  mounted  higher  and  higher.  Is  it  not  so 
with  the  believing  soul  when  floods  of  great  waters 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  TRIAL.  107 

come  into  it?  As  these  waters  swell  and  rise, 
sinful  follies,  worldly  vanities,  carnal  pursuits, 
pride,  self,  and  ignorance,  disappear,  and  the 
soul  gets  nearer  to  heaven.  Precious  trial  that 
buries  earth's  vanity  and  corruption,  and  unveils 
heaven's  joy  and  glory  to  the  soul !  Thus  out  of 
the  eater  comes  food.  The  trial  that  looked  so 
threatening  has  brought  such  mercy.  The  cloud 
that  seemed  charged  with  electricity  empties  a 
fruitful  shower.  Oh,  trying  seasons  are  our  most 
spiritual,  most  prayerful,  most  Christ-endearing, 
Christ-conforming  seasons,  and  so  trial  becomes 
precious.  "  Stars  shine  the  brightest  in  the  darkest 
night ;  torches  are  the  better  for  the  heating  ; 
grapes  do  not  come  to  the  proof  till  they  come 
to  the  press ;  spices  smell  sweetest  when  pounded ; 
young  trees  root  the  fastest  for  shaking;  vines 
are  better  for  bleeding  ;  gold  looks  the  brightest 
for  scouring  ;  glow-worms  glisten  best  in  the 
dark ;  juniper  smells  the  sweetest  in  the  fire ;  the 
palm  tree  proves  the  better  for  pressing  ;  cammo- 
mile,  the  more  you  tread  it  the  more  you  spread 
it.  Such  is  the  condition  of  all  God's  children ; 
they  are  then  most  triumphant  when  most 
trampled,  most  glorious  when  most  afflicted ;  often 
most  in  the  favour  of  God  when  least  in  man's ; 


108  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OP  TRIAL. 

as  their  conflicts,  so  their  conquests  ;  as  their 
tribulations,  so  their  joys;  they  live  best  in  the 
furnace  of  persecution,  so  that  heavy  afflictions 
are  the  best  benefactors  to  heavenly  blessings, 
and  when  afHictions  hang  heaviest  corruptions 
hang  loosest,  and  grace'  that  is  hid  in  nature,  as 
sweet  VA^ater  in  rose  leaves,  is  then  most  fragrant 
v/hen  the  fire  of  affliction  is  put  under  to  distil 
it  out."*  Favoured  child  of  God,  whose  Father's 
discipline  in  providence  and  grace  wafts  such 
blessings  into  the  soul!  Precious  trial  that 
makes  Jesus  more  precious,  the  throne  of  grace 
more  precious,  the  discipline  of  the  covenant 
more  precious,  holiness  more  precious,  the  saints 
of  God  more  precious,  the  word  of  God  more 
precious,  and  the  prospect  of  going  home  to  glory 
more  precious !  "  Happy  the  believer  who,  the 
more  afflictions  assail  him,  cleaves  the  more 
closely  to  the  Lord.  Like  the  travelha^  overtaken 
in  a  storm,  who,  when  the  rain  beats  upon  him, 
or  the  snow  drifts  upon  his  person,  or  the  moun- 
tain wind  drives  furiously  against  him,  lays 
firmer  hold  of  his  cloak  and  wraps  it  closely 
around  him,  he,  amidst  the  storm  of  troubles, 
keeps  faster  hold  of  the  '  Man  who  is  an  hiding- 

*"  Speneer. 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  TPJAL.  1  09 

place   from   the  wind    and   a   covert   from    tlie 
tempest' " 

A  time  of  trial  is  a  time  of  sensibility.  God 
often  sends  it  for  this  very  end.  There  is  nothing 
in  the  gospel  of  Christ  that  forbids  emotion, 
everything  to  awaken  it ;  there  is  nothing  in  the 
religion  of  Jesus  to  crush  sensibility,  everything 
to  create  it.  Christianity  is  a  religion  of  feeling — 
deep,  hallowed,  sanctified  feeling.  It  is  the  only 
religion  that  thoroughly  appeals  to  our  emotional 
nature,  that  touches  the  deep,  hidden  springs  of 
our  humanity,  and  tells  us  we  may — weep.  With 
Christ's  tears  at  Bethany,  and  with  his  drops  of- 
blood  in  Gethsemane  before  us,  surely  we  may 
express  the  deepest  sympathy  with  the  adversity  of 
others,  and  may  indulge  in  deep,  chastened  grief 
with  our  own.  Weep  on,  then,  beloved  mourner ! 
We  would  not  seal  up  those  tears.  "Jesus 
wept,"  and  you  too  may  weep.  "  No  chastening 
for  the  present  is  joyous,  but  grievous  ;"  therefore, 
it  is  no  sin  to  give  expression  to  emotion,  to  in- 
dulge in  sensibility,  to  "water  our  couch  v/ith 
tears,  and  to  make  our  bed  to  swim.''  Vv^ithout 
a  measure  of  grief  our  afHiction  would  leave  no 
trace  of  good.  When  God  speaks,  we  should 
hear ;  when  He  smites,  we  should  feel.     Only  let 


HO  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  TRIAL. 

your  grief  be  moderate,  chastened,  and  submis- 
sive, embodying  its  sentiment,  and  ex}'  tessiug  its 
intensity  in  the  language  and  suirit  of  the  "  Man 
of  Sorrows,"  "Not  my  will,  0  my  Father,  but 
thine  be  done." 

What  shall  we  then  say  to  these  things? 
Shall  we  not  count  among  the  precious  things 
of  God,  not  the  least  precious,  the  trial  whose 
discipline  removes  from  us  so  much  evil,  and 
confers  upon  us  so  much  good?  How  little 
should  we  know  experimentally  of  the  Lord 
Jesus — what  depths  there  were  in  His  love,  what 
soothing  in  His  sympathy,  what  condescension  in 
His  grace,  what  gentleness  and  delicacy  in  His 
conduct,  what  exquisite  beauty  in  His  tears,  what 
safety  beneath  Hi§  sheltering  mng,  and  what  re- 
pose upon  His  loving  heart,  but  for  this  very 
adversity.  Your  ark  is  tossed  amidst  the  broken 
waters,  but  you  have  Christ  on  board  your  ves- 
sel, and  it  shall  not  founder.  He  may  seem,  as 
of  old,  "when  asleep  upon  a  pillow,"  ignorant 
of,  and  indifferent  to,  the  storm  that  rages 
wildly  around  you ;  yet  the  eye  of  His  Godhead 
never  slumbers,  and  He  will,  and  at  the  best 
moment,  arise  in  majesty  and  power,  hush  the 
tempesit  and  still  the  waves,  and  there  shall  be 


THE  PKECIOUSNESS  OF  TFJAL.  Ill 

peace.  And  will  you  not  then  count  that  a  precious 
adversity  that  awakens  in  your  breast  the  adoring 
exclamation,  "  What  manner  of  man  is  this,  that 
even  the  winds  and  the  sea  obey  him  ? "  Yes ; 
Christ  treads  the  limpid  pathway  of  your  sorrow. 
Ho  comes  to  you  walking  upon  the  sea  of  your 
trouble.  He  approaches  to  quell  your  fears,  to  calm 
your  mind,  to  give  you  peace.  And  but  for  this 
alienation  of  property,  this  sore  bereavement,  this 
terrible  calamity,  this  wasting  disease,  this  languor, 
suffering,  and  decay,  these  restless  days  and  wake- 
ful nights,  oh,  how  many  a  precious  visit  from  the 
Beloved  of  your  soul  would  you  have  lost !  Be 
still  then  ;  trial  will  bring  a  precious  Jesus  to  you ; 
and  the  presence,  the  love,  the  sympathy,  and  the 
grace  of  Jesus  will  lighten,  soothe,  and  sweeten 
your  trial.  We  shall  soon  be  at  home,  where  "  God 
shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes ;  and 
there  shall  be  no  more  death,  neither  sorrow,  nor 
crying,  neither  shall  there  be  any  more  pain." 
The  last  truth  of  God  will  be  seen,  the  last  lesson 
of  holiness  will  be  learned,  the  last  taint  of  sin  will 
be  effaced,  and  there  will  be  no  more  need  of 
sorrow's  iliscipline,  nor  the  hallowing  influence  of 
precious  trial ;  the  last  ember  of  the  furnace  will 
be  extinguished,  the  last  wave  of  trouble  will  die 


112  THi  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  TRIAL. 

upon  the  sliore,  and  we  shall  be  for  ever  with 
Jesus.  Until  then,  "  commit  your  way  unto  the 
Lord,"  leave  your  concerns  in  His  hands,  "  trust 
in  Him/'  and  come  up  from  the  wilderness  cling- 
ino-  to  His  almighty  arm,  and  leaning  upon  His 
loving  breast,  to  uphold  you  in  weakness,  to  soothe 
you  in  grief,  and  to  bring  you  home  to  Himself, 
where  the  days  of  your  mourning  shall  be  ended, 
and  "  God  shall  wipe  away  all  teaes  feom 

THEIK  EYES." 

**  When  sore  afflictions  crusli  the  soul, 
And  riven  is  each  earthly  tie, 
The  heart  must  cling  to  God  alone : 
He  wipes  the  tear  from  every  eye. 

**  Through  wakeful  nights,  when  rack'd  with  pai% 
On  bed  of  languishing  you  lie. 
Remember  still  your  God  is  near 
To  wipe  the  tear  from  every  eye. 

**  A  few  short  years,  and  all  is  o'er ; 

Your  sorrows,  pains,  will  soon  pass  byj 
Then  lean  in  faith  on  God's  dear  Son, 
He  '11  wipe  the  tear  from  every  eye. 

**  Oh,  never  be  your  soul  cast  down, 
Nor  let  your  heart  desponding  sigh. 
Assured  that  God,  whose  name  is  Love, 
Will  wipe  the  tear  from  every  eye! *** 

*  Mrs  Mackinlay. 


CHAPTER  W. 

THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  THOUGHTS. 

*•  How  precious  are  thy  thoughts  unto  me,   0  God  !    hoW 
great  is  the  sum  of  them ! " — Psalm  exxxix.  17. 

It  is  marvellous  that  God  should  think  of  us  as 
He  does.  That,  infinitely  great  and  holy— all 
worlds,  all  beings,  all  events  occupying  His  mind 
— ^He  should  yet  have  individual  thoughts  of  us, 
those  thoughts  not  mere  passing  glances  of  the 
mind,  but  involving  the  pre-determination  and 
pre- arrangement  of  each  event,  circumstance,  and 
step  of  our  personal  history,  trivial  though  it  be 
as  a  hair  falling  from  the  head^-is  a  truth  too 
mighty  to  grasp  were  it  not  too  precious  to  refuse, 
and  too  divine  to  disbelieve.  You  have,  doubt- 
less, beloved,  often  appeared  in  your  own  view 
so  obscure  and  insis^nificant  a  bein{>; — a  mere 
cypher  in  the  great  sum  of  human  existence,  a 
single  drop  in  the  vast  ocean  of  human  life — as  to 
be  almost  at  an  infinite  remove  from  God's  notice. 
H 


il4t      THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  THOUGHTS. 

You  could  not,  indeed,  relieve  yourself  from  the 
conviction  of  individual  resi^onsibility,  nor  stifle 
the  reflection  that  for  each  transaction  of  the  pre- 
sent life  the  future  holds  you  accountable ;  yet  that, 
isolated  and  solit^iry,  -]")erchan33,  poor  and  mean, 
as  you  may  be,  God,  the  great,  the  holy  Lord  God 
should  think  of  you,  notice  you,  regard  you,  set 
His  heart  ujdou  you — that  His  thoughts,  more 
precious  than  the  ocean's  gems,  and  more  nume- 
rous than  the  sands  which  belt  it,  should  cluster 
around  you,  clinging  to  you  with  a  grasp  so 
fervent  and  intense  as  to  lift  you  to  the  distinc- 
tion and  privilege  of  a  being  in  whom,  the  Divine 
regard  were  solely  and  supremely  absorbed — is  a 
truth  distancing  all  conception,  and  well-nigh 
overwhelming  you  with  its  mightiness.  And  yet 
so  it  is !  Each  child  of  God  dwells  in  His  heart, 
and  engages  His  mind  as  though  he  were  the  sole 
occupant  of  this  boundless  universe — a  tiny  in- 
sect swimming  in  the  ocean  of  infinity.  Such  is 
the  truth  to  which  the  psalmist  gives  utterance  in 
a  burst  of  devout,  impassioned  feeling,  "  How 
precious  are  thy  thoughts  unto  me,  0  God  I  how 
great  is  the  sum  of  them  !"  "  Unto  me  I"  Here 
is  faith  attracting  to,  and  concentrating  upon,  its 
individual  self  all  the  urecious  thoughts  Jeliovaii 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  THOUGHTS.      115 

has  of  His  people.  Oli,  there  is  not  a  thouglit  of 
His  wisdom,  nor  a  thouglit  of  His  love,  nor  a 
thouglit  of  His  power,  nor  a  thought  of  His 
grace  which  does  not"  entwine  itself  with  the 
being,  and  blend  itself  with  the  salvation  of  each 
child  of  His  adoption.  The  subject  now  engaging 
our  meditation  is — the  peeciousness  of  God's 
THOUGHTS — and  in?cy  the  theme  lay  low  all  high, 
towering,  sinful  thoughts  of  ourselves,  and  inspire 
and  raise  our  holy,  grateful,  adoring  thoughts  of 
Him^His  glory,  beauty,  and  love — ^until,  with  a 
depth  of  adoration,  and  an  intensity  of  affection, 
worthy  the  theme,  our  hearts  respond,  "How 
precious  are  thy  thoughts  unto  me,  0  God  1  how 
great  is  the  sum  of  them ! "  Let  us  first  con- 
remplate  a  few  characteristics  of  God's  precious 
thoughts  of  His  saints. 

God's  thoughts  of  His  people  are — infinite. 
Believers  deal  too  little  with  the  infinitude  of 
God.  Hence  the  tendency  to  "limit  the  Holy 
One  of  Israel."  Thus,  too,  it  is,  that  our  confidence 
in  God  is  so  hesitating,  our  views  of  His  power  so 
dwarfish,  our  love  so  defective,  and  our  requests 
and  expectations  so  contracted.  "  I  am  a  great 
King,  saith  the  Lord  God."  All  His  thoughts  are 
vast,  infinite,  wortliy  of  His  greatness.  His 
electing  thought  of   us   was  a  great   thought ; 


116      THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  THOUGHTS. 

His  th ought  of  redeeming  us  was  a  great  thought ; 
His  tliought  of  making-  us  divine  by  the  regenera- 
tion of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  a  great  thought ;  His 
thought  of  bringing  us  to  glory  to  enjoy  Him 
fully  and  for  ever  is  a  great  thought.  All  these 
thoughts  of  God  are  as  great  as  they  are  precious, 
as  precious  as  they  are  groat.  0  child  of  God ! 
think  not  lightly  of  the  thoughts  God  has  of 
thee — they  are  so  vast,  nothing  can  exceed,  so 
precious,  nothing  can  equal  them.  The  thoughts 
of  an  Infinite  Mind  encircle"  and  enfold  thee  more 
closely  and  fondly  than  the  ivy  clasps  the  elm,  or 
the  mother  her  new-born  infant.  Whether  they 
appear  clad  in  darkness,  or  robed  in  light,  they 
are  equally  the  great  and  precious  thoughts  of  thy 
covenant  God  and  Father.  "  How  precious  ai-fe 
thy  thoughts  unto  me,  0  God !  how  great  is  the 
sum  of  them !" 

God's  thoughts  of  His  people  are — Jiidden. 
The  thoughts  of  the  Invisible  One,  they  must 
necessarily  be  so.  It  is  His  glory  to  conceal 
until  it  becomes  His  wisdom  and  love  to  reveal 
them.  Treasured  up  in  the  Divine  Mind',  they 
repose  in  profound  mystery  until  each  circum- 
stance in  our  daily  life  unfolds  and  makes  them 
known,  then  we  learn  how  real  and  hov/  precious 
Grod's  thoughts  of  us  are.     There  is  not  a  moment. 


THE  PPvECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  THOUGHTS.      117 

beloved  of  God,  that  the  Lord  is  not  thinking  of 
you;  nor  is  there  a  moment  that  He  is  not,  in 
some  form  or  other,  embodying  those  thoughts 
in  His  gracious  and  providential  deaUngs  with 
yoa.  His  wisdom  withholds,  and  His  love  veils 
them,  until  the  event  transpires  that  gives  them 
utterance  and  form.  Therefore,  when  God  is 
silent,  let  us  be  still ;  when  He  speaks,  let-  us 
hearken.  Hidden  to  us  though  His  precious 
thoughts  are,  tliey  are  all  known  to  Him.  "/ 
knoiu  the  thoughts  I  think  towards  you,-  sailh 
the  Lord ;  thoughts  of  peace  and  not  of  evil,  to 
give  you  an  expected  end/'  Attempt  not,  there- 
fore, to  fathom  the  Divine  Mind,  or  to  penetrate 
the  thoughts  that  are  hidden  there.  Know  thou- 
that  they  are  thoughts  of  everlasting  love,  thoughts 
of  assured  peace,  and  let  this  bring  your  heart 
into  silent,  j)atient  waiting,  until  all  these  thoughts 
shall  stand  unveiled  in  His  wise,  loving,  and  holy 
dispensations,  here,  and  in  heaven's  own  light 
hereafter.  Enougji  is  revealed  by  Christ  to 
satisfy  you  that  God's  thoughts  of  you  are 
thoughts  of  reconciliation  —  that  there  exists 
not  in  the  Divine  Mind  a  solitary  thought  ad- 
verse to  your  well-being.  Jesus,  our  Friend, 
reposes  in  His  people  the  same  confideiice 
His  Father  has  reposed  in  Him.     "All  things 


118     THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  THOUGHTS. 

that  I  have  heard  of  my  Father  I  have  made 
known  unto  you/'  Jesus  is  the  expression  and 
embodiment  of  our  Father's  mind.  Jesus  is  God 
thinkinix,  God  lovinn:,  God  workincc,  God  redeem- 
ing.  "  He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the 
Father."  Be  not,  then,  troubled  in  mind  at  the 
dark  and  mysterious  in  your  path,  God  is  deal- 
ing well  with  you.  By  His  light  you  shall  walk 
through  darkness.  Confiding  in  the  wise  and  lov- 
ing, though  concealed,  thoughts  of  your  heavenly 
Father,  your  trustful  heart  can  respond,  as  those 
thoughts  gradually  unfold,  "  How  precious  are 
thy  thoughts  unto  me,  0  God  \" 

UnchangeaUeness  is  another  characteristic  of 
God's  thoughts  of  His  people.  This  is  self-evi- 
dent, since  they  are  the  thoughts  of  the  Unchange- 
able One.  Change  implies  imperfection.  God  is 
a  perfect  Being,  consequently  He  cannot  change. 
"I  the  Lord  change  not."  With  Him  is  "no 
variableness,  neither  the  shadow  of  a  turning." 
He  may  vary  His  providences,  multiply  His'  dis- 
pensations, and  shift  the  ever-moving  scene  of 
human  life,  but — 

"  His  eternal  thouglits  move  on. 
His  undisturbed  affairs." 

How  precious  is  this  truth  to  the  child  of  God  I 


THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  THOUGHTS.      119 

Human  thoughts  change  ;  mind  itself  fails,  smd 
with  it  fades  from  memory  countenances  that  were 
familiar,  and  names  that  were  fond,  and  scenes  that 
were  sacred.  Human  thoughts  that  cluster  and 
cling  so  warmly  and  closely  around  us  to-day,  ere 
many  weeks  are  j)ast,  attracted  by  new  objects  of 
interest,  or  absorbed  by  new  engagements  of  time, 
have  fled  and  gone,  and  we  are  alone  and  forgotten. 
But  there  is  One  whose  thoughts  of  us  never 
change,  whose  mind  never  ceases  for  a  moment  to 
think  of  us.  "  0  Israel,  thou  shalt  not  be  for- 
gotten of  me,"  is  His  own  loving  declaration. 
Directing  us  to  a  mother — the  last  earthly  home  of 
human  tenderness,  sympathy,  and  love — He  tells 
us,  "  She  may  forget,  yet  will  not  I."  Beloved, 
whatever  fluctuation  you  find  in  human  thought, 
or  change  in  human  affection,  God's  thoughts  of 
love,  and  care,  and  faithfulness,  are  changeless. 
Have  they  ever  darted  into  your  heart  like  solar 
beams,  causing  that  heart  to  sing  for  joy  ?  Then, 
thoifgh  in  darkness,  loneliness,  and  sorrow  you  are 
led  to  exclaim,  "Hath  the  Lord  forgotten  to  be 
gracious?''  God  still  bears  you  in  His  thoughts  and 
on  His  heart.  Kelatives  may  forget,  friends  may 
forget,  the  saints  may  forget,  but  thy  God  never 
can.     He  thinks  of  you  at  this  moment  as  lov- 


I  20     THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  THOUGHTS. 

mfr'i^^  as  carefully,  as  from  all  eternity.  Once  in 
the  tlioughts  of  thy  covenant  God,  thou  art  in 
those  thoughts  for  ever.  Be  not  cast  down,  then, 
if  God  appears  to  forget  you.  "  My  way  is  hid 
from  the  Lord,"  says  the  desponding  Church. 
"  No,"  says  God ;  "  I  have  engraved  thee  ujDon  the 
palms  of  my  hands ;  thy  walls  are  continually 
D^efore  me."  Amidst  all  your  mental  wanderings, 
your  fickle,  faint  thoughts  of  Him,  He  still  re- 
members you.  In  the  multitude  of  your  anxious 
and  perplexed  thoughts  within  you,  awakened  by 
a  sense  of  your  ungrateful  oblivion  of  God,  or  by 
His  trying  and  mysterious  dealings,  let  this  com- 
fort delight  your  soul,  that  He  never  forgets  you. 
But  let  us  particularise  some  of  God's  thoughu 
of  His  saints. 

He  thinks  of  their  per^sons.  Each  believer  has 
a  personal  interest  in  the  Divine  Mind.  •  The  ac- 
ceptance of  our  person  before  that  of  our  sacri- 
fice is  God's  order.  It  is  man's  folly,  deep  and 
fatal,  to  reverse  this.  "  I  will  accept  you '  and 
your  sweet  savour,"  says  the  Lord  God — first,  the 
persons,  and  then  the  offerings  of  His  people. 
Now,  the  Lord's  people  are  an  accepted  people — 
"  accepted  in  the  Beloved."  You  may,  in  some 
moments  of  spiritual  despondency,  appear  to  your 


THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  THOUGHTS.     121 

own  view  so  "\dle  and  uncomely  as  to  be  beyond 
the  pale  of  God's  loving  and  complacent  regard. 
'  You  can  only  think  of,  and  view  yourself  with, 
the  deepest  self-abhorrence.  And  yet  at  that 
moment  of  spiritual  prostration,  your  person, 
standing  in  Christ,  clad  in  His  imputed  right- 
eousness, and  comely  through  the  comeliness  He 
has  put  upon  you,  is  an  object  of  His  ineifable 
delight ;  and  all  His  parental,  gracious,  and  tender 
thoughts  are  entwined  around  you  with  a  grasp 
from  which  nothing  shall  ever  separate  you. 

He  thinks  of  His  oiun  work  in  your  soul — that 
divine  kingdom  of  righteousness,  joy,  and  peace 
in  the  Holy  Spirit  which  has  its  home  in  every 
regenerate  man.  Its  development  and  growth,  its 
progress  amidst  indwelling  sin,  the  fluctuation  of 
spiritual  feeling,  the  varied  phases  it  assumes, 
the  summer's  drought,  the  winter's  frost  through 
which  it  passes — occupies  the  incessant  thoughts 
of  God.  He  has  His  eye  upon  that  hidden  king- 
dom of  grace  in  the  soul  more  intently,  more 
tixedly,  more  benignantly  than  He  views  the  most 
powerful  and  gorgeous  kingdom  upon  earth. 
"  The  kingdom  of  God  is  within  you,"  says  the 
Saviour ;  and  all  other  kingdoms  shall  fall  and 
disappear,  when  this  kingdom  of  grace  in  the 


122     THE  PKECIOUSKESS  OF  GOD's  THOUGHTa 

saints  shall  emerge  from  its  veiled  obscurity  and 
feebleness,  and  expand  and  brighten  into  an  eter- 
nal kingdom  of  glory.  Yes,  beloved,  God  thinks 
of  all  the  spiritual  exercises  through  which  you 
pass — your  fears  and  hopes,  your  doubtings  and 
your  trustings,  your  high  and  your  low  frames, 
your  infirmities  of  prayer,  of  faith,  and  love — yea, 
there  is  not  a  throb  of  your  heart,  not  a  feeling  of 
your  soul,  not  a  thought  of  your  mind  growing  out 
of  the  work  of  Divine  grace  within — all  that  ele- 
vates or  depresses,  that  grieves  or  cheers,  that 
shades  or  brightens — that  does  not  engage  the 
thoughts  of  thy  God. 

The  thoughts  of  God,  too,  are  occupied  luith  the 
returns  His  people  make.  Nothing  you  do  escapes 
His  notice.  What!  is  there  anything  done  by 
you  for  God  to  which  He  is  indifferent  ?  Ah,  no ! 
He  thinks  of  all  your  sincere  desires  to  love  Him, 
your  lowly  endeavours  to  serve  Him,  your  earnest 
efforts  to  obey  Him,  your  feeble,  imperfect  attempts 
to  honour  and  glorify  Him.  He  thinks  of  all  the 
poor  returns  you  make  of  loving  toil,  of  patient 
endurance,  of  filial  obedience.  Have  you  a  pass- 
ing remembrance  of  Him  as  you  thread  your  way 
through  the  crowd? — God  thinks  of  it.  Is  there 
a  gush  of  love  welling  up  from  your  heart  iu 


THE  PKECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  THOUGHTS.     123 

secret  communion  ? — God  thinks  of  it.  Bear  you 
with  stealthy  step  to  an  obscure  abode  the  cup 
of  coid  water  to  moisten  the  fevered  lips  of  some 
poor  suffering  saint? — God  thinks  of  it.  Have 
you  relinquished  some  fond  idol,  or  mortified  some 
darling  sin,  or  resisted  some  potent  temptation, 
or  discharged  some  act  of  self-denial  for  the 
honour  of  His  name  ? — God  thinks  of  it.  Every 
habit  you  lay  down,  or  cross  you  take  up,  or  bur- 
den you  bear,  or  yoke  to  which  you  bow  for  Jesus, 
shall  be  treasured  up  in  the  thoughts  of  thy  God 
through  eternity. 

We  have  now,  in  the  progress  of  our  remarks, 
arrived  at  a  delightful  part  of  the  subject — the 
preciousness  of  God's  thoughts.  And  where  is 
there  a  heart  touched  by  divine  grace  that  does  not 
respond  from  its  innermost  shrine  to  the  exclama- 
tion of  David — "  How  precious  are  thy  thoughts 
unto  me,  0  God!  how  great  is  the  sum  of  them  ! " 
They  are  in  truth  precious,  than  which  nothing  is 
really  so.  To  feel  that  God  has  one  loving  thought 
of  us,  to  know  that  He  thinks  of  us — that  He  re- 
members us  with  a  constancy  which  no  forgetful- 
ness  on  our  part  of  Him  can  efface,  to  be  quite  sure 
that  in  His  thoughts  of  love.  His  thoughts  of  peace, 
His  thoughts  of  complacent  delight,  His  true,  con- 


1 24     THE  PEEGIOUSNESS  OP  GOD'S  THOUGHTS. 

stant,  faithful  tliouglits  we  have  a  personal  share— 
oh,  there  is  a  preciousness  in  this  truth,  a  repose, 
a  confidence,  a  sanctity,  which  distances  all  con- 
ception !  "  How  precious  are  thy  thoughts  unto 
me,  0  God ! "''     Let  us  go  into  a  few  particulars. 

Grod's  thoughts  are  precious  in  themselves — ■ 
they  are  essentially  precious.  They  must  be  so, 
since  they  are  a  Father's  thoughts.  How  precious 
iire  His  thoughts  of  eternal  love  towards  us! 
What !  is  there  no  preciousness  in  this  truth  to 
your  soul,  beloved  ?  I  trust  the  honey  from  the 
comb  is  not  half  so  sweet.  "  I  have  loved  thee 
with  an  everlasting  love,  therefore  with  loving- 
kindness  have  I  drawn  thee."  Is  there  no  sweet- 
ness in  this  truth,  in  comparison  of  which  all  car- 
nal sweetness  is  as  gall?  You  have  tasted  the 
gracious  stream,  and  found  it  sweet ;  but  have 
you  followed  that  stream  to  the  fountain  whence 
it  flowed — the  everlasting  love  of  your  covenant 
God — and  tasted  yet  more  sweetness  there  ?  Be 
ye  assured  of  this,  not  one  drop  of  honey  distils 
into  your  cup,  but  it  comes  from  the  heart  of  God. 
It  exudes  from  tliat  "Tree  of  Life"  which  He 
planted  in  this  sinful,  sorrow-stricken  world, 
scathed,  wounded,  by  His  own  hand  of  justice. 
"  Stricken,  smitten  of  God,  and  afflicted,  it  i)leased 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  THOUGHTS.      125 

the  Lord  to  bruise  liim  ;  lie  hath  put  him  to 
grief,"  that  through  this  costly,  touching,  winning 
channel — the  wounds  of  our  Immanuel — might 
flow  into  our  souls  His  everlastino;  thouohts  of 
love.  Then  you  exclaim,  "  Did  God  love  me  from 
all  eternity  ?  did  He  think  of  me  then  ?  was  He 
preparing  all  my  future  happiness  and  eternal 
blessedness,  treasuring  up  for  me  all  grace  here, 
and  all  glory  hereafter  ? — 0  God  !  how  precious 
are  Thy  thoughts  of  love  to  me  1 "  Yes,  they  are 
precious,  because  they  are  God's  thoughts,  and 
not  man's — divine,  and  not  human — thoughts  of 
Divine  love,  and  not  of  anger — of  peace,  and 
not  of  wrath. 

As  redeeming  thoughts  they  are  precious.  It 
was  a  thouglit,  which  could  only  find  its  concep- 
tion in  the  Divine  Mind,  that  of  saving  sinners  by 
the  sacrifice  of  God's  beloved  Son.  No  finite  mind 
would  ever  have  thought  of  saving  man ;  once 
lost,  he  would  to  that  mind  seem  lost  irrecover- 
ably. To  secure  the  integrity  of  His  moral 
government  intact,  the  glory  of  His  Divine  nature 
unsullied — to  harmonise  justice  with  mercy,  holi- 
ness with  love,  truth  with  grace,  and  thus  to  re- 
concile all  the  jirring  interests  of  heaven  in  the 
salvation  of  sinners,  by  the  blood  of  the  Cross, 


126     THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  THOUGHTS. 

was  a  thought  worthy  of  God.  Go  to  the 
cross  of  Calvary,  and  learn  how  costly  and 
lirecious  are  God's  redeeming  thoughts  of  you. 
His  thought  of  rearing  that  cross  in  the  centre 
of  a  revolted  part  of  His  empire — of  impaling 
upon  it  His  only  begotten  and  well-beloved  Son, 
a  sacrifice  for  the  salvation  of  its  rebellious 
subjects — His  thought  of  laying  all  our  sins  and 
all  our  curse  upon  Jesus,  extinguishing  the  fires 
of  our  hell  by  the  life-blood  of  Immanuel — of 
opening  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  us  through  the 
pierced,  broken  heart  of  Christ  the  Anointed  One 
— oh,  it  were  infinitely  worthy  of  Him  who  is 
"  wonderful  in  counsel,  and  excellent  in  working! " 
0  God,  when  I  read  thy  heart  in  the  cross,  in  the 
wounds,  in  the  tears,  in  the  anguish,  in  the  blood 
of  thy  Son,  Jesus  Christ,  how  precious  are  thy 
thoughts  unto  me ! — thoughts  that  planned  and 
accomplished  my  redemption,  by  an  expedient  so 
vast,  and  at  a  cost  so  precious. 

Trace  these  thoughts  of  God  as  they  compassed 
our  path  through  all  the  days  of  our  unregeneracy 
— how  precious  are  they !  We  too  much  over- 
look this — the  patience  and  forbearance  of  God 
during  the  period  of  our  unconverted  days.  Surely 
the  '  long-suffering  of  God'  through  all  these  stages 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD*S  THOUGHTS.      127 

and  acts  of  enmity  and  rebellion  was  '  salvation/ 
How  often,  when  gliding  upon  the  treacherous 
rapid  that  bore  us  onward  to  the  gulph,  or  when 
standing  upon  the  brink  of  the  yawning  preci- 
pice, eternal  wrath  jBlaming  beneath  our  feet,  God 
thought  of  us  in  mercy  and  redeemed  our  life 
from  instant  and  everlasting  destruction  !  And 
along  all  the  winding  path  of  wayrrardness  and 
sin,  of  ^worldliness  and  folly,  still  His  thoughts 
of  electing  love  and  sovereign  grace  pursued  us, 
nor  lost  their  sight,  nor  relaxed  their  hold  of  us, 
until  the  appointed  and  happy  hour  that  brought 
us  into  the  bond  of  the  covenant. 

How  precious  His  thoughts  in  conversion. 
What  must  the  love  and  tenderness  of  those 
thoughts  have  been  at  the  moment  that  saw  us 
prostrate  at  His  feet,  all  our  self-righteousnes,s, 
rebellion,  and  hostility,  all  our  false  dependencies 
and  refuges  falling  in  wreck  and  ruin  from  around 
us  ;  and  our  soul  in  that  blessed  posture  which  He 
Himself  has  portrayed,  as  none  but  He  could, 
in  language  the  most  tender  and  touching:  "To 
this  man  will  I  look,  even  to  him  that  is  poor  and 
of  a  contrite  S2Dirit,and  that  trembleth  at  my  woitI!" 
Oh,  what  must  have  been  His  gracious,  condescend- 
ing, loving  thoughts  when  He  traced  our  first; 


128     THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOBS  THOUGHTS. 

tear,  saw  our  first  sorrow,  and  heard  our  first 
appeal  to  His  mercy  I  When  afar  off,  he  beheld  us 
approaching  in  penitence  and  contrition,  marked 
the  downcast  look,  the  hesitating  step,  the  trem- 
bling heart,  and  heard  the  secret  resolve,  "  I  will 
arise  and  go  to  my  Father,  and  will  say  unto  Him, 
I  have  sinned."  And  when  He  looked  and  be- 
held the  glance,  the  touch,  the  venture  of  faith  on 
Jesus — saw  the  trembling ,  soul  embrace  His 
blessed  Son,  receive  His  unspeakable  gift,  and 
trust  in  His  great  salvation — how  precious  must 
have  been  His  thoughts  of  us  at  that  moment  ? 

How  precious  are  His  restoring  thoughts. 
These  may,  at  times,  appear  greater  than  His 
thoughts  in  conversion.  Why?  Because  these 
restoring  thoughts  are  after  all  our  sinful  wan- 
derings, repeated  backslidings  in  the  face  of 
love  the  most  tender,  of  goodness  the  most  un- 
wearying, of  faithfulness  the  most  unwavering,  of 
dealings  the  most  kind.  That  still  His  thoughts 
of  pardon  and  of  restoration  should  follow  us, 
seeking  us,  bringing  us  back,  and  restoring  to  our 
souls  the  joys  of  His  salvation,  oh,  how  precious 
in  themselves  are  God's  thoughts  1  "  I  have  gone 
astray  like  a  lost  sheep  ;  seek  thy  servant ;  for  I 
do  not  forget  thy  commandments." 


THE  PPvECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  THOUGHTS.     129 

God's  providential  thoughts  of  His  people  are 
precious,  God  is  thinking  of  our  wants,  of  our 
circumstances,  of  our  emergencies,  every  moment. 
His  providential  thoughts  of  us  are  anticipative  ; 
they  prevent  us  with  their  goodness.  That  same 
God  who  fed  Elijah  beneath  the  sycamore 
tree, — who  prepared  a  dinner  for  the  disciples, 
weary  with  their  night  of  fruitless  toil,  as  they 
landed  upon  the  shore, — who  feeds  the  ravens 
when  they  cry,  and  makes  those  ravens  feed  His 
children, — who,  when  the  meal  and  the  oil  are 
well-nigh  exhausted,  sends  succour, — is  our  God 
of  providence,  all  whose  thoughts  are  acquainted 
with,  anticipate,  and  supply  our  daily  need  and 
emergency.  Blessed  is  it  to  trace  a  Father's 
thou^its  of  us  in  our  providential  mercies :  to 
feel  that  this  good  has  come,  this  mercy  has  been 
bestowed,  this  table  sj^read,  tliis  want  suppKed, 
this  pressure  met,  this  evil  averted,  by  God's  care- 
ful providential  thought  of  us.  Oh,  how  precious 
are  these  thoughts  to  him  who  lives  upon  aEather's 
bounty,  who  can  trace  a  Father's  hand,  feel  a 
Father's  heart,  and  hear  a  Father's  voice  responsive 
to  the  petition,  "  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread." 

But  God's  thoughts  are  not  only  precious  in 
themselves,  they  are  so  also  in  the  personal  ex* 


130     THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  THOUGHTS. 

perience  of  the  believer.  David's  language  ex- 
presses this,  '  How  precious  are  Thy  thoughts 
unto  me,  0  God  !"  This  is  not  an  abstract  truth 
• — no  revealed  truth  is  so  to  the  child  of  God.  If 
through  the  truth  he  is  sanctified — "Sanctify 
tliem  through  Thy  truth" — then  every  truth  of 
God  forms  an  essential  ingTcdient  in  God's  grand 
recipe  for  ail  believers.  Christ  pledged  the  pro- 
mised, and  now  given,  Spirit,  that  "  when  He  is 
come  He  shall  guide  you  into  all  truth."  Oh,  did 
we  more  distinctly  recognise  this  office  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  honour  Him  more  by  availing 
ourselves  of  His  teaching — ceasing  to  "hear  the 
instruction  that  causeth  to  err;"  especially  ceasing 
from  our  own  fancied  wisdom  and  attainments — 
we  should  not  be  the  children  in  knowledge  and 
the  dwarfs  in  holiness^  that  we  are,  but  men 
in  both.  Into  the  personal  experience,  then,  of 
this  truth  the  Holy  Spirit  is  prepared  to  guide 
us — the  preciousness  of  God's  thoughts.  Oh,  yes, 
they  are  precious  at  all  times,  in  all  places,  and 
under  all  circumstances.  Wreathed  in  dark 
clouds  or  glowing  in  sunlight,  whatever  the  form 
they  assume  or  the  tint  they  wear,  they  are  still 
the  thoughts  of  a  covenant  God,  and  as  such 
are  inexpiessibly  precious  to  the  believing  soul 


THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  THOUGHTS.     131 

Who  will  affirm  that  thoughts  of  love  —  a 
creature's  love  though  it  be — are  not  precious  ? 
The  fond  remembrance  borne  to  us  from  some 
remote  spot,  assuring  us  that  time  has  not  effaced 
nor  distance  annihilated  that  sacred  affection, 
that  early  love  that  first  enstamped  its  image 
upon  the  heart,  is  more  precious  to  us  than  rubies. 
These  thoughts  of  love  thus  wafted  to  us  are  more 
fragrant  than  the  violet  breath  of  spriug.  But 
oh,  how  do  the  thoughts  of  divine  love  distance 
this!  That  human  heart  must  die,  and  in  that 
very  moment  those  thoughts  of  love  perish.  But 
God  can  fill  and  satisfy  our  souls  with  Himself  in 
the  entire  absence  of  all  creature  good.  How  pre- 
cious and  soothing  to  our  sad  and  lonely,  perhaps 
aching  and  anguished  hearts,  is  the  reflection  that 
God  thinks  of  us  in  love !  And  when  we  deem 
no  one  bears  us  in  fond  remembrance — when 
our  path  is  dreary,  our  faith  is  low,  our  comforts 
few — when  resources  are  failing,  and  creatures 
are  withdrawing,  and  Satan  is  tempting — when  a 
train  of  untoward  circumstances  are  weaving  their 
net-work  around  our  feet,  forming  a  labyrinth 
to  human  ken  of  inexplicable  and  inextricable 
difficulties — and  when,  from  the  many  and  deep 
waters  in  which  we  sink,  our  appeal  is  heard, 


132    THE  PEECI0us:^7Ess  OF  god's  thoughts. 

"  My  heart  is  overwhelmed  ;  lead  me  to  the  rock 
that  is  higher  than  I" — oh,  how  precious  to  ns 
then  are  the  covenant,  faithful,  lovino;  thoughts 
of  our  God ! 

There  is  another  peculiar  stage  of  Christian 
experience  in  which  the  soul  experiences  the  pre- 
ciousness  of  God's  thoughts.  We  refer  to  the 
season  of  mental  disquietude  and  depression, 
it  may  be  of  despondency  and  desiDair.  You 
cannot  at  that  moment  command  your  mental 
powers,  control  your  thoughts,  or  fix  and  con- 
centrate them  upon  any  consecutive  train  of 
serious  and  devout  reflection.  Oh,  is  it  not 
then  soothing  and  precious  to  be  reminded  that 
your  heavenly  Father  has  thoughts  of  you,  that 
your  High  Priest  in  heaven  has  thoughts  of  you, 
that  the  Holy  Spirit  on  earth  has  thoughts  of  you, 
that  each  Divine  Person  of  the  Lilorious  Godhead 
has  you  in  remembrance,  breathing  the  words 
with  which  He  once  comforted  His  Church  in  the 
wilderness,  "  I  know  the  thoughts  that  I  think 
towards  you,  saith  the  Lord,  thoughts  of  peace 
and  not  of  evil,  to  give  you  an  expected  end."  Oh, 
let  no  child  of  God — around  whose  mind  tliick 
clouds  are  hoverino^,  walkino;  in  darkness  and 
having  no  light,  tempted  to  doubt  God,  to  casi 


THE  PEECIOTJSNESS  OF  GOD's  THOUGHTS.     133 

away  his  confidence  and  abandon  his  hope  in 
Christ — yield  himself  to  the  desponding  reflection 
that  he  has  no  place  in  God's  thoughts  of  peace. 
Christian  sufferer !  child  of  the  light  walking  in 
darkness !  thy  Father's  thoughts  of  you  never  were 
more  tender,  compassionate,  and  faithful  than  at 
this  season  of  mental  gloom,  of  spiritual  de- 
spondency. You  may  not  behold  Him  through 
the  cloud  that  shades  Him  from  your  eye ;  but 
He,  from  whom  no  darkness  hideth,  sees  you,  and 
knows  the  way  that  you  take.  Though  you  may 
have  relaxed  your  hand  of  faith  on  Him,  He  has 
not  withdrawn  His  hand  of  love  from  you,  but  is 
leading  you  by  a  right  way  to  bring  you  to  your 
heavenly  and  eternal  home.  "  I  am  poor  and 
needy,  yet  the  Lord  thinketh  upon  me." 

Let  this  subject  test  the  bearing  of  our  minds 
towards  God.  What  are  our  thoughts  of  Him? 
It  is  a  mark  of  the  ungodly,  that  "  God  is  not  in 
all  their  thoughts."  It  is  a  distinctive  feature  of 
the  children  of  God,  that  they  "  think  upon  His 
name."  Oh,  is  there  an  occupation  of  the  mind 
to  be  compared  with  this  ?  Thinking  of  God ! 
meditating  upon  Christ  1  There  is  no  other  sub- 
ject of  meditation  that  can  calm  your  peiturbed 
thouglits,  fix  your  wanderin^^   thoughts,  purify 


1 84     THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OP  GOD'S  THOUGHTa 

your  sinful  thoughts,  harmonise  your  perplexed 
thouglits,  quench  your  panting  thoughts,  soothe 
and  comfort  your  sad  and  mournful  thoughts,  as 
thinking  upon  God  !  Here  is  repose — here  is 
peace — here  is  hope.  Oh,  that  He  did  engage 
more  of  our  thoughts  1  What  an  infinite,  bound- 
less, ennobling  theme  !  "  My  meditations  of  Him 
shall  be  sweet."  Thoughts  of  His  love  will  comfort 
you  in  sorrow,  thoughts  of  His  power  will  Ccilm 
you  in  danger,  thoughts  of  His  holiness  will  clieck 
you  in  temptation,  thoughts  of  His  wisdom  will 
encourage  you  in  doubt,  thoughts  of  His  all- 
seeing,  all-pervading,  all-enshrouding  presence 
will  sweeten  the  solitude,  smooth  the  roughness, 
and  illumine  the  gloom  of  your  path  homeward 
across  the  desert. 

And  remember  how  precious  to  His  heart  are 
your  thoughts  of  Him.  "  They  that  feared  the 
Lord  spake  often  one  to  another :  and  the  Lord 
hearkened,  and  heard  it,  and  a  book  of  remem- 
brance was  written  before  him  for  them  that 
feared  the  Lord,  and  that  thought  upon  his 
name."  (Mai.  iii.  16.)  Imperfect,  transient,  sin- 
ful as  your  thoughts  of  God  are,  yet  there  is  not 
a  humble,  grateful,  adoring  thought  of  Him  in 
your  heart  that  is  not  more  precious  to  Him 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  THOUGHTS.      133 

than  countless  worlds.  Those  worlds,  innumerable 
and  glorious,  will  ere  long  be  swept  from  their 
spheres ;  but  not  one  lowly,  loving,  holy  thought 
of  God,  that  once  found  a  moment's  home  in  your 
heart,  shall  ever  be  erased  from  His  took  of  re- 
membrance. These  holy  thoughts  of  God  in 
Christ,  that  struggled  amidst  indwelling  corrup- 
tion— that,  like  grains  of  gold  amidst  beds  of 
earth,  sparkled  in  their  veiled  and  lowly  beauty, 
seen  only  by  Him  from  whom  nothing  holy,  as 
nothing  sinful,  is  hidden — these  thoughts  of  His 
love  and  faithfulness  which,  in  seasons  of  depres- 
sion, and  circumstances  of  trial,  and  scenes  of 
sorrow,  darted,  sun-like,  athwart  your  gloomy 
desponding  mind — "My  Father  loves  me  now, 
cares  for  me  now,  is  thinking  of  me  now — how 
-precious  are  Thy  thoughts  unto  me,  0  God  1 " — 
all,  all  comes  up  as  a  memorial  before  Him,  more 
beauteous  than  morning  light,  more  fragrant  than 
the  breath  of  spring,  more  costly,  precious,  and 
endurable  than  ocean's  richest  gems  ?  No  tongue 
can  describe  how  precious  and  glorifying  to  Christ 
is  a  penitential,  believing,  loving,  adoring,  grate- 
ful remembrance  of  His  name,  welling  up  from 
the  renewed  heart  of  a  poor  sinner.  He  seems 
to   say,   "Hast  thou,  my  disciple,   one  thought 


136     THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  THOUGHTS. 

of  Me  ?  I  have,  for  that  one  thought,  ten  thou- 
sand thoughts  of  thee.  And  when  I  seem  to  be 
deaf  to  thy  voice,  and  silent  to  thy  petition,  and 
thou  art  led  to  exclaim,  *  The  Lord  hath  forsaken 
me,  and  my  Lord  hath  forgotten  me,'  listen  to  my 
words — '  Can  a  woman  forget  her  sucking  child, 
that  she  should  not  have  compassion  on  the  son 
of  her  womb  ?  Yea,  she  may  forget,  yet  will  not 
I  forget  thee/  " 

Seek  the  daily  purification  of  your  thoughts  of 
God  in  the  atoning  blood  of  Jesus.  All  your  truant, 
unbelieving,  murmuring,  rebellious  thoughts,  oh, 
take  them  to  the  Fountain  which  alone  can 
blot  them  out,  leaving  no  tracings  upon  God's 
tablet  but  your  penitential  thoughts  of  His  holi- 
ness, your  grateful  thoughts  of  His  love,  your 
adoring  thoughts  of  His  glory,  your  peaceful 
thoughts  of  His  grace  !  One  holy,  laving,  adoring 
thought  of  His  name  He  will  ii'jver,  never  forget. 

And  suffer  no  humbling  conviction  of  personal 
unworthiness,  or  blinding  influence  of  dei^p  sor- 
row, to  veil  from  your  mind  the  precious  truth  that 
God  still  thinks  of  you.  Y(ni  may  be  forgotten 
by  some,  and  may  deem  yourself  too  insignificant 
and  obscure  to  be  remembered  by  others  ;  but  He 
upon  whom  all  worlds  hang,  and  all  beings  de- 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  THOUGHTS.     137 

pend,  licas  thoiiglits  of  kindnes,-;  and  of  love  towards 
you.  Listen  to  His  gracious  declaration  addressed 
to  you,  "Thou  slialt  not  be  forgotten  of  me,  0 
Israel ! "  Oli,  wondrous  grace,  matcliless  love,  that 
entwines  you,  His  beloved  child,  in  His  thoughts 
of  peace,  and  care,  and  sympathy,  with  an  inten- 
sity, individuality,  and  minuteness,  which  seem  to 
exclude  from  His  mind  every  other  being  in  the 
universe,  so  completely  does  God  absorb  His  people 
within  Himself.  Bereaved  and  desolate  widow ! 
God,  thy  God,  thinks  of  thee,  and  of  thy  little 
ones.  Lone  and  friendless  orphan !  God  thinks 
of  you,  for  "in  Him  the  fatherless  find  mercy/' 
Mourning  one !  God  thinks  of  thee,  for  He  has 
declared,  "  I,  even  I,  am  He  that  comforteth  you." 
Wanderer,  penitent  and  heart  stricken !  God 
thinks  of  thee,  for  He  says,  "  1  have  surely  heard 
Ephraim  bemoaning  himself.  Is  Ephraim  my 
dear  son?  is  he  a  pleasant  child?  for  since  I 
spake  against  him,  I  do  earnestly  remember  him 
still :  therefore  my  bowels  are  troubled  for  him  ; 
I  will  surely  have  mercy  upon  him,  saith  the 
Lord."  Tried,  tempted,  afflicted  one  !  God  thinks 
of  thee.  .  "  I  know  their  sorrows,"  saith  the 
Lord.  "Come,  my  people,  enter  thou  into  thy 
chambers,  and  shut  thy  doors  about  thee :  hide 


138     THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  C  OD'S  THOUGHTS. 

thyeelf  as  it  were  for  a  little  moment,  until  the 
indignation  be  overpast."  Sick  one  !  amidst  thy 
languor,  pain,  and  solitude,  thy  God  thinks  of  thee, 
for  "He  knoweth  our  frame,  He  remembereth 
that  we  are  dust ; "  and  He  has  promised  "gently 
to  lead  them  that  are  burdened/'  Stay,  then,  your 
mind  upon  Jehovah-Jesus.  "  Thou  wilt  keep  him 
in  perfect  peace,  whose  mind  (margin,  whose 
tliovglits)  is  stayed  on  thee :  because  he  trusteth 
in  thee."  Let  nothing  inexplicable  in  God's  deal- 
ings with  you  unhinge  your  mind  from  this  con- 
fidence in  the  wisdom,  love,  and  righteousness  of 
His  procedure.  Eemember  His  declaration,  "  My 
til  oughts  are  not  your  thoughts,  neither  are  your 
ways  my  ways,  saith  the  Lord.  For  as  the  hea- 
vens are  higher  tlian  the  earth,  so  are  my  ways 
higher  than  your  ways,  and  my  thoughts  than 
your  thoughts."  (Isa.  Iv.  8,  9.)  Thus,  confide  in 
those  covenant,  unchanging,  loving  thoughts  of 
God,  and  believe  that,  high  as  the  billows  mount, 
these  divine  thoughts  of  your  Father's  love  tower 
infinitely  above  all  your  unworthiness,  sins,  sor- 
rows, and  fears.  Although  at  times  so  absorbed 
in  a  sense  of  your  sinfulness  and  littleness  you 
may  appear  to  yourself  but  like  an  animalcule 
swimming  in  the  ocean,  or  a  mote  floating  in  the 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  THOUGHTS.     139 

sunbeam,  yet  the  God  who  gave  to  that  insect 
its  being,  and  sustains  its  life,  thinks  of,  and  cares 
for,  and  loves  you.  Go,  then,  and  exclaim,  "  How 
precious  are  thy  thoughts  unto  me,  0  God  !  how 
great  is  the  sum  of  them  !  "   "  Casting  all  Youfi 

SAKE  UPON  HIM ;  FOR  HE  CARETH  FOE  YOU." 

*'  Mighty  God  !  on  whom  the  cares 

Of  the  whole  creation  lie ; 
And  whose  ample  bosom  bears 

The  load  so  patiently  : 
*Midst  the  worlds  that  lean  on  Thee, 
Thou  hast  loving  thoughts  of  me. 

**  Ever  quickly  Thou  dost  hear 

Thy  children's  feeble  cry ; 
And  dost  keep  them  (everywhere 

Beneath  Thy  watchful  eye  : 
*]\Iidst  the  worlds  that  lean  on  Thee, 
Thou  hast  f aitliful  thoughts  of  me. 

**  Anxious  care  and  heavy  woes 

Oft  agitate  my  breast ; 
And  no  balm  that  hither  grow* 

Can  give  my  spirit  rest : 
But  'midst  worlds  that  lean  on  The% 
Thou  hast  gentle  thoughts  of  me,'* 


CHAPTER  y. 

THE  PEECI0USNES3  OF  THE  DIVINE  PROMISES. 

•"Whereby  are  e;iven  unto  us  exceeding  great  and  precio\i3 
promises." — 1  Peter  i.  4. 

The  promises  of  God  are  tlie  jewellery  of  the 
Bible.  Every  page  of  this  sacred  volume  is  rich 
and  sparkling  with  these  divine  assurances  of 
Jehovah's  love,  faithfulness,  and  pov/er  towards 
His  people.  We  can  scarcely  cite,  as  illustrat- 
ing His  beneficence  and  forethought,  a  more  ap- 
propriate and  costly  evidence  of  God's  wisdom 
and  goodness  than  this  peculiar  provision  which 
He  has  made  for  the  exigencies  of  His  Cliurch. 
It  meets  the  believer  at  every  step  of  his  journey, 
confronts  every  circumstance  of  his  life,  and 
chimes  with  each  phase  of  his  mental  and  spiritual 
experience.  Upon  no  spot  in  the  wilderness  can 
he  plant  his  foot,  strange  and  untrodden  though 
that  path  may  be,  but  a  gem  from  this  casket 


THE  PRECICUSNESS,  ETC.  141 

meets  his  eye,  the  siglit  of  which  inspires  his 
heart  with  confidence,  his  spirit  with  comfort,  his 
soul  with  hope. 

Now,  God,  in  giving  us  these  divine  assurances, 
proceeds  with  His  Church  upon  the  same  prin- 
ciple which  holds  together  the  social  fabric  of 
Imman  society,  viz.,  promise  and  trust.  It  is 
promise,  in  some  form  or  other,  and  trust  in 
that  promise,  which  binds  man  to  man ;  and  it 
is  the  confidence  we  repose  in  his  word  which 
gives  credence  to  his  statements,  his  discoveries, 
and  his  testimonies ;  and  which  lures  and  sus- 
tains us  in  our  individual  path  of  acquisition 
and  research.  The  promise  of  gold  allures  the 
avaricious,  the  promise  of  glory  fires  the  ambi- 
tious, the  promise  of  pleasure  stimulates  the 
worldly,  the  promise  of  intellectual  reward  sus- 
tains and  animates  the  student.  And  although 
these  promises  may  prove  as  visionary  and  fitful 
as  a  dream,  yet,  for  the  moment,  they  impart 
confidence  and  inspire  hope.  Thus  man's  cre- 
dulity in  man  is  the  great  ligament  of  human 
society,  and  the  promise  of  reward  the  pole-star 
of  his  life.  Nov/,  our  heavenly  Father  deals  with 
His  children  precisely  upon  the  same  principle — 
of  promise  and  trust;.     He  speaks,  and  challenges 


142  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF 

our  belief  ;  He  promises,  and  asks  our  confideuce ; 
He  utters  His  word,  and  bids  us  rely  implicitly 
on  His  love,  faithfulness,  and  power  to  make  it 
good. 

Among  the  preciou,s  things  of  God,  then,  how 
inconceivably  precious  and  indispensable  are  His 
promises  !  Imagine  what  would  have  been  the  con- 
dition of  His  children  apart  from  the  divine  pro- 
mises of  which  the  blessed  volume  is  so  full.  What 
must  have  been  the  desolateness,  the  sadness,  and 
the  sinking  had  we  not  the  divine  assurances  of 
God's  Word  on  which  to  rely;  and  in  the  realisation 
of  which  we  are  guided  in  our  march  heavenward, 
are  upheld  in  weakness,  cheered  in  depression, 
and  conducted  step  by  step  to  final  blessedness. 
Oh,  were  it  possible  to  erase  from  the  sacred 
volume  all  those  precious  promises  which  cluster 
in  its  pages,  like  golden  fruit  bending  from  the 
Tree  of  Life,  what  a  wintry  gloom  would  enshroud 
the  whole  of  your  future,  both  the  life  that 
now  is,  and  the  life  which  is  to  come.  Eob  a 
man  of  God  of  the  "  precious  promises,"  and  you 
extino;uish  the  sun  of  his  moral  firmament,  and 
roll  back  the  darkness  and  confusion  of  chaos. 
Rob  him  of  the  promises,  and  you  cut  off  every 
S])ring  of  comfort  and  consolation  that  cheers  and 


THE  DIVINE  PEOMISES.  143 

gladdens  hi^?  heart  in  tliis  vale  of  suffering  and 
tears. 

Another  observation  we  make  refers  to  the  fact, 
that  these  are  not  the  promises  of  man,  hut  of 
God.  They  are  the  promises  of  Jehovah,  the 
promises  of  an  Infinite  Being ;  the  promises  of  a 
God  who  cannot  lie — consequently  He  will  fulfil 
them ;  and  of  a  God  of  Omnipotence, — and  conse- 
quently He  possesses  the  power  to  make  them  good. 
We  bid  you  keep  this  truth  vividly  before  you, 
that  the  promises  on  which  God  has  caused  you 
to  hope  are  the  promises  of  Jehovah — conse- 
quently there  is  the  certain  pledge  of  their  timely 
and  complete  fulfilment. 

They  are,  moreover,  comprehensive  in  their 
character,  and  are  adapted  to  all  the  varied  cir- 
cumstances of  individi*al  history — so  comprehen- 
sive and  so  adapted,  that  we  cannot  conceive  of 
any  condition  in  which  you,  as  a  child  of  God, 
may  be  placed,  any  circumstance  by  which  you 
may  be  surrounded,  any  sorrow  by  which  you  may 
be  depressed,  any  perils  that  may  confront,  any 
darkness  that  may  overshadow  you,  or  any  wants 
of  which  you  may  be  the  subject,  in  which  you 
may  not  find  some  promise  of  His  blessed  Word 
that  meets  your  case.     Away  with  the  promises 


144  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OP 

(as  it  regards  my  personal  experience)  if  I  tliouglit 
there  was  a  sorrow  feeding  at  the  core  of  my 
heart  which  God's  word  of  promise  could  not 
console,  an  intricacy  in  my  path  through  which 
it  could  not  guide  me,  a  bitter  in  the  cup 
God  causeth  me  to  drink  for  which  it  had 
no  sweetness.  Beloved,  we  want  you  to  keep 
this  view  of  the  precious  promises  of  God's  Word 
constantly  before  you.  They  are  comprehensive, 
and  adapted  to  all  the  circumstances  of  your  per- 
sonal history,  and  so  prove  themselves  to  be  the 
precious  promises  of  Jehovah. 

Yet  one  more  observation.  These  promises  of 
God  are  covenant  promises;  that  is,  they  are  the 
promises  of  the  new  covenant  of  grace.  We  deal 
too  much  v/ith  the  old  covenant,  and  too  little 
with  the  new.  Our  faith  is  too  much  of  a  Jewish 
faith,  and  too  little  of  a  Christian.  A  more 
glorious  covenant  is  the  covenant  of  grace  ;  and 
its  promises  are  "  better  promises" — promises  of 
more  precious  blessings  than  ever  appertained  to 
the  old  covenant.  They  are  all  signed  and  sealed 
with  the  heart's  blood  of  the  Mediator  of  the  cove- 
nant, and,  consequently,  they  are  the  precious 
promises  of  our  Covenant  God.  That  covenant 
must  be  broken,  the  oath  of  that  covenant  must 


THE  DIVINE  PROMISES.  145 

be  violated,  tlie  God  of  that  covenant  must  change, 
and  the  "blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant'' 
must  cease  to  be  efficacious  if  one  solitary  pro- 
mise on  which  your  poor,  trembling,  and  anxious 
soul  hangs  its  all,  should  fail.  They  cannot 
fail,  because  they  are  the  promises  of  the  new 
covenant  of  grace.  "VYell  may  they  be  called 
"  exceeding  great  promises. "  They  are  the  pro- 
mises of  a  great  God,  and  of  a  great  covenant. 
They  are  "great,"  in  themselves,  because  they 
promise  us  great  blessings.  They  are  "  exceed- 
ing great/'  because  they  are  the  promises  of 
Jehovah.  They  rest  upon  four  foundations,  or 
pillars  ;  and  so  long  as  these  pillars  stand,  so 
long  must  stand  the  precious  promises  of  God's 
word.  God's  holiness  is  one  pillar  upon  which 
they  stand,  which  will  not  suffer  Him  to  deceive; 
God's  goodness  is  another  which  will  not  suffer 
Him  to  forget ;  God's  truth  is  another,  which 
will  not  suffer  Him  to  change ;  God's  power  is 
the  fourth,  which  enables  Him  to  accomplish  all 
that  He  has  promised.  With  these  few  general 
observations,  we  now  proceed  to  a  more  particu- 
lar illustration  of  their  preciousness  and  efficacy. 
*'  Exceeding  great  and  precious  "  is  the  character 
given  to  them  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the  Holy 


146  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OP 

Ghost  never  uses  worclG  without  profound  sig- 
nificance and  meaning. 

They  are  ''precious  promises,"  because  of  the 
source  'from  whence  they  originate.  "What  are 
these  promises  ?  They  are  the  unfolding  of  the 
heart  of  God  ;  they  are  the  revelation  of  the  mind 
of  God ;  they  are  the  exponents  of  the  will  of 
God ;  they  are,  in  a  word,  God  Himself.  If 
a  faitliful  and  true  friend,  a  man  of  probity, 
integrity,  and  honesty,  who  would  rather  pluck 
out  his  right  eye,  or  sever  his  right  hand  than 
violate  his  word,  makes  us  a  promise,  it  is  but 
another  exhibition  of  his  own  self.  In  that 
promise  we  read  his  veracity,  his  kindness,  his 
love.  We  receive  the  promise,  believe  the  pro- 
mise, act  upon  the  ]Dromise,  because  we  know 
the  man,  and  feel  sure  that  the  promise  is  a 
reflection  of  his  character.  We  want  no  other 
endorsement  than  the  probity,  integrity,  and 
friendship  of  the  promiser.  Look  at  the  pro- 
mises of  God.  They  are  exceedingly  precious, 
because  of  the  source  whence  they  originate. 
They  are  the  throbbings  of  the  infinite  and  death- 
less love  of  God.  I  cannot,  with  a  weeping  eye, 
light  upon  a  precious  promise,  but  the  moment  I 
see  it  I  behold  my  Father's  love  exhibited  and  im- 


THE  DIVINE  PROMISES.  147 

veiled.  I  read  God's  heart  in  the  promise.  I  seem 
to  hear  the  gentle,  tender  accents  of  His  voice ; 
therefore,  as  the  revelation  of  my  Father's  love, 
the  promises  of  God  become  exceeding  precious. 
Oh,  how  often  has  your  heart  been  touched  with 
tlie  kind  promise  of  a  parent !  You  have  read 
in  that  assurance  the  love  whence  it  originated. 
Beloved,  read  the  love  of  your  heavenly  Father 
in  the  precious  promises.  They  are  but  the  echoes 
of  His  heart  sounding  from  each  page  of  the 
sacred  volume. 

They  are  precious,  too,/rom  the  channel  through 
which  they  floiu.  All  the  promises  of  God  come 
to  us  through  a  channel — the  same  channel 
through  which  every  blessing  flows — but  which, 
^ve  fear,  is  too  much  overlooked,  and  in  our  sad 
forgctfulness  of  which  we  have  such  low  thoughts 
of  Jesus,  and  such  dim  views  of  God's  love. 
Beloved,  there  is  but  one  channel  through  which 
God  bestows  any  blessing  upon  us.  You  ask 
what  it  is.  I  give  it  you  in  God's  own  precious 
words : — "  There  is  one  Mediator  between  God 
and  man,  the  man  Clirist  Jesus."  All  your 
blessings  flow  to  you  through  Jesus.  Your  pro- 
vidential mercies,  the  higher  blessings  of  grace — 
your  sins  pardoned,  your  name  written  in  the 


148  PRECIOUSNESS  OF 

Lamb's  Book  of  Life,  the  glories  of  heaven  unfold- 
ing to  your  faith — all  flow  to  you  through  the  one 
Mediator.  Jesus  is  the  medium  through  which 
the  precious  promises  of  the  word  come  to  us. 
We  ask  you,  then,  if  the  promises  are  not  pre- 
cious 1  if  they  do  not  derive  inconceivable  value 
and  sweetness  from  the  channel  through  which 
they  flow  ?  0\  it  is  kind  of  God  to  send  you  a 
blessing  or  a  rebuke  through  one  who  loves  you ! 
Dearly  beloved,  look  at  the  precious  promises. 
They  all  come  to  you  through  the  merits,  media- 
tion, finished  work,  atoning  sacrifice,  the  incessant 
and  ever-prevalent  intercession  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  Consequently,  they  become  exceedingly 
precious.  Nay,  more  than  this.  Every  promise 
meets  and  centres  in  Christ.  ''  All  the  promises 
of  God  are  yea  and  amen  in  Christ  Jesus."  Not 
a  solitary  promise  that  buoys  you  above  the  surg- 
ing billows,  or  that  joaiiits  its  bright  bow  on  the 
dark  cloud  that  overshadows  you,  or  that  distils  its 
drop  of  sweetness  into  your  .nauseous  draught, 
but  that  promise  is  in  Christ,  through  Christ, 
from  Christ  and  will  be  made  good  to  you  in 
virtue  of  your  union  with  Christ.  Here  the  case  of 
many  of  God's  saints  is  met  who  say,  "  I  dare  not 
claim  the  promise  ;  T  am  so  sinful,  so  unworthy, 


THE  DIVINE  PEOMISES.  149 

BO  unbelieving,  I  have  so  often  looked  at  tlie  pro- 
mise and  rejected  the  comfort  that  it  gives,  that  I 
dare  not  now  appropriate  it."  Dearly  beloved,  the 
ground  on  which  you  stand  with  regard  to  the 
promise  of  God,  is  the  finished  work  of  Jesus 
Christ ;  and  these  promises  come  to  you  in  virtue 
of  what  Christ  has  done  ;  consequently,  there 
is  not  a  sin-burdened,  sorrow-stricken  soul  but 
may  stretch  forth  his  hand  and  receive  these  pre- 
cious jewels  as  they  flow  out  from  the  open  casket 
of  God's  word. 

They  are  precious  in  themselves.  Take  thje 
promise  addressed  to  a  soul  under  a  conviction  of 
sin,  spiritually  and  earnestly  inquiring  his  way  of 
pardon,  acceptance,  and  salvation.  The  Holy  Ghost 
has  given  you  a  deejD  sense  of  your  sinfulness. 
You  see  your  heart  to  be  vile,  your  nature  de- 
praved ;  smitten  with  godly  grief  for  sin,  and 
bowed  in  the  dust  of  self-abasement,  you  are 
almost  on  the  brink  of  despair.  But  Christ's 
promise  meets  your  case — "  Come  unto  me,  all 
ye  that  are  weary  and  heavy  laden,  and  I  will 
give  thee  rest."  "  Look  unto  me  and  be  ye  saved 
ail  the  ends  of  the  earth."  "Him  that  cometh 
unto  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  The  moment 
your  eye  of  faith,  though  misted  with  tears,  can 


150  THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OP 

descry  tliesc  promises,  hope  springs  up  in  your 
heart.  Oh,  precious  promise,  that  bids  me  come 
weary  and  heavy  laden  with  sin  to  rest  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  receive  Him  a&  all  my 
salvation  and  all  my  desire !  Will  you  not  say 
that  is  an  "  exceeding  great  and  precious  pro- 
mise," that  bids  the  sin-weary  find  rest  in  Jesus  ? 
Or,  are  you  oppressed  by  some  of  those  varied 
mental  and  spiritual  exercises  that  do  so  much 
cast  down  the  child  of  God?  How  precious  is 
the  promise — "  Why  art  thou  cast  down,  0  my 
soul,  and  why  art  thou  disquieted  within  me  ? 
Hope  thou  in  God,  for  I  shall  yet  praise  Him, 
who  is  the  health  of  my  countenance  and  my 
God."  Or,  are  you  a  child  of  the  light  walking 
in  darkness,  no  starlight,  no  sunlight,  not  a  soli- 
tary beam  to  cheer  your  way — all  spiritual  gloom 
around  you  ?  Listen  to  that  precious  promise — ■ 
"  Who  is  among  you  that  feareth  the  Lord,  that 
walketh  in  darkness  and  hath  no  light,  let  him 
trust  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  and  stay  himself 
upon  his  God."  What  a  precious  promise  is  that? 
Or,  are  you  suffering  from  a  sense  of  the  Divine 
withdrawment,  tht  suspended  manifestations  of 
the  Lord's  love  to  your  soul  i  What  a  precious 
promise  is  this — "  Por  a  small  moment  have  I  for" 


THE  DIVINE  PEOMISES.  151 

saken  thee,  but  "with  great  mercies  will  I  gather 
thee.  In  a  little  wrath  I  hid  my  face  from  thee  for 
a  moment ;  but  with  everlasting  kindness  will  I 
have  mercy  on  thee,  saith  the  Lord  thy  Eedeemer?" 
Or,  conscious  of  backsliding  and  departure  from 
God,  having  gone  astray  like  a  lost  sheep,  your  heart 
smitten  with  godly  grief,  beginning  to  doubt  the 
reality  of  your  former  Christian  experience  ?  Hear 
the  touching  words  of  the  Lord — "  Eeturn,  thou 
backsliding  Israel,  saith  the  Lord,  and  I  will  not 
cause  mine  anger  to  fall  upon  you,  for  I  am  mer- 
ciful, saith  the  Lord,  and  I  vdll  not  keep  anger 
for  ever.  Only  acknowledge  thine  iniquity."  Oh, 
what  precious  promises  are  these  to  tlie  ^^oor, 
heart-broken  penitent !  Is  there  nothing  in  these 
gracious  assurances  that  meets  your  case?  Or, 
are  you  in  trouble,  difficulties  hemming  you  in 
on  every  side,  all  things  seeming  to  make  against 
you  ?  Is  there  no  preciousness  in  that  promise — 
"  Call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble,  I  will  de- 
liver thee,  and  thou  shalt  glorify  me?"  Oh,  hov/ 
many  a  tried  and  afflicted  saint,  buffeting  ^^th 
the  storm,  has  been  buoyed  up  and'  kept  above 
the  waves  by  this  one  solitary  and  precious  pro- 
mise of  God,  "Call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble !" 
Or,  are  you  assailed  by  the  fiery  darts  of  the 


]  52  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OP 

enemy?  List^  to  the  promises  addressed  to  tlie 
temi^ted,  "  The  Lord  knoweth  how  to  deliver  the 
godly  out  of  temj^tatious."  "There  hath  no 
temptation  taken  you  but  such  as  is  common  to 
man;  but  God  is  faithful,  who  will  not  suffer 
you  to  be  tempted  above  what  ye  are  able ; 
but  will  with  the  temptation  also  make  a  way 
to  escape,  that  ye  may  be  able  to  bear  it."  Are 
you  in  deep  affliction,  in  sore  adversity?  Lis- 
ten to  the  promise  of  thy  God — "  When  thou 
passest  through  the  waters  I  will  be  with  thee, 
and  through  the  floods  they  shall  not  over- 
flow thee."  "  All  things  work  together  for  good 
to  them  that  love  God."  "Casting  all  your 
care  upon  Hiin,  for  He  careth  for  you."  Are 
you  troubled  because  answers  to  prayer  are 
delayed  ;  because  the  vision  tarries  and  appeareth 
not  ?  The  promise  is — "  Wait  on  the  Lord,  be 
of  good  courage,  and  He  shall  strengthen  your 
heart."  Are  you  anticipating  an  eyil,  looking  at 
it  in  the  distance,  and  trembling  at  its  approach  ? 
Hear  the  soothing  word  of  thy  Father — "  Come, . 
my  people,  enter  thou  into  thy  chambers,  and 
shut  thy^  doors  about  thee,  hide  thyself,  as  it  were, 
for  a  little  moment,  until  the  indignation  be  over- 
past." Could  sweeter  chimes  breathe  upon  your 
troubled  spirit  words  more  appropriate  or  mor© 


THE  DIVI¥E  PROMISES.  153 

soothing  ?  Are  you  afraid  of  coming  short  of  eter- 
nal glory — of  perishing  at  last  in  sight  of  heaven  ? 
Listen  to  the  promise — "  He  that  hath  begun  a 
good  work  in  you  will  perform  it  until  the  day 
of  Jesus  Christ."  "  Now  unto  Him  that  is  able 
to  keep  you  from  falling."  Thus  kept,  how  can 
you  perish  ?  Are  friends  and  kindred  alienated, 
and  do  you  feel  desolate  and  lonejy  ? — "  When 
my  father  and  my  mother  forsake  me,  then  the 
Lord  will  take  me  up"— -'-'I  will  never  leave  thee, 
nor  forsake  thee,"  is  the  precious  promise  of  thy 
God.  Do  the  infirmities  and  weaknesses  of  age 
accumulate  around  you  ?  "  Even  to  old  age,  I 
am  He,  and  even  to  hoar  hairs  vfill  I  carry  you. 
I  have  made  and  I  will  bear.  Even  I  will  carry 
and  deliver  you."  This  is  the  precious  pro- 
mise to  God's  dear  aged  saints.  Let  us  learn 
from  these  words  to  be  very  tender,  sympa- 
thising, and  patient  towards  the  aged.  They  are 
dear  and  precious  to  the  heart  of  God,  and 
it  is  an  honour — oh,  how  great ! — to  place  our 
•arm  beneath  the  aged  one  whom  God  carries  in 
His  loving  heart.  Are  you  afraid  of  temporal 
poverty,  that  the  cruse  of  oil  and  the  barrel  of 
meal  will  fail  you  ?  Hear  thy  God — "  Your  bread 
and  your  water  shall  be  sure."  "  Seek  ye  first 
the  kingdom  of  God  .  and  His  righteousness,  and 


154  THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OP 

all  things  shall  be  cadded  to  you."  Are  yon  in 
bondage  through  the  fear  of  death  ?  Cling  to 
the  precious  promise — "  This  God  is  our  God  for 
ever  and  ever.  He  will  be  our  guide  even  unto 
death."  Thus  have  we  travelled  through  a  few 
of  the  varied  circumstances  in  which  you  may  be 
placed,  for  each  one  of  which  God  has  provided 
a  precious  promise,  on  which  He  causeth  your 
soul  to  hope. 

Precious,  too,  are  these  promises  in  the  expe- 
rience of  His  people.  You  can  testify  to  their 
inconceivable  preciousness.  What,  my  beloved, 
would  you  have  done  without  them  ?  Have  they 
not  stanched  many  a  bleeding  wound  ?  and  dried 
many  a  falling  tear?  Have  they  not  calmed 
many  a,  perturbed  moment?  Have  they  not 
guided  your  feet  through  many  a  labyrinth, 
shed  light  on  many  a  lonely  path,  been  as  oil 
on  the  broken  Avaters  of  many  a  dark  billow, 
and  like  voices  of  music  have  broken  sweetly  on 
many  a  dreary  night  of  weeping  and  of  woe  ?  You 
have  fled  to  them  in  times  of  necessity,  have  en- 
twined your  arms  of  faith  around  them  in  Vv'eak- 
ness,  and  having  tested  their  soothing  and  support, 
you  can  put  your  seal  to  the  truth,  that  the  pro- 
mises of  God  are  "  exceeding  great  and  precious." 


THE  DIVINE  PROMISES.  155 

■  Precious  are  they,  too^  in  the  fruit  they  hear. 
Who  can  describe  the  peace  and  joy  of  the  soul  when 
faith  takes  hold  of  the  Divine  promises  ?  Who 
will  not  say  they  are  "  exceeding  great  and  pre- 
cious promises,"  as  he  beholds  the  precious  fruits 
these  promises  bring  forth  in  the  happy  experi- 
ence of  the  saint  of  God  ?  With  this  bare  outline 
of  the  subject,  let  us,  in  conclusion,  refer  to  one  or 
two  practical  inferences. 

We  exhort  you,  beloved,  to  take  hold  of  the  Pi^o- 
miserin  the  promise.  The  mere  promise  is  nothing 
to  us  if  we  cannot  descry  that  which  underlies  the 
promise, — and  that  which  we  are  to  deal  with  in 
the  promise  is,  the  Promiser  Himself.  Abraham 
staggered  not  at  the  promise  of  God,  "  because  he 
counted  Him  faithful  who  had  promised."  He 
would  have  staggered  at  the  promise  of  man,  be- 
cause it  was  so  marvellous  ;  but  wHen  he  saw  the 
Divine  Promiser  in  the  promise,  he  knew  that 
what  was  impossible  with  man  was  possible  with 
God,  and  so  he  believed  Him  faithful  that  had 
promised.  Rest  in  Jesus,  ye  wearied  and  bur- 
dened ones, — rest  in  God,  ye  tried  and  tempted 
ones, — rest  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  ye  sad  and  mourn- 
ful ones  ;  for  all  the  precious  promises  of  God,  on 
which  He  has  caused  you  to  hope,  are  but  tho 


156  THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF 

unfoldings  of  God  Himself.  Deal,  then,  with  the 
Proiniser  in  the  promise,  and  you  will  find  the 
promise  to  be  like  a  rock  of  adamant  beneath 
your  feet. 

We  exhort  you  to  store  your  heart  ricldywith 
the  precious  promises  of  God.  Take  them  on 
board  your  bark  plentifully,  for  you  have  yet 
many  a  storm  to  weather,  and  you  will  need  them 
to  ballast  your  vessel  in  the  tempestuous  sea. 
Furnish  your  memories  abundantly  with  them  ; 
let  your  heart  deal  closely  with  them ;  the  time 
will  come  when  the  promise  will  be  more  precious 
to  you  than  gold,  yea,  than  much  fine  gold  ;  and 
when  afiliction  cometh,  and  the  dark  cloud  gathers, 
oil  then,  how  ]3recious  will  you  find  the  promises 
of  your  Covenant  God  to  be  v/ith  which  you 
stored  your  mind  and  fed  your  faith  ! 

Recollect,  they  are  God's  gifts,  and  are  not 
your  purchase.  "  Whereby  are  given  unto  you 
exceeding  great  and  precious  treasures."  Come, 
then,  to  God  empty-handed.  Do  not  reason  and 
hesitate  because  of  your  past  unbelief;  but  as 
gifts  of  God's  free  favour,  welcome  and  trust  in 
them. 

God  may  sometimes  write  the  sentence  of 
death  upon  a  promise,  and  everything  in  His 
providence  may  seem  opposed  to  its  fulfilment, 


THE  DIVINE  PEOMISES.  157 

though  for  jears  you  have  clung  to  it.  Be  not, 
however,  staggered  at  that.  There  is  a  life  in 
that  promise,  beloved,  that  never  can  die.  Take, 
as  an  illustration,  the  seed  you  have  sown  in  the 
earth.  You  go  and  look  at  iL  and  find  it,  appa- 
rently dead  and  decayed — a  mass  of  dust  only ; 
but  there  is  a  vital  jirinciple  there  that  cannot  be 
lost,  and  in  process  of  time  that  seed  will  geradnate 
and  become  a  beauteous  flower.  So  is  it  with 
the  precious  promise  of  God.  Month  after 
month,  year  after  year  has  rolled  by,  and  you  see 
no  fulfilment  of  the  promise  ;  but  wait  God's 
appointed  way  and  His  ordained  time,  and  the 
promise  shall  rise  again  in  all  its  life,  loveliness, 
and  fruit.  God  will  cease  to  be  rather  than  not 
fulfil  the  word  on  which  He  has  caused  your  soul 
to  hope. 

Walk  in  the  holiness  of  the  promise.  Oh,  those 
are  solemn  words  in  2  Cor.  vii.  1  — "  Having 
therefore  these  promises,  dearly  beloved,  let  us 
cleanse  ourselves  from  all  filthiness  of  the  flesh 
and  spi7'it,  perfecting  holiness  in  the  fear  of 
God"  The  crowning  glory  and  preciousness  of 
these  promises  is,  that  they  are  sanctifying,  pro- 
moting that  holiness  of  life  "without  which  no 
man  shall  see  the  Lord."  Having  therefore  these 
rich  clusters  of  precious  promises  bending  down 


158  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF 

from  tlie  Tree  of  Life,  wlience  we  may  pluck  them 
at  all  times,  in  all  seasons,  and  under  all  circum- 
stances, let  your  life  be  a  holy  life,  and  let  the 
sanctifying  influence  of  the  promises  mould  and 
govern  your  conduct. 

In  all  your  future  path  "be  ye  followers  of 
them  .who  through  faith  and  patience  inherit  the 
promises,"  in  all  their  fulness,  blessedness,  and 
preciousness.  Follow  them  as  they  followed 
Christ ;  imitate  them  as  they  imitated  God  ;  press 
after  them  as  they  pressed  forward  and  reached 
the  ooal  and  won  the  prize,  for  ere  long  you  too 
shall  be  put  into  their  full  possession — the  pro- 
mise of  grace  terminating  and  expanding  in  the^ 
full  enjoyment  of  the  promise  of  glory.  And 
when  the  time  of  your  departure  is  at  hand,  your 
work  finished,  your  battle  fought,  and  your  vic- 
tory won,  and  when  the  soles  of  your  feet  smite 
the  chill  waters  of  death,  then  shall  you  find  the 
path  through  those  waters  all  paved  and  glowiug 
with  the  exceeding  great  promises  of  your  cove- 
nant God.  Standing  upon  these  precious  stones, 
when  heart  and  flesh  are  failing,  and  you  are 
about  to  leave  a  wife  in  lonely  widowhood,  or 
children  in  friendless  orphanage — eternity,  a  so- 
lemn, untried  eternity,  unveiling  its  realities  to 


THE  DIVINE  PEOMISES.  159 

your  view— with  what  firmness  will  faith  plant  its 
feet  upon  these  Divine  promises — so  shall  you  pass 
peacefully,  triumphantly  over  Jordan,  and  all  the 
harpers  will  meet  and  welcome  you  on  the  other 
side.  The  Lord  grant  that  these  exceeding  great 
promises  may  become  increasingly  precious  to  our 
hearts,  and  purifying  to  our  lives,  and  all  the 
praise  and  honour  shall  redound  to  Him  who  has 
declared,  "  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but 
my  word  shall  not  pass  away/'  Lord,  help  us  to 
receive  Thy  promise,  and  to  trust  in  Thee  the 
Promiser ! 

"  How  oft  have  sin  and  Satan  strove 

To  rend  my  soul  from  Thee,  my  God  1 
But  everlasting  is  Thy  love, 

And  Jesus  seals  it  with  His  blood. 

"  The  oath  and  promise  of  the  Lord 

Join  to  confirm  the  wondrous  grace; 
Eternal  power  performs  the  word, 

And  fiUs  all  heaven  with  endless  praise. 

"  Amidst  temptations  sharp  and  long, 
My  soul  to  this  dear  refuge  flies ; 
Hope  is  mj  anchor,  firm  and  strong, 
While  tempests  blow  and  billows  risa; 

"  The  gospel  bears  my  spirit  up  ; 
A  faithful  and  unchanging  God 
Lays  the  foundation  of  my  hope 
la  oaths  and  promises  and  blood.** 


CHAPTER  VI. 

THE  PEECIOUSNESS   OF   CHRIST'S  BLOOD. 

"The  precious  blood  of  Christ." — 1  Peter  i.  19. 

The  Word  of  God  is  the  only  book  that  conveys 
to  US  a  correct  idea  of  the  sanctity  and  meaning 
of  blood.  The  instructions  of  God  as  to  its 
nature  and  use  in  the  Levitical  economy  present 
the  spectacle  to  the  mind  invested  with  an  im- 
pressiveness  awful  in  its  character,  and  profound 
in  its  meaning.  In  God's  eye  blood  was  a  sacred 
thing.  The  solemnity  with  which  He*  regarded, 
and  the  vigilance  with  which  He  shielded  it,  are 
remarkably  striking.  We  marvel  not  at  this. 
By  the  instrument  of  blood  Jehovah  was  to 
unfold  His  Divine  character,  illustrate  His  moral 
government,  and  achieve  His  miracle  of  mercy 
in  behalf  of  fallen  man,  in  a  way  so  wonderful 
and  resplendent  as  the  intelligent  universe  had 
never  beheld.  That  one  thing — blood,  was  to  fill 
the  world  with  His  glory,  heaven  with  His  re- 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST'S  BLOOD.      1 61 

deemed,  and  eternity  mtli  His  praise  !  Hence 
the  sacredness  and  value  of  blood  in  God's  view. 
What  an  impressive  spectacle  would  meet  the 
eye  of  the  devout  Israelite  as  he  entered  the 
temple  to  worship.  He  would  see  blood  upon 
the  altar — blood  upon  the  sides  of  the  altar — 
blood  in  the  bowls  of  the  altar — blood  flowino: 
around  the  altar ;  and  in  that  blood,  so  profusely 
shed  and  minutely  applied,  his  penitent  heart 
would  confront  the  truth,  "  Without  sheddino-  of 
blood  there  is  no  remission  ;"  and  his  believing  eye 
would  behold  the  "  precious  blood  of  Christ,  as  of 
a  lamb  without  blemish  and  without  spot,"  "  slain 
from  the  foundation  of  the  world." 

Such  is  the  vital  truth  which  is  now  to  eniraire 
our  thoughts.  Among  all  the  precious  things  of 
God  there  is  not  one  so  precious,  so  inestimable, 
so  influential,  as  the  "precious  blood  of  Christ." 
All  salvation,  all  purity,  all  peace,  all  holiness, 
all  hope,  all  heaven,  is  bound  uj)  in  the  atoning 
blood  of  Immanuel.  There  is  no  acceptance  for 
the  sinner,  no  cleansing  for  the  guilty,  .no  pardon 
for  the  penitent,  no  sanctification  for  the  believer, 
but  in  the  vicarious  sacrifice  of  the  Son  of  God. 
With  nothing  are  honesty  and  tenderness  of 
conscience,  soul-prosperity,  the  power  of  prayer, 


162      THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRTST^S  BLOOD. 

purity  of  heart,  holiness  of  life,  unreserved 
obedience,  pence,  joy,  and  hope,  so  intimately 
related,  so  closely  entwined,  as  the  "precious 
hlood  of  Christ."  It  becomes,  then,  of  the  greatest 
moment  that  we  should  have  scriptural,  spiritual, 
realising  views  of  this  gTcat  truth.  The  point  at 
which  we  are  liable  to  come  short  is,  not  so  much 
our  depreciatory  views  of  the  essential  worth  of 
atoning  blood  as  of  the  necessity  of  the  application 
of  it  to  the  conscience.  How  few  there  are  of  the 
Lord's  people  who  are  walking  with  the  blood 
upon  the  conscience !  "  For  this  cause  many  are 
weak  and  sickly  among  you,  and  many  sleep." 
We  detect  this  deficiency  and  defect  in  the  ex- 
perimental religion  of  many,  by  the  absence  of 
a  wakeful  conscience,  of  deep  sjDirituality  of 
mind,  of  minute  confession  of  sin,  of  closeness 
of  walk,  and  a  Christ-like  temper  and  spirit. 
Nor  this  alone.  To  what  may  we  trace  the  doubt 
and  uncertainty  as  to  their  pcr.-onal  salvation, 
the  want  of  assured  peace,  joy,  and  communion 
with  Godj  which  imj^arts  a  sickly  hue  to  the 
Christianity  of  so  many,  which  dims  their  light, 
impairs  their  vigour,  and  makes  them  so  easy  a 
prey  to  Satan's  assaults  and  the  world's  seduc- 
tions, but  to  the  absence  of  close  dealing  with 


THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST's  BLOOD.      163 

fclie  atoning  blood?  The  application  of  blood 
was  a  truth  distinctly  seen,  even  amidst  the  dim 
twilight  shadows  of  the  Levitical  and  prophetical 
disi^ensations.  The  blood  of  the  sacrifice  was  of 
no  avail  until  it  was  applied,  brought  into 
contact  with  the  object.  That  object  then — 
whether  a  person  or  a  thing — became  relatively 
holy.  Touched  by  the  sacrificial  blood  it  was  re- 
garded as  sanctified — as  set  apart  for  the  holy 
Lord  God ;  but  until  the  blood  was  applied  it 
was  a  common  thing.  How  glorious  the  gospel 
of  this  !  The  believing  soul  must  come  in  con- 
tact with  the  atoning  blood  of  Christ ;  and  in 
order  to  maintain  holiness  and  closeness  of  walk 
with  God — the  essence  of  true  religion — and  to 
pass  through  life's  duties,  trials,  and  temptations, 
as  a  royal  priest,  realising  our  high  calling  of  God, 
there  must  be  the  constant  application  of  the 
blood  of  Christ.  We  will  not  anticipate  sub- 
sequent parts  of  this  chapter,  but  proceed  to  lay 
the  basis  of  our  subject  by  directing  the  reader's 
attention  to  the  essential  dignity  and  worth  of 
the  "  precious  blood  of  Christ." 

It  would  seem  impossible,  by  any  illustration 
or  argument,  to  over-estimate  the  intrinsic  -value 


164      THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST  S  BLOOD. 

of  Christ's  atoning  blood.  There  are  some  things 
in  religion  of  which  we  may  entertain  a  too  ex- 
alted and  exaggerated  conception.  'For  exam23le, 
we  may  have  too  high  a  view  of  the  Church  of 
Christ,  exalting  it  above  Christ  Himself.  We  may 
hold  too  exaggerated  and  too  exclusive  views  of 
Church  ordinances,  displacing  and  magnifying 
them,  substituting  their  observance  for  vital  reli- 
gion, for  a  change  of  heart,  for  faith  in  Christ 
exclusively  for  justification.  But  no  such  danger 
lies  in  our  study  of  the  blood  of  Christ.  Here  our 
views  cannot  be  too  high,  our  contemplation  too 
profound,  our  hearts  too  loving  and  adoring. 

Consider  for  a  moment,  beloved,  the  ends  that 
were  accomplished  by  the  shedding  of  Christ's 
blood.  We  often  estimate  the  value  of  a  mean 
by  the  end  it  secures.  The  Atonement  of  Christ 
w^as  to  meet  the  claims  of  God's  moral  govern- 
ment. By  man's  sin  its  holiness  had  been  in- 
vaded, its  authority  contemned,  its  sanctions, 
laws,  and  commands  outraged.  Over  all  its  glory 
a  cloud  had  passed.  God's  eternal  purpose  was 
to  save  man.  But  He  could  save  him  only  by 
an  expedient  that  would  remove  that  cloud  and 
cause  the  glory  it  shaded  to  shine  forth  witli  deeper 
and  more  resplendent  lustre.    The  expedient  that 


THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  CHEIST's  BLOOD.      1  G5 

WDUld  thus  meet  the  claims  of  the  Divine  govern- 
ment must  be  Divine.  The  Atonement  that  would 
link  justice  with  mercy,  and  holiness  with  love,  in 
the  salvation  of  the  Church,  must  be  infinite  in 
its  character,  and  priceless  in  its  worth.  Such, 
in  a  few  words,  were  the  two  grand  ends  to  be 
secured,  and  which  were  secured,  by  the  offering 
lip  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Viewed  only  in 
this  light,  how  precious  does  the  blood  of  Christ 
appear  !  Blood  that  could  harmonise  the  Divine 
attributes— uphold  the  righteousness  of  the  Di\dne 
government,  making  it  honourable  and  glorious  in 
God  to  save  sinful  man — must  be  precious. 

It  is  precious  blood,  because  it  is  virtually  the 
*  blood  of  God.'  This  is  a  strong  but  a  scrip- 
tural expression.  Paul,  in  his  parting  address  to 
the  Ephesian  elders,  employs  it — "The  Church 
of  God,  which  He  hath  purchavsed  with  His  own 
blood."  This  it  is  which  stamps  the  atoning 
blood  of  the  Saviour  with  such  dignity  and  virtue 
— it  is  the  blood  of  Jehovah-Jesus.  It  pos- 
sesses all  the  worth  and  glory  of  the  Godhead — ■ 
all  the  divine  virtue  and  efncacy  of  the  Deity. 
From  this  it  derived  its  power  to  satisfy,  its 
virtue  to  atone,  its  efricacy  to  cleaiise.  And  this 
is  the  reason  why  one  drop  of  this  precious  blood. 


16Q      THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST  S  BLOOD. 

falling  upon  a  sin-burdened  conscience,  in  a 
moment  dissolves  the  weighty  load,  and  fills 
the  soul  with  joy  and  peace  in  believing.  And 
this  is  why  there  exists  not  a  stain  of  human 
guilt  which  the  atoning  blood  of  Immanuel  can- 
not utterly  and  for  ever  efface.  Why,  in  a  word, 
it  is  blood  that  "  cleanseth  from  all  sin/' 

But  it  follows  that  it  is  the  blood  of  a  pure  and 
sinless  humanity,  and  this  by  no  means  lessens 
our  idea  of  its  preciousness.  A  deep  mystery, 
we  admit,  is  the  incarnation  of  God ;  but  mys- 
tery confronts  us  everywhere,  and  in  everything ; 
therefore  it  would  be  unphilosophical,  as  un- 
believing, to  cavil  at  this  fundamental  doctrine 
of  Christianity — the  profoundest  mystery  in.  the 
universe — because  it  transcended,  though  it  does 
not  contradict,  human  reason.  Our  humanity  is 
the  incarnation  of  a  spiritual  nature ;  we  are  not 
one,  but  three  parts — body,  soul,  and  spirit — and 
yet  we  do  not  deny  our  own  being.  Let  us  go  to 
Bethlehem,  and  see  this  great  sight,  not  to  reason, 
but  believe,  not  to  fathom,  but  adore.  ,  How  great 
the  folly  of  man  in  his  endeavour  to  sound  the 
de23ths  of  God's  infinity !  Here,  then,  exists  an 
essential  element  of  preciousness  in  Christ's  blood 
—it  flowed  from  arteries  untouched,  untainted 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST'S  BLOOD.      167 

by  the  virus  of  sin  ;  from  a  Immanity  upon  Y»^liicli 
not  a  breath  of  pollution  had  fallen.  "  He  knew 
no  sin/'  Begotten  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  He  was 
that "  holy  thing"  born  of  a  virgin.  "  Holy,  harm- 
less, undefiled,  and  separate  from  sinners,"  He 
came  into  the  world,  lived  in  it,  died  in  it,  and  left 
it  as  pure  and  immaculate  as  the  Deity  He  en- 
shrined. His  Godhead  wore  not  the  tainted  fleece, 
was  clad  not  in  the  leprous  garment  of  our 
fallen,  apostate,  and  sinful  nature.  A  holy  Sa- 
viour offered  up  a  sinless  Atonement  for  unholy, 
sinful  man.  Hence  the  preciousness  of  His  blood. 
Look  at  it,  beloved,  in  this  light,  and  let  your 
hearts  glow  with  love,  adoration,  and  praise,  as 
you  kneel  before  the  cross,  and  feel  the  distilling 
upon  your  conscience  of  that  blood,  that  pardons, 
covers,  cancels  all  your  guilt.  Erom  this  view 
of  the  essential  preciousness  of  Christ's  blood, 
let  us  consider  its  preciousness  to  God. 

We  have  referred  to  the  law  of  the  Levitical  dis- 
pensation relating  to  blood.  The  minute  directions 
which  God  gave  concerning  it  marked  the  sacred- 
ness  and  sigriificance  of  blood  in  His  holy  eyes. 
Can  we  for  a  moment  suppose  that  the  blood  of 
the  Atonement  offered  upon  the  cross  of  Calvary 
Bhould  not  be  of  yet  more  infinite  worth  and  pre- 


168      THE  PEECIOtJSNESS  OF  CHEIST'S  BLOOD. 

ciousness  to  God  ?  Beloved,  we  believe  that  of 
all  the  great  truths  upon  which  in  this  volume 
we  are  expatiating,  we  shall  find  in  the  hour  of 
death  this  to  be  the  most  essential,  supporting, 
and  comforting — the  preciousness  and  acceptable- 
11  ess  to  God  of  that  Divine  sacrifice  for  sin  upon 
which,  m  that  awful  moment,  we  are  relying 
— to  know  then  that  God  is  well  pleased  with 
that  blood  upon  which,  as  a  poor,  guilty  sinner 
about  to  appear  in  eternity,  we  rest ;  and  that  in 
its  acceptance  we  are  accepted,  by  its  virtue  we 
are  washed  whiter  than  snow,  and  that  through 
its  merit  we  shall  appear  before  God  in  righteous- 
ness— surely,  with  this  truth  witnessed  to  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  in  our  souls,  death  will  have  no  sting, 
and  the  grave  no  terror. 

The  atoning  blood  of  Christ  must  be  j^recious 
to  the  Father,  because  it  is  the  blood  of  His  own 
Son.  There  was  an  essential,  close,  and  endear- 
ing relation  between  the  Victim  and  the  Offerer. 
Is  the  blood  of  a  child  precious  to  the  heart  of  a 
parent  ?  Thus  precious  was  the  blood  of  Jesus  to 
God.  Oh,  methinks,  if  ever  God  loved  His  Son,  He 
loved  Him  then  !  Gazing  from  His  throne  in  glory 
upon  the  awful  scene  on  earth,  He  saw  the  Son 
who  dwelt  in  His  bosom  from  eternity  impaled 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST'S  BLOOD.      169 

ujDon  the  accursed  tree,  suffering  the  just  for  the 
unjust,  vindicating  the  rectitude  of  His  govern- 
ment, and  pouring  out  His  holy  soul  unto  death, 
that  He  might  bring  us  unto  God. 

But  there  was  not  only  the  yearning  of  paren- 
tal affection  in  God,  but  in  the  sacrifice  of  His 
beloved  Son  He  beheld  the  salvation  of  His 
Church  fully  and  for  ever  secured.  In  that  vital 
stream  Jle  saw  the  life,  the  spiritual  and  eternal 
life,  of  His  people.  His  everlasting  love  had  found 
a  fit  and  appropriate  channel  through  which  it 
could  flow  to  the  vilest  sinner.  Di\4ne  Mercy, 
in  her  mission  to  our  fallen  planet,  approached 
the  Cross  of  Calvary,  paused — gazed — and  adored. 
Then  dipping  her  wings  in  the  crimson  stream, 
pursued  her  flight  through  the  world,  proclaim- 
ing, in  music  such  as  angels  had  never  heard, 
"  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  and  on  earth  peace 
and  good  will  to  men  ! " 

And  when  God  raised  His  Son  from  the 
grave,  exalted  Him  to  glory,  set  Him  at  His 
own  right  hand,  and  then  sent  down  the  Holy 
Spirit,  the  seal  of  His  acceptance  was  affixed 
to  His  own  deep  sense  of  the  preciousness  of 
Christ's  blood.  "  Herein  is  love,  not  that  we 
loved  God,  but  that  He  loved  us,  and  sent  Hia 


1 70      THE  PEECIOUSXESB  OF  CHRIST'S  BLOOD. 

Sou  to  be  the  propitiation  for  our  sins/'  Trem« 
bling  soul  1  approach  this  Atonement.  God  has 
accepted  it — will  not  you  ?  Surely  you  may  with 
confidence  and  hope  rely  upon  that  sacrifice  with 
which  He  has  thus  declared  Himself  well  pleased. 
You  cannot  come  to  it  too  hopefully,  nor  rely 
upon  it  too  implicitly,  nor  believe  in  it  too  simply, 
nor  rejoice  in  it  too  fervently.  It  is  precious  to 
God,  and,  in  virtue  of  its  preciousness,  your  person 
is  precious,  your  prayers  are  precious,  your  offer- 
ings of  love  are  precious — fragrant  to  Him  as  the 
"smell  of  a  field  which  the  Lord  hath  blessed."* 
Plead  but  the  precious  blood  of  Christ  for  renewed 
forgiveness,  urge  it  as  your  argument  in  prayer, 
and  draw  from  it  your  motive  to  self-surrender  as 
a  holy,  living  sacrifice  to  God,  and  you  shall  not 
fail  of  acceptance  with  the  Holy  One. 

But  there  is  another  view  of  our  subject  which 
illustrates  the  endearing  character  of  Christ's 
blood.  It  is  not  only  precious  to  God,  but  it  is  also 
'precious  in  the  experience  of  the  believer.  God 
will  make  that  precious  to  His  people  which  is 
precious  to  Himself.  He  will  endear  to  their 
hearts  that  which  is  dear  to  His  own.  It  is  pre- 
cious to  the  saints,  because  it  is  the  blood  of  theii' 
Great  High  Priest.     There  was  no  personal  rela- 


THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST'S  BLOOD.      171 

tion  between  the  sacrifice  and  the  priest  under  the 
Levitical  dispensation.  But  here  the  Antitype 
transcends  the  type.  We  see  in  the  blood  of 
Christ  the  blood  of  one  who  stands  to  us  in  the 
varied  and  tender  relations  of  a  Priest,  a  Shepherd, 
a  Friend,  a  Brotlier,  a  Kinsman,  a  Eedeemer. 
Oh,  to  travel  to  the  cross  and  behold  in  that  illus- 
trious Sufferer  One  who  combined  in  Himself  every 
endearing,  tender,  and  precious  relation  !  It  yva.s 
no  stranger  who  hung  there.  It  was  no  wayfar- 
ing man  of  grief  who  died  there.  It  was  our  Elder 
Brother,  our  Goel,  our  Friend.  How  precious,  then, 
to  our  penitent,  believing,  loving  hearts  must  that 
blood  be !  AVith  what  reverence  should  we  speak  of 
it,  with  what  faith  should  we  trust  in  it,  with  what 
gratitude  should  we  welcome  it,  and  with  what 
holiness  of  life  should  we  shew  forth  its  praise  ! 

As  all  his  salvation  it  must  possess  an  inde- 
scribable preciousness  to  the  believer.  There  is  no 
salvation  for  the  soul  but  in  the  atoning  blood  of 
Immanuel.  Whatever  else  presents  itself  as  such 
is  a  delusion  and  a  snare.  Baptism  is  nothing  here. 
Sacraments  are  nothing  here.  Priestly  power  is 
nothing  here.  Works  of  human  merit  are  nothing 
here.  The  blood  of  Christ — God's  own  expedient 
• — stands  unrivalled  and  alone,  the  only  hope  of 


172      THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST'S  ELOOD. 

a  lost  sinner.  The  teaching  and  authority  of 
God's  Word  are  decisive  and  ultimate  on  this 
momentous  and  vital  point.  Christ's  sacrifice 
is  declared  to  be  a  "propitiation  through  faith 
in  His  blood"  (Rom.  iii.  25)  ;  "  Being  justified  by 
His  blood"  (Eom.  v.  9)  ;  "We  have  redemption 
through  His  blood"  (Eph.  i.  7) ;  "  That  He  might 
sanctify  the  people  with  His  own  blood "  (Heb. 
xiii.  12)  ;  "Who  hath  washed  us  from  our  sins  in 
His  ov/n  blood"  (Rev.  i.  5);  "These  are  they 
v,'hich  came  out  of  great  tribulation,  and  have 
washed  their  robes,  and  made  them  wdiite  in  the 
blood  of  the  Lamb  :  therefore  are  they  before  the 
throne"  (Rev.  vii.  14).  In  tiiese  declarations 
it  will  be  seen  is  inscribed  the  great  essential 
truth  —  Salvation  alone  by  the  atoning 
BLOOD  OF  Christ.  This  is  the  *  Stone'  wliich  is 
set  at  nought  by  all  who  seek  some  other  Wiiy  to 
heaven — who  build  their  hope  upon  the  sand — a 
,way  the  end  of  which  is  death.  But  "neither 
is  there  salvation  in  any  other ;  for  there  is  none 
other  name  under  heaven  given  among  men 
whereby  we  must  be  saved."  Before  the  power 
and  glory  of  this  one  precious  name,  every  false 
religion  shall  vanish,  and  to  it  every  knee  shall 
bow.     Around  a  dying  bed  the  scaffolding  of  all 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  CHEIST's  BLOOD.      17S 

ecclesiastical  systems  falls,  leaving  the  man  who 
has  reposed  his  all  upon  it,  to  his  ghostly  hope. 
But  to  that  departing  soul,  to  whom  the  savour, 
power,  and  preciousness  of  the  name  of  Jesus  is 
as  ointment  shedding  its  fragrance  round  the 
room  where  disease,  and  death  with  united  force 
are  battling  with  life,  oh  how  supporting,  sooth- 
ing, and  hope-inspiring  is  the  precious  blood  of 
Christ  which  is  felt  at  that  awful  moment,  when 
the  transgressions  of  a  Kfe  crowd  upon  memory, 
to  "  cleanse  from  ALL  sin  !" 

The  peace  which  flows  from  the  application  of 
the  atoning  blood  of  Christ  increases  greatly  the 
believer's  sense  of  its  preciousness.  "Who  can 
describe  the  repose  of  conscience,  the  mental 
serenity,  the  heart-ease  which  this  blood  seals 
upon  the  believing  soul  ?  It  must  be  experienced 
to  be  understood.  Beloved,  as  your  eye  traces  this 
page,  there  may  rage  within  your  breast,  unknown 
and  unsuspected  by  others,  the  storm  of  sin's 
conviction.  So  sunlight  and  serene  is,  per- 
haps, the  surface,  not  a  shadow  or  a  wavelet  be- 
trays the  hidden  and  deep  emotion.  And  yet  you 
feel  yourself  a  sinner — a  lost  sinner — the  chief  of 
sinners.  You  are  filled  with  sin-loathing,  self- 
abhorrence,  sorrow,  and  grief.     A  deep  conviction 


174      THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST'S  BLOOD. 

of  your  utcer  vileness,  imwortlnncss,  and  hell- 
deserving  is  the  cause.  And  what  is  the  remedy  ? 
The  precious  blood  of  Christ  !  Brought  beneath 
that  blood,  as  like  a  crimson  tide  it  flows  from 
the  cross,  peace — perfect  peace — the  peace  of 
(jod  which  passeth  all  understanding,  will  flow 
into  your  soul,  and  there  shall  be  a  great  calm. 
And  then  wnll  you  joyously  exclaim,  "I  am  at 
peace  with  God  through  Christ.  The  tempest  is 
hushed  ;  the  thunder-cloud  has  passed  away  ;  the 
Sun  of  Righteousness  pours  its  golden  beams 
into  my  soul,  and  heaven  and  earth  seem  to  meet 
and  kiss  each  other." 

The  present  efficacy  of  the  atoning  blood  must 
form  an  endearing  element  to  the  heart  whose 
pantings  and  breathings  are  for  jnirity.  This 
will  need  no  argument  to  those  of  my  readers 
who  are  wont  to  keep  a  vigilant  oversight  of  the 
spiritual  state  of  their  souls.  You  will  feel,  be- 
loved, that  you  cannot  close  your  day,  in  which, 
despite  the  greatest  watchfulness  and  prayer,  there 
will  be  found,  in  things  done,  or  in  things  undone, 
much  to  produce  contrition  and  humility,  vWth- 
out  a  fresh  application,  to  the  Fountain.  The 
atoning  blooi  of  Jesus  is  of  r)resent  efficacy. 
This,  one  of  its  essential  elements,  is  much  over- 


THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  CHEIST'S  BLOOD.      175 

looked.  Many  of  the  Lord's  people  postpone  an 
immediate  confession  of  sin  and  application  to 
the  blood.  The  effect  is  to  produce  searedness 
of  conscience,  and  a  kind  of  moral^ossification  of 
the  heart,  most  injurious  to  personal  holiness. 
The  conscience  thus  losing  its  tenderness,  and  the 
heart  its  sensibility,  sin  comes  to  be  seen  in  a 
light  less  abhorrent,  sanctification  less  sought, 
and  Christ  less  endeared.  Eemembering,  then, 
that  it  is  an  oyen  and  a  flowing  Fountain — that 
no  sin,  no  backsliding,  however  great  and  aggra- 
vated, dare  interdict  or  intercept  your  approach, 
repair  immediately  in  faith  to  the  blood,  wash, 
and  be  clean.  The  atoning  blood  of  Immanuel 
is  the  Divine  Bath  of  the  soul.  Take  an  illus- 
tration. The  physical  man  is  kept  healthy  and 
vigorous  only  by  perpetual  ablution.  And  he  is 
not  acting  in  obedience  to  the  laws  of  his  being, 
as  well  as  the  commands  of  his  Maker,  who, 
deeming  as  unworthy  his  notice  the  claims  of  his 
physical  structure  to  his  regard,  despises  those 
precautionary  measures,  and  refuses  to  employ 
those  restorative  and  sanative  means  which  God 
has  imposed  for  the  preservation  and  recovery  of 
bodily  health.  "We  have  no  more  right  to  trifle 
with  the  body  than  with  the  soul.     If,  as  a  pro- 


176      THE  PIIECIOUBNESS  OF  CHEIST's  BLOOa 

fessing  Christian,  suffering  from  wasting  disease, 
you  refuse  to  avail  yourself  of  the  sanative  aids 
God  has  kindly  placed  within  your  reach,  the 
skill  and  the  appliances  His  providence  has  pro- 
vided, you  are,  undoubtedly,  acting  presump- 
tuously, and  not  in  faith.  God  has  ordained  the 
mean  as  the  end,  and  no  man  can  attempt  to 
sunder  them  without  violence  to  his  own  best  in- 
terests, and  dishonour  to  God.  With  this  we 
must  blend  the  thought,  that  all  means  of  recovery 
are  futile  without  His  blessing  ;  but  that,  looking 
to  Him  in  prayer  and  confidence,  we  shall  reahse 
the  truth  of  His  word — "And  the  prayer  of  faith 
shall  save  the  sick/'  Or,  if  that  petition  is  with- 
held, it  is  but  to  confer  a  blesshig  yet  more  pre- 
cious— it  may  be,  the  soul's ,  translation  to  that 
world  of  blessedness,  "  the  inhabitants  of  which 
shall  no  more  say,  I  am  sick/'  And  now  let  us 
return  to  the  truth  thus  illustrated. 

Infinitely  more  needful  is  the  constant  cleans- 
ing of  the  soul.  We  repeat  the  assertion,  that 
atoning  blood  is  the  Divine  laver  of  the  believer. 
The  existence  of  a  fretting  leprosy  within,  and 
the  hourly  contact  with  a  raging  plague  without, 
necessitates  perpetual  soul-ablution.  Let  it  not 
be  supposed  that  we  are  advocating  a  habit  cal 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST'S  BLOOD.      177 

culated  to  impress  the  mind  with  light  thoughts 
of  sin,  or  to  make  Christ  its  minister.  !Par  from 
this  will  be  the  effect  of  a  constant  and  conscien- 
tious dealing  with  Christ's  atonement — of  frequent 
bathing  in  the  blood.  The  blood  bf  Christ  is  sanc- 
tifying, as  well  as  purifying.  It  not  only  effaces 
the  immediate  stain  of  guilt,  but  it  intensifies  the 
heart's  thirst  for  holiness.  No  believer  can  culti- 
vate an  intimate  acquaintance  with  Christ,  or  bathe 
frequently  in  the  fountain  of  His  blood,  and  not 
experience  a  growing  sanctification.  It  is  the 
blood  of  a  Jioly  sacrifice,  and  it  leaves  the  traces 
of  holiness  wherever  it  flows.  And  when  he 
comes  afresh  and  closely  to  the  "  blood  of  sprink- 
linoj,"  and  as^ain  o-oes  forth  to  the  Christian  conflict, 
it  is  to  fight  more  successfully/to  walk  more  cir- 
cumspectly, and  to  yield  himself  more  unreservedly 
unto  God.  How  clearly  and  forcibly  does  the 
apostle  put  this  truth — the  sanctifying  influence 
of  the  blood.  "  Now  the  God  of  peace,  that 
brought  again  from  the  dead  our  Lord  Jesus,  that 
great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep,  through  the  blood  of 
the  everlasting  covenant,  make  you  perfect  in 
every  good  ivork  to  do  His  will."  (Heb.  xiii.  20,  21.) 
Let  it  not,  then,  be  supposed,  that  in  pleading  for 
fre(^uent  application  of  the  Saviour's  sacrifice,  a 
u 


178      THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST'S  BLOOD. 

constant  cleansing  from  sin,  we  advocate  a  lax, 
careless  walk.  We  believe  that  the  heart  is  only 
thoroughly  examined,  sin  is  only  deeply  known, 
principles,  motives,  and  aims  are  only  closely 
sifted,  analysed,  and  seen,  by  the  power  of  the 
atoning  blood  of  Christ.  The  blood  not  only 
cleanses,  but  it  searches  ;  it  not  only  purifies,  but 
it  probes.  Its  influence  is  powerful  and  pene- 
trating, imparting  a  keen  perception  of  sin  where 
its  existence  and  taint  were  not  seen  or  suspected. 
In  proportion  to  the  filtration  of  a  lake,  or  the 
polish  of  a  mirror,  is  the  power  of  reflecting  the' 
object  imaged  upon  the  surface.  Keep  thy  heart, 
0  believer,  much  beneath  the  cross,  thy  conscience 
in  frequent  and  close  contact  with  the  blood,  and 
the  slightest  touch  of  sin  will  make  thee  restless 
and  unhappy  until  thou  hast  confessed,  and  God 
has  forgiven.  This  is  the  secret — which,  alas  !  few 
see,  or  care  to  know — of  preserving  the  garments 
white  amidst  pollution,  the  mind  serene  amidst 
turmoil,  the  heart  happy  amidst  sorrow,  the  life 
radiant  and  transparent  as  the  sun,  and  the  spirit, 
temper,  and  carriage  Christ-loving,  and  Christ-like. 
Oh  tl"  e  wonders  of  the  precious  blood  of  Christ ! 
Who  can  exalt  it  too  highly,  adore  it  too  pro- 
foundly, love,  magnify,  and  honour  it  too  deeply 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OP  CHRIST'S  BLOOD.      179 

and  exclusively?  Will  it  not  constitute  the 
theme  of  our  study,  the  burden  of  our  song,  and 
the  source  of  our  bliss  as  ages  roll  on,  and  never 
cease  to  roll  ?  Beloved,  the  surprise  then  will  be, 
that  here  below  we  should  have  prized  it  so  little, 
travelled  to  it  so  un frequently,  and  glorified  it 
so  imperfectly,  and  have  regarded  it  with  an 
affection  so  fickle  and  so  cold ! 

The  last  is  not  the  least  precious  view,  to  the 
saints  of  God,  of  the  atoning  blood  of  Christ,  which 
this  chapter  presents — viz.,  its  voice  and  power 
in  heaven.  It  is  a  delightful,  sanctifying  truth — • 
the  pleading  of  the  blood  within  the  vail  that  now 
separates  the  s?ants  of  the  Most  High  on  earth 
from  the  glory  of  the  upper  and  inner  sanctuary. 
Our  great  High  Priest  hath  passed  within  that 
vail,  has  entered  into  that  sanctuary,  bearing  in 
His  hands  the  blood  He  shed  on  Calvary.  And 
with  that  blood — basing  His  intercession  upon 
its  diviue  and  changeless  efficacy — He  pleadeth  for 
the  Church  with  an  individual,  momentary,  and 
ceaseless  intercession.  Surely  the  present  power 
of  the  blood  in  heaven  will  not  admit  of  a 
moment's  doubt  in  his  mind  who  remembers  its 
virtue  ages  antecedent  to  its  oblation.  God,  in  anti- 
cipation of  this  sacrifice,  upon  the  promise  of  Christ 


180      THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST'S  BLOOD. 

to  give  Himself  an  offering,  extended  His  full  for- 
giveness to  those  who,  amidst  types,  and  shadows, 
and  symbols,  believed  in  the  "Lamb  slain  from 
the  foundation  of  the  world."  Upon  Christ's  bond 
to  release  His  Church,  long  before  the  actual  pay- 
ment of  the  ransom,  the  "  prey  was  taken  from  the 
mighty,  and  the  lawful  captive  was  delivered." 
God  accepted  the  Saviour's  suretyship,  and  ex- 
tended pardon  to  Adam,  and  Abel,  and  all  the 
Old  Testament  believers,  upon  trust  and  credit  of - 
a  future  sacrifice.  Thus  did  the  atoning  blood  of 
Jesus  do  what  the  law  never  could  have  done — " 
"  redeem  from  transgressions  under  the  first  tes- 
tament ;"  and,  by  its  antecedent  and  anticipative 
merit,  procure  the  "remission  of  sins  that  are 
past."  If,  then — and  this  is  our  argument — the 
blood  of  Christ  was  so  efiicacious  ages  before  it 
was  shed,  how  much  more  efficacious  is  it  at  the 
present  moment,  now  that  it  is  actually  shed ! 
The  testimony  of  the  Holy  Ghost  touching  this 
truth  is  clear  and  conclusive  :  — "  Christ  being 
come  an  High  Priest  of  good  things  to  come,  by  His 
own  blood  He  entered  in  once  into  the  lioly  place, 
having  obtained  eternal  redemption  for  us."  (Heb. 
ix.  11,  12.)  "  Christ  is  not  entered  into  the  holy 
places  made  with  hands,  which  are  the  fig-ures  of 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OP  CHEIST's  ELOOD.      181 

fclie  true  ;  but  into  heaven  itself,  now  to  appear  in 
tlie  presence  of  God  for  us"  (ver.  24).  "  The  blood 
of  Christ,  Avhich  speaketh  better  things  than  the 
blood  of  Abel."  Here,  then,  blood  is  one  of  the 
precious  things  of  God — most  precious  !  Christ 
is  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  enveloped  in 
the  incense-cloud  of  His  merits,  praying  for  you 
with  a  ceaseless  and  successful  advocacy.  Amidst 
your  trials  and  toils,  your  temptations  and  sins, 
your  wants  and  woes,  your  fears  and  tremblings, 
the  voice  of  Immanuel's  blood  speaks  for  you  in 
heaven,  and  that  voice  is  echoed  back  to  earth  in 
the  succourings,  upholdings,  and  soothings,  in 
the  strength,  grace,  and  love  which  its  pleadings 
secure  for  you  below. 

And  what  a  balm  for  the  sin-distressed  con- 
science is  the  precious  blood  of  Christ !  There 
grows  not  in  the  universe  another  tree  whose  bal- 
sam can  heal  the  wounded  conscience  but  this 
Tree  of  Life — a  crucified  Saviour.  0  beware,  be- 
loved reader,  of  2^ false  healing !  '^They  have  healed 
the  hurt  of  my  people  slightly,''  says  God ;  that 
is,  imperfectly,  falsely.  There  is  no  balsam  for 
a  wounded  conscience  but  that  which  exudes  from 
the  wounds  of  Christ.  "  With  His  stripes  we  are 
bealed/"'  Bring  your  wound  to  Christ's  wounds,  and 


182      THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST'S  BLOOD. 

it  is  in  a  moment  healed.  '  Heal  me,  0  Lord,  and 
I  shall  be  healed.''  David  testifies,  "  I  cried  unto 
Thee,  and  Thou  hast  healed  me/'  And  is  not  this 
the  especial  office  and  gracious  mission  of  Jesus  ? 
Listen  to  His  precious  words  :  "He  hath  sent  me 
to  heal  the  broken-hearted.''  Oh  the  luxury  of  a 
broken  heart  for  sin,  thus  soothed,  bound  up,  and 
healed  by  "  the  precious  blood  of  Christ ! ''  Who 
would  not  cry,  "  Lord,  subdue,  break,  dissolve  my 
heart  for  sin ;  let  its  grief  be  never  so  deep,  pun- 
gent, and  bitter,  may  it  but  be  brought  into  con- 
tact with  the  virtue,  the  peace,  and  preciousness 
of  Thy  most  precious  blood  V  Again,  we  beseech 
you,  beware  of  a  spurious  healing  !  Remember, 
no  tear  can  heal  a  wounded  conscience — no  con- 
fession can  heal  it — no  sacrament  can  heal  it — 
no  minister  can  heal  it — nothing  in  this  wide 
universe  can  heal  it  but  the  precious  atoning 
blood  of  Christ.  That  can  heal  it  in  one  mo- 
ment. It  can  efface,  not  only  the  faintest  breath 
of  guilt  from  the  troubled  conscience,  but  it 
can  wash  out  the  deepest,  darkest,  foulest  blot 
of  sin  that  ever  existed  upon  the  human  soul. 
Think  you  there  is  no  pardon  for  you?  Deem 
you  beyond  the  pale  of  salvation  because  you 
are  so  great,  or  so  aged  a  sinner — "  a  sinner  of  a 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  CHEIST'S  BLOOD.      183 

hundred  years  old/'  it  may  be  ?  Look  at  Adam, 
the  poisoner  of  his  sj^ecies,  the  murderer  of  his 
race.  The  precious  blood  of  Christ  availed  for  him, 
and  in  virtue  of  it  he  is  now  in  glory,  the  greatest, 
the  chiefest,  the  head  of  all  sinners,  hymning  the 
high  praises  of  the  blood  that  brought  him  there. 
Will  you,  then,  hesitate  to  believe  ?  will  you  de- 
spond and  despair  while  this  monument  of  sav- 
ing mercy,  of  sovereign  grace,  of  Christ's  atoning 
blood,  stands  as  "  a  pattern  to  them  which  should 
hereafter  believe  on  Him  to  everlasting  life?" 

Are  you  approaching  the  solemnities  of  a 
dying  hour  ?  Oh,  turn  you  now  from  everything 
but  the  precious  blood  of  Christ !  Let  go  every 
object  but  the  cross.  Eelax  your  hold  of  churches 
and  creeds,  duties  and  ordinances,  ministers  and 
saints,  and  let  one  object  absorb  every  thought, 
and  feeling,  and  desire — filling  the  entire  scope 
of  the  brief  and  solemn  space  that  now  divides 
time  from  eternity — the  peecious  b^ood  of 
Cheist  !  Cast  yourself  upon  it  in  simple  be- 
lieving— look  at  it  with  the  feeblest,  dimmest  eye 
of  faith,  and  it  will  speak  pardon,  peace,  and  joy 
to  your  soul,  unvailing  to  your  departing  spirit 
a  hope  radiant  with  immortality. 

Beware  of  the  false  religions  of  the  day.    They 


184j    the  preciousness  of  Christ's  blood. 

are  all  designed  and  tend  to  vail  the  cross  of  Jesus. 
\Ye  want  no  other  'altar'  than  Christ.  AYe  need  no 
other  sacrifice  but  His.  Christ  is  our  only  altar ; 
Christ  is  our  only  sacrifice  ;  Christ  is  our  only 
door  into  heaven  ;  Christ  is  all,  and  in  all.  Value 
ministers,  churches,  ordinances,  means  of  grace, 
only  as  they  are  stejoping-stones  that  lift  you 
above  themselves,  and  lead  you  upward  and  on- 
ward, closer  and  closer  to  Jesus.  Around  Him 
entwine  the  arms  of  your  faith ;  clasp  Him  to 
your  loving  heart ;  and  be  ye  sure  of  this,  that 
such  is  His  grace,  such  His  compassion,  such 
His  tenderness,  sympathy,  and  love.  He  will  never 
tear  from  His  bosom  the  poor,  trembling,  peni- 
tent soul  that  has  fled  within  it  for  shelter.  Ap- 
proach this  divine  Altar,  this  one  finished  Sacri- 
fice, ye  poor  in  spirit — ye  that  smite  upon  the 
breast — ye  that  mourn  for  sin — ye  that  cry,  "Un- 
clean, unclean  !" — ye  that  see  your  own  righteous- 
ness to  be  but  filthy  rags — ye  that  disclaim  and 
abjure  every  other  salvation,  and  lay  your  mouth 
in  the  dust,  acknowledging  your  iniquity,  trans- 
gression, and  sin ;  draw  near  to  this  atoning 
BLOOD,  and  behold  your  welcome  in  the  free 
grace  of  a  sin-forgiving,  sin-pardoning  God.  This 
precious  blood  will  give  you  liberty — this  pre- 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST'S  BLOOD.      185 

cious  blood  will  give  you  peace — this  precious 
blood  will  sign  and  seal  you  as  one  upon  whom 
the  'second  death'  shall  have  no  power.  Then, 
when  Christ  is  coming,  and  the  trumpet  is  sound- 
ing, and  the  dead  are  rising,  and  the  great  white 
throne  is  unvailing,  and  all  are  pressing  round 
it  for  judgment,  then  will  be  fulfilled,  as  never 
before,    the   precious   promise   of    God — "  And 

WHEN  I  SEE  THE  BLOOD,  I  WILL  PASS  YOU  Wi." 
Sprinkled  with  that  blood,  sheltered  by  that  blood, 
washed  from  every  stain  in  that  blood,  not  a  drop 
of  divine  wrath  will  light  upon  you ;  and  you 
shall  hear  the  Judge  of  all  pronounce  you  par- 
doned— accepted — saved  !  Then  will  it  be  said  of 
you — "  These  are  they  who  came  out  of  great  tri- 
bulation, and  have  washed  their  robes,  and  made 
them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  Therefore 
are  they  before  the  throne."  And  from  every  heart 
and  tongue  of  that  goodly  company  of  apostles, 
and  prophets,  and  martyrs,  and  the  spirits  of 
just  men  made  perfect,  will  the  glorious  anthem 
swell — "  Unto  Him  that  loved  us,  and  washed  us 
from  our  sins  in  His  own  blood,  and  hath  made  us 
kings  and  priests  unto  God ;  to  Him  be  glory  and 
dominion  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen."  Oh  the  bliss 
of  that  moment]     May  it  be  ours  to  join  that 


186     THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST'S  BLOOD, 

number,  and  to  unite  in  that  song !     Amen,  and 
Amen. 

*'  We  have  an  Altar  and  a  Priest 

Within  the  riven  vail — 
All  typal  sacrifice  has  ceased. 

Remove  that  '  altar  rail ! ' 
With  holy  boldness  venture  nigh; 
The  Golden  Altar  stands  on  high. 

"  'Tis  sprhikled  with  the  costly  blood 
On  which  the  Father  smiles, 
That  blood  which  from  the  Offerer  flow'd 
For  all  whom  sin  defiles. 
Look  there,  and  meet  your  Father's  eye. 
There  learn  the  priestly  mystery. 

**  The  brazen  altar  smokes  no  more 

On  which  the  Victim  lay, 
Where  sin's  unmeasured  doom  He  bore^ 

When  thou  hadst  novight  to  pay ; 
*  Go  forth  without  the  camp/  and  see 
What  God's  High  Priest  hath  done  for  thee, 

*•  Then  look  within  '  the  Inner  Shrin©,' 

Where  now  He  pleading  stands. 
Not  God's  High  Priest  alone,  but  thine — 

What  say  those  wounded  hands  ? 
The  Father,  when  those  scars  He  heal'd. 
Once,  and  for  aye,  thy  pardon  seal'd. 

**  Though  now  in  heaven,  the  Priestly  King 
Long  minister'd  on  earth ; 
His  life  one  '  whole  burnt-offering,' 
Sweet-savour'd  from  his  birth ; 
The  fragrance  of  that  life  divine 
Perfumes  and  fills  *  the  Inner  Shrine.* 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST'S  BLOOD.     187 

•"  No  '  rood  screen '  shields  it  from  the  eye 

Of  those  whose  sight  is  true  ; 
■  That '  Inner  Shrine '  in  yon  pure  sky 

Is  open  now  for  you. 
All  conscience-cleansed  and  free  from  sin. 
The  fuU-robed  Priest  says,  '  Welcome  in.' 

"Behold  those  jewels  on  His  breast. 

Each  as  a  signet  graved  ! 
Close  to  that  bosom,  warmly  prest. 

Lie  those  by  Jesus  saved ; 
And  thou  art  saved,  whoe'er  thou  art. 
If  Jesus  has  thy  willing  heart. 

**  The  golden  frontlet  on  his  brow. 

With  '  Holiness '  inscribed, 
Tells  that  the  law  is  honour'd  uow^ 

In  vain  with  tinsel  bribed : 
The.  perfect  work  of  One  alone 
Will  God's  all-searching  justice  own. 

**  Hark  to  the  music  of  those  bells  ! 

How  sweet  their  silver  voice  ! 
Of  Peace,  Good-will,  and  Grace  it  teii»-i« 

IIow  canst  thou  but  rejoice. 
When  God  Himself  dehghts  to  hear 
Those  silver  tones  salute  His  ear? 

**  A  golden  lamp  sheds  forth  its  ray; 

The  Spirit  is  your  guide ; 
He  shews  the  New,  the  Living  Way-^s 

The  rent  vail  opens  wide  : 
A  seven-fold  light  that  lamp  imparts. 
And  courage  gives  to  trembling  hearts. 

"  And  say,  hast  thou  not  oft  regaled 
Upon  that  living  Bread, 


188     THE  PEECTOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST'S  BLOOa 

Which,  when  all  earthly  comfort  fail'd. 
Your  craving  spirit  fed  ? 
That  heavenly  Manna,  Shew-bread  sweet, 
Which  none  but  white-robed  priests  may  eat. 

*  The  Laver  stands.     If  earth-defiled. 

Go,  wash  thy  hands,  thy  feet. 
And  simply  as  a  pardon'd  child 

Approach  the  Mercy-seat ; 
Within  the  vail  your  censer  bring, 
And  burn  sweet  incense  to  the  King. 

•*  For  know,  that  since  God's  Lamb  was  slain. 
All  typal  rites  have  ceased  ; 
Nor  till  Melchisedec  shall  reign, 
May  earth  behold  a  priest. 
Save  those  who,  wash'd  in  Jesus'  blood, 
Are  now  made  white-robed  priests  to  God. 

•*  They  walk  '  the  outer  court'  a  wliile, 

But  live  within  the  vail ; 
Look  out  and  weep,  look  in  and  emile. 

And  chant  the  melting  tale 
Of  Him  who  bless'd  the  bread  and  wine — 

•  Th»  Pbiest'  within  '  The  Inner  Shrine."* 

By  the  Authcn'  of  "  Wild  Thyjue.' 


CHAPTER  Vn. 

THE  PRECIOUS  ANOINTING. 

The  precious  ointment  upon  the  head,  that  ran  dowa 
upon  the  beard,  even  Aaron's  beard  :  that  went  down  to 
the  skirts  of  his  garments." — Psalm  cxxxiii.  2. 


It  is  to  this  striking  emblem — the  anointing  oil 
' — rather  than  to  the  truth  it  illustrates,  the  pre- 
sent chapter  especially  relates.  The  truth  illus- 
trated in  this  beautiful  passage,  we  admit,  is  a 
great  and  holy  one — hrotheiiy  love.  "  Behold,  how 
good,  how  pleasant  it  is  for  brethren  to  dwell 
together  in  unity  \"  Would  that  we  saw  more  of 
it  in  the  professing  Church  of  God !  Then  would 
the  disciples  of  Christ  be  more  marked  and  dis- 
tinguished as  such.  "  Por  by  this  shall  all  men 
know  that  ye  are  my  disciples,  if  ye  have  love 
one  to  another!'  But  it  is  the  holy  and  pre- 
cious anointing  itself  to  which  we  especially 
direct  the  reader's  attention.  The  subject  is  of 
essential  importance.  It  is  the  personal  posses- 
sion of  this  anointing  that  constitutes  oui'  true 


190  THE  PEECIOUS  ANOINTING.     . 

Christianity.  The  religion  of  vast  numbers  is 
but  the  religion  of  sentiment,  the  religion  of 
form,  the  religion  of  ritualism — a  religion  utterly 
destitute  of  one  j^article  of  this  divine  and  pre- 
cious anointing.  It  is  therefore  of-  the  greatest 
importance  that  each  reader  of  this  Vv^ork  should 
institute  the  most  rigid  self-scrutiny  to  ascertain 
his  real  possession  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Anointer 
and  the  anointing,  without  an  interest  in  which 
we  possess  but  "a  name  to  live  wliile  we  are 
dead  ;"  "  having  a  form  of  godliness,  without  the 
power  thereof."  To  aid  the  devout  reader  in  his 
inquiry  into  this  subject,  it  will  be  our  object  to 
illustrate  the  precious  nature  of  this  divine 
anointing, — its  application  to  Christ,  the  true  spi- 
ritual Aaron  and  Head  of  the  royal  priestliood, — 
and  its  communication  through  Him  to  all  who 
form  a  part  of  the  one  Anointed  Priesthood.  Oh 
that  as  we  meditate  upon  this  soul-reviving  truth, 
the  "oil  of  gladness"  may  diffuse  its  influence 
and  fragrance  through  our  souls,  endearing  Him 
to  our  hearts  whose  precious  "  name  is  as  ointment 
poured  forth"  to  those  who  know  and  love  it. 

The  office  of  the  priesthood  under  the  Levitical 
dispensation  was  regarded  as  one  of  the  higliest 
designations  of  God  in  His  Church.     The  priest 


THE  PBECIOUS  ANOINTING.  191 

stood,  as  it  were,  in  God's  place.  He  Wcis  Jeho- 
vah's vicegerent — the  medium  of  communication 
from  God  to  the  people,  and  from  the  people  to 
God.  He  vv^as  to  receive  the  word  from  the  mouth 
of  God,  and  communicate  it  to  the  people  ;  and, 
on  their  part,  he  was  to  make  sacrifice,  take  of 
their  offerings,  and  present  them  to  the  Lord.  It 
will  thus  be  seen  that  the  priesthood  was  one  of 
the  highest  and  holiest  offices  in  the  Church  of 
God.  It  was  in  fact  associated  with  royalty, 
Melchisedec  was  both  a  priest  and  a  king — a 
royal  priest  In  this  respect  he  was  a  remarkable 
type  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who,  by  one  of  the 
prophets,  is  designated  a  ''Priest  upon  His 
throne,''  and  who  stands  to  His  Church  in  the 
twofold  relation  of  King  and  Priest.  Such  is  the 
dignity  to  which  their  union  with  Christ  raises 
His  people.  They  are,  in  virtue  of  that  union, 
a  "royal  priesthood,"  "offering  up  spiritual  sac- 
rifices acceptable  to  God  through  Christ." 

We  have  remarked,  respecting  the  priesthood 
under  the  old  economy,  that,  so  important  was 
the  institution,  the  instructions  God  gave  for  the 
selection  of  the  priests,  and  their  designation  te 
the  office,  were  of  the  most  minute  and  significant 
character.     Our  present  subject  limits  us  to  a 


192  THE  PEECIOUS  ANOINTING^. 

single  and  specific  one — the  anointing.  The 
directions  of  God  touching  the  composition  of  the 
nnguent — the  precious  oil — by  which  Aaron  and 
the  priests  were  set  apart  to  their  holy  office,  are 
minute  and  instructive  : — "  Moreover  the  Lord 
spake  unto  Moses,  saying,  Take  thou  also  unto 
thee  principal  spices,  of  pure  myrrh  five  hundred 
shekels,  and  of  sweet  cinnamon  half  so  much,  even 
two  hundred  and  fifty  ;  and  of  sweet  calamus  two 
hundred  and  fifty  shekels,  and  of  cassia  five  hun- 
dred shekels,  after  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary, 
and  of  oil  olive  an  hin  :  and  thou  shalt  make  it 
an  oil  of  holy  ointment,  an  ointment  compound 
after  the  art  of  the  apothecary  :  it  sliall  be  an 
holy  anointing  oil.  And  thou  shalt  anoint  Aaron 
and  his  sons,  and  consecrate  them,  that  they  may 
minister  unto  me  in  the  jDriest's  office/'  (Exod. 
XXX.  22-25,  30.)  How  deep  and  precious  the  spi- 
ritual significance  of  all  this  1  The  great  truth  it  is 
designed  to  illustrate  is  the  nature  and  precious- 
ness  of  that  holy  anointing  of  which  all  the  "  royal 
priesthood"  of  Christ  are  partakers,  and  apart 
from  which  all  religion,  the  most  intellectual 
poetical,  and  strictly  ritual,  is  vain  and  dead, 
spurious  and  worthless."  One  drop  of  this  holy 
oil,  this  divine  anointing,  hath  in  it  more  of  God* 


THE  PRECIOUS  ANOINTING.  193 

more  of  Christ,  more  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  more 
substance,  sweetness,  and  preciousness,  than  all 
the  religions  of  man,  the  most  costly,  splendid^ 
and  imposing,  combined. 

In  one  sentence  we  define  the  divine  nature  and 
the  essential  value  of  this  precious  anointing — it 
consists  in  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in 
the  soul.  We  marvel  not,  then,  that  in  the  typal 
unfolding  of  this  truth,  there  should  be  such  an 
accumulation  of  precious,  fragrant,  and  costly 
things.  And  yet  how  far  below  the  Antitype 
does  it  fall  1  What  earthly  things,  the  most  rare 
and  precious,  can  convey  any  adequate  idea  of  the 
divine  nature  and  the  essential  worth  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  ?  Who  is  He  ?  There  are  those  who  would 
reduce  Him  to  a  mere  attribute  of  God — an  in- 
fluence of  the  Most  High — an  emanation  of  the 
Deity — a  divine  principle  !  Alas  !  how  many,  even 
of  the  Lord's  own  people,  have  but  the  most  dim 
and  imperfect  views  of  the  personal  dignity  and 
official  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  yet  would  re- 
coil with  abhorrence  at  the  thought  of  holding  a 
sentiment  in  the  slightest  degree  derogatory  to  His 
glory.  And  amongst  those  who  utterly  and  openly 
impugn  the  divine  dignity  of  the  Spirit,  denying 
totally  His  personal  oneness  with  the  Godhead,  to 


194  THE  PRECIOUS  ANOINTING. 

what  subtle  distinctions  and  hollow  sophisms,  in 
the  enmity  of  the  carnal  mind  to  God's  revealed 
truth,  vv^ll  they  resort,  rather  than  accept  the  plain 
and  simple  declarations  of  the  Bible  ?  But  who  is 
the  Holy  Ghost  ?  Our  mind  is  filled  with  sacried 
and  solemn  awe  as  we  inscribe  the  words — The 
Holy  Ghost  is  the  third  Person  in  the  God- 
head. When  we  open  the  revealed  Word  and 
read  the  words  which  compose  the  formulary  of 
baptism,  and  the  apo.stolic  benediction,  who  can 
doubt  this  truth  ?  Touching  the  former  we  read, 
"Go  ye  therefore  and  teach  all  nations  {make 
discijjles),  bctptizing  them  in  the  name  of  the 
Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost," 
(Matt,  xxviii.  19.)  Touching  the  latter  it  is 
written,  "The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  the  love  of  God,  and  the  communion  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  be  with  you  all.  Amen.''  (2  Cor. 
xiii.  14.)  What  shall  we  say  to  these  distinct, 
emphatic  declarations  ?  Doubt  them  ?  Cavil  ♦afc 
them  ?  Reduce  them  to  figures  of  speech  ?  Deny 
and  reject  them?  God  forbid  !  Beloved  reader. 
is  there  no  secret  thought  in  your  mind  deroga- 
tory to  the  Divine  Personality  of  the  Ploly  Spirit  ? 
■ — no  lurking  suspicion  of  His  claims  to  your 
love,  worship,  and  obedience?    Do  you  cherish 


THE  PEECIOUS  ANOINTING.  195 

towards  Him  like  feelings  of  holy  awe,  filial 
reverence,  and  'implicit  faith  with  those  with 
which  3^ou  regard  the  Father  and  the  Son  ?  In  a 
word,  do  you  honour,  and  love,  and  pray  to  the 
Holy  Ghost  even  as  you  love,  honour,  and  pray 
to  the  first  and  second  Persons  of  the  ever-blessed 
Trinity  ?  Oh,  forget  not  that  the  debt  of  love, 
confidence,  and  obedience  which  you  owe  to  the 
Spirit  is  the  same  !  As  you  could  not  be  redeemed 
and  saved  without  the  blood-shedding  of  the  Son, 
so  you  could  not  be  regenerated  and  sanctified  but 
by  the  divine  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Such, 
then,  is  the  sacred  anointing  of  the  royal  priest- 
hood !  The  possession  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  all 
His  divine  perfections  and  ofiicial  relations,  by 
each  believer  in  Jesus,  is  the  precious  anointing 
by  which  he  is  set  apart  as  a  priest  of  the  Most 
High  God.  Can  we  conceive  of  any  blessing  more 
costly  and  precious  ?  Of  this  blessing  you  are 
the  recipient  if  you  are  a  believer  in  the  Lord 
Jesus.  And  the  Word  of  God  declares  it : — - 
"  Ye  have  received  the  Spirit  of  adoption."  "  He 
hath  given  you  the  earnest  of  the  Spirit."  "  The 
Spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in  you."  How  easy  v/ere 
it  to  multiply  these  proofs  ! 

Passing  from  the  person  of  the  Spirit^  we  ad- 


196  THE  PRECIOUS  ANOrNTING. 

vert  for  a  moment  to  the  u'ork  of  the  Spirit. 
How  precious  is  that  work  I — so  "precious  that  all 
language,  all  imagery,  fails  adequately  to  express 
it.  If,  beloved,  you  are  a  temple,  a  sanctuary  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  there  is  more  of  God,  more  of 
divine  glory,  dwelling  within  your  soul,  than  in  all 
the  worlds  that  God  has  made,  known  and  un- 
known. Oh,  how  imperfectly  we  estimate  the  value 
and  high  calling  of  a  saint  of  God  1  But  as  we  are 
to  speak  of  this  in  a  distinct  chapter  of  the  pre- 
sent work,  we  but  refer  to  it  now  as  illustrating 
the  costliness  of  this  anointing.  The  glory  of  a 
believer  in  Christ — like  the  glory  of  Him  whose 
son  he  is — is  a  concealed  glory.  "The  King's 
daughter  is  all  glorious  within."  Where  her  dark 
corruption  dwells,  where  the  great  conflict  is  pass- 
ing, even  there,  amidst  so  much  that  is  opposite  in 
nature  and  hostile  in  spirit,  the  great  glory  of  tlie 
child  of  God  dwells,  and  all  that  hidden  glory  con- 
sisteth  of  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  soul. 
Abrokenheart  for  sin,  the  spirit  of  self-abhorrence, 
the  trembling  faith  in  Christ,  the  thirst  for  sanc- 
tification,  the  breathings  after  God,  are  component 
parts  of  that  divine  and  precious  anointing  which 
has  sanctified  you  as  a  priest  of  the  Most  High 
God. 


THE  PRECIOUS  ANOINTING.  197 

The  influences  of  the  Holy  Ghost  enter  essen- 
tially into  the  precious  anointing  of  the  believer. 
What  progress  in  the  divine  life  can  there  be 
apart  from  these  ?  This  sacred  anointing  needs 
perpetual  care  and  replenishing.  The  spirit  of 
prayer  in  our  souls — how  restrained  !  The  spirit 
of  adoption — how  it  droops !  The  spirit  of  love 
— how  it  languishes!  The  spirit  of  faith — 
how  it  fluctuates  !  The  spirit  of  Christ — hov/  it 
wanes !  But  the  Holy  Spirit  quickens,  revives, 
and  restores  by  fresh  inspirations  of  His  influence. 
A  gale  from  Him  bears  on  its  wings  life,  fruit- 
fulness,  and  fragrance.  When  the  '  south  wind ' 
blows  upon  the  soul,  the  spices  thereof  flow  out, 
and  Christ  cometh  into  His  garden,  eats  His 
pleasant  fruit,  and  gathers  His  myrrh  and  His 
spice.  And  then,  thus  revived  and  refreshed  by 
a  renewed  emanation  of  the  Spirit's  grace,  the 
moral  atmosphere  in  which  the  Christian  walks 
is  all  permeated  and  perfumed  with  the  fragrance 
of  this  precious  anointing.  Can  you,  then,  esti- 
mate its  worth  ?  That  heart-outpouring,  that  soul- 
breathing,  that  glimpse  of  Jesus,  that  Ji our  of 
nearness  to  God,  that  moment's  enjoyment  of  the 
Divine  presence — oh !  would  you  have  bartered 
it  for  earth's  choicest,  costliest,  fondest  joys !    Be- 


198  THE  PEECIOUS  ANOINTING. 

loved,  live  not,  as  a  priest  of  God,  without  the 
sensible  inbeing  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Live  in  con- 
scious union  and  communion  with  Him — seek  to 
be  filled  with  His  influences.  If  prayer  languishes 
— if  grace  decays — if  aff'ection  chills — if  there  is 
any  discovered  relapse  of  your  soul  in  the  divine 
life,  seek  at  once  and  earnestly  the  fresh  commu- 
nication of  this  divine  anointing.  "  Let  thy  gar- 
ments always  be  white,  and  thy  head  lack  no 
ointment." 

The  indestructihleness  of  this  anointins;  is  the 
last  element  of  its  preciousness  to  which  we 
allude.  It  is  no  small  mercy  to  a  child  of  God, 
that  amidst  the  evanescence  of  spiritual  feel- 
ing, the  ebb  and  flow  of  Christian  experience, 
nothhig  aff'ects  the  imperishable  nature  of  that 
divine  anointing  by  which  he  was  once  and  for 
ever  consecrated  to  an  unchangeable  priesthood. 
All  earth's  perfumes  evaporate  and  die  ;  the  blight 
is  upon  every  flower,  the  curse  is  in  every  sweet  \ 
but  here  is  that  which  can  never  be  destroyed. 
Once  the  Holy  Ghost  quickens  the  soul  with  the 
breath  of  life,  once  He  enkindles  a  sparlc  of  love 
to  God  in  the  heart,  once  He  breathes  upon  the 
believer  this  celestial  perfume,  he  possesses  a 
blessing  which  no  age  can  impair,  and  which  no 


THE  PEECIOUS  ANOINTING.  199 

circumstance  can  change.  Hostile  influences 
there  may  be  which  would  seeni  to  peril  its 
existence — the  indwelling  taint  of  sin  would 
threaten  its  purity  and  sweetness — yet  nothiug 
shall  ever  prevail  to  destroy  the  work  of  the 
Spirit  in  the  heart  of  the  regenerate.  It  is  an 
anointing  incorruptible — it  has  a  fragrance  im- 
perishable. The  power  and  perfume  thereof 
shall  go  down  with  the  believer  into  the  grave, 
shall  embalm  and  preserve  the  slumbering  dust 
of  God's  elect,  until,  in  the  morning  of  the 
first  resurrection,  the  trumpet  of  the  archangel 
bids  them  rise  to  meet  their  Lord  in  the  air. 
What  behold  I  in  that  narrow  house?  What 
see  I  reposing  in  that  clay-cold  bed  ?  A  ruined 
temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost !.  Will  it  ever  be  re- 
stored again  ?  Oh, yes  !  "We  look  for  the  Saviour, 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  shall  change  our  vile 
body,  that  it  may  be  fashioned  like  unto  His 
glorious  body,  according  to  the  working  whereby 
He  is  able  even  to  subdue  all  things  unto  Himself." 
(Phil.  iii.  20,  21.)  Thus  precious  is  this  holy 
oil,  the  divine  anointing  of  the  believer  in  Jesus. 
It  imparts  dignit})  to  his  person,  for  it  constitutes 
him  a  priest-royal.  It  imparts  fragrance  to  his 
sacrifices,  for  it  makes   them   "an  odour  of  a 


200  THE  PEECIOUS  ANOINTING. 

sweet  smell,  a  sacrifice  acceptable,  well-pleasing 
to  God."  His  prayers  are  precious,  his  praises 
are  precious,  his  labours  are  precious,  his  every 
lowly  act  of  love,  obedience,  and  service  is  incon- 
ceivably precious  to  God,  touched  with  this  divine 
and  holy  oil.  And  as  the  perfume  of  the  rose 
still  linojers  upon  the  broken  and  crumbled  ruins 
of  the  shattered  vase,  so  the  divine  perfume  of  the 
Holy  Spirit's  indwelling,  regenerating,  sanctifying 
grace  shall  cling  to  the  believer,  his  works  and 
labour  and  memory,  long  after  death  shall  have 
ruined  the  material  structure,  and  it  shall  have  re- 
turned to  the  dust  from  whence  it  came.  "  The 
righteous  shall  be  had  in  everlasting  remem- 
brance."    "The  memory  of  the  just  is  blessed." 

But  while  we  thus  maintain  the  essential  inde- 
structibility of  this  precious  anointing,  we  would 
by  no  means  fail  to  caution  the  believer  against 
that  which  yet  may  seriously  impair  its  vigour,  ob- 
scure its  beauty,  and  lessen  its  fragrance.  Essen- 
tially it  may  not  perish,  influentially  it  may. 
Intrinsically  it  cannot  be  destroyed,  efficiently  it 
can.  A  noxious  element  may  insinuate  itself  into 
this  divine  unguent,  and  blend  with  it  a  mixed 
and  ungenial  redolence.  "  Dead  flies  cause  the 
ointment  of  the  apothecary  to  send  forth  .an  ill 
savour:  so  doth  a  little  folly  him  that  is  in  repu- 


THE  PRECIOUS  ANOINTING.  201 

tation  for  wisdom  and  honour."  (Eccles.  x.  1.) 
An  uneven  walk,  an  un watchful  spirit,  an  un- 
Christ-like  dej)ortment  may  blend  with  this  pre- 
^cious  anointing,  and  thus  destroy  its  fragrance, 
and  impair  its  power.  The  moral  influence  of 
the  Church  in  the  world  is  in  proportion  to  her 
spiritual  separation /?^om  the  world.  The  light  she 
emits  throughout  the  earth  will  be  graduated  by 
her  holy  elevation  above  the  earth.  The  chande- 
lier which  illumines  an  apartment  is  suspended 
from  its  centre.  The  Church  of  God  is  the 
world's  moral  chandelier.  The  Divine  Sun  from 
whom  she  receives  her  holy  lustre,  has  con- 
descendingly, but  emphatically,  pronounced  her 
the  "light  of  the  world.''  It  follows,  then,  that 
the  spiritual  influence  which  the  Church  is  to 
exert  in  the  world  as  a  conservator  of  the  truth, 
as  a  witness  for  Christ,  and  as  an  instrument 
to  guide  men  to  the  Saviour,  will  be  potent  and 
successful,  healthy  and  powerful,  in  proportion 
to  her  own  moral  elevation,  holiness,  and  spiritu- 
ality. What  applies  to  the  Church  as  a  corporate 
body,- equally  applies  to  the  individual  Christian. 
Oh,  what  a  blessing  in  the  sphere  in  which  he 
moves  is  a  man  of  God,  living  under  the  rich 
.anointing  of  the  Holy  Spirit !  It  is  impossible 
he  can  be  hid.    "  The  ointment  of  his  right  hand 


202  THE  PEECIOUS  ANOINTINO. 

bewrayetli  itself."  And  the  moral  savour  of  that 
ointment  —  the  holy,  lieavenly  fragrance  that 
floats  around  him  —  testifies  to  all  who  are 
brought  within  its  influence,  of  God,  of  Christ, 
of  eternity.  See,  then,  that  your  religion  is  not 
half  Christian,  half  Infidel — half  Protestant,  half 
Popish — half  sincere,  half  compromising.  Beware 
of  the  "  dead  fly  in  the  ointment."  Worldli- 
ness  of  living — covetousness  of  heart — an  unfor- 
giving temper — an  earthly,  grovelling  mind — an 
uncharitable,  censorious  spirit — a  want  of  integ- 
rity and  uprightness  of  principle  in  your  dealings 
with  men — a  secret  rebellion  of  will  against  the 
government,  the  providence,  the  disposal  of  God, 
may  just  be  that  "  dead  fly."  These  may  be  the 
things,  or  others  of  a  like  character,  which  lessen 
your  heavenliness  of  miiid,  impair  your  spiritual 
vigour,  shade  your  divine  light,  vail  your  pre- 
cious anointing,  and  render  your  moral  influ- 
ence as  a  labourer  for  Christ  so  little  useful  to 
man,  and  your  walk  as  a  believer  in  Jesus  so  little 
honouring  to  God. 

A  .vital  part  of  our  subject  remains  to  be  con- 
sidered— the  confluence  of  this  precious  oil  in 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  true  spiritual  Aaron  of 
the  ''Eoyal  Priesthood."  We  term  this  a  vital 
truth,  and  justly  so,  because  it  is  the  source  of  all 


THE  PRECIOUS  ANOINTING,  203 

spiritual  life  to  the  believer!  We  are  Christian 
in  truth  only  as  we  are  one  with  Christ.  We  are 
living  branches  in  reality  only  as  we  have  union 
with  Jesus  the  Living  Vine.  We  are  an  anointed 
priesthood  only  in  virtue  of  our  sacerdotal  rela- 
tion to  Him,  the  Great  High  Priest  of  His  Church. 
Here  is — union;  and  this  union  is — life.  Now, 
our  blessed  Lord  Jesus  was  anointed  with  the  Holy 
Ghost.  His  human  nature  was  filled  with  the 
Spirit,  and  in  this  consisted  His  divine  anointing, 
and  in  this  anointing  His  consecration  as  the 
Eoyal  Sacerdotal  Head  of  a  succession  of  royal 
priests.  How  clear  and  beautiful  are  the  inspired 
testimonies  to  this  truth !  For  example,  in  the 
Old  Testament  we  read,  "  I  have  found  David  my 
servant ;  with  my  holy  oil  liave  I  anointed  him.'' 
(Ps.  Ixxxix.  20.)  "  Thou  lovest  righteousness,  and 
Latest  wickedness  :  therefore  God,  thy  God,  hath 
anointed  thee  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above 
thy  fellows."  (Ps.  xlv.  7).  "Behold,  0  God,  our 
shield,  and  look  upon  the  face  of  thine  anointed." 
Now,  in  what  did  this  anointing  of  Christ  con- 
sist but  the  fulness  of  the  Holy  Spirit  ?  So  we 
read,  "  God  anointed  Jesus  of  Nazareth  with  the 
Holy.  Ghost"  (Acts  x.  38.)  So  the  indwelling 
fulness  of  the  Spirit;,  "For  God  giveth  not  the 
Spirit  by  measure  unto  him."     His  humanity 


204  THE  PRECIOUS  ANOINTTNa 

was  indebted  for  the  wisdom  with  wliicli  it  spake, 
for  the  understanding  by  "\^hich  it  discerned, 
which  made  Him  of  "  quick  understanding  in  the 
fear  of  the  Lord,"  fpr  the  power  with  which  it 
wrought,  and  for  the  beauty  which,  amidst  its 
humiliation  and  woe,  made  it  so  transcendently 
glorious,  to  the  indwelling  fulness  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  Oh,  what  would  our  humanity  be  were  it 
filled,  as  was  the  Son  of  God's,  with  the  fulness 
of  the  Spirit !  And  if,  in  our  Christian  character, 
we  would  approximate  to  this  model — in  a  word, 
if  we  would  be.  Christ-like — we  must  be  more 
richly  replenished  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  "  Hereby 
we  know  that  He  (Christ)  abideth  in  us,  by  the 
Spirit  which  he  hath  given  us."  (1  John  iii.  24.) 
We  shall  be  assured  of  our  union  to  Christ,  of 
His  home  in  our  hearts,  of  our  relation  to  the 
seed-royal,  the  true  priesthood,  by  the  inhabita- 
tion of  the  Spirit.  0  Divine  and  Holy  Spirit ! 
enter  us,  unworthy  though  we  are  ;  make  Thy 
home  in  our  hearts,  vile  though  they  be  ;  breathe 
life  and  love,  peace  and  joy,  into  our  souls  ; 
quicken  us,  seal  us,  teach  us,  sanctify  us,  and 
make  us  divine,  by  making  us  Christ-like — happy, 
by  making  us  holy, — and  so  fill  and  occupy  us 
with  Thyself  that  there  may  be  no  room  for  the 


THE  PBECIOUS  ANOINTING.  205 

reign  of  sin,  the  power  of  the  world,  and  the  love 
of  self.  Beloved,  you  cannot  besiege  the  throne  of 
grace  for  a  more  needed  and  a  greater  blessing  than 
the  fulness  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Think  not  that 
we  employ  an  expression  too  strong  when  we 
speak  of  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit.  It  is  recorded 
of  Stephen  that  he  was  "fall  of  faith,  and  of  the 
Holy  Ghost"  And  that  this  was  not  a  peculiar 
or  privileged  case,  the  apostle  exhorts  all  believers 
to  be  "filled  loith  the  Spirit.''  Seek,  then,  be- 
loved, for  your  own  soul  this  divine  anointing. 
Be  not  satisfied  with  a  measured  bestowment  of 
the  precious  blessing,  but  in  earnest  and  impor- 
tunate supplication  open  your  mouth  wide,  that 
He  may  fill  it  1  Oh  the  readiness  of  the  Spirit  to 
impart  the  boon !  Oh  the  willingness  of  Christ, 
the  Anointed,  to  satiate' every  longing  soul,  and 
to  replenish  every  hungry  soul  from  His  own  over- 
flowing fulness  !  The  straitness  is  in  us,  not  in 
Jesus.  Seek,  then,  with  a  seeking  that  will  take 
no  denial,  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit ! 

The  holy  oil  was  poured  upon  the  head  of 
Aaron.  This  is  most  significant  •  The  Lord 
Jesus — our  Aaron — was  anointed  v/ith  the  Spirit, 
as  the  Head  of  His  Church.  '  "He  is  the  Head 
of  the  body,  the  Chui-ch."     And  the  fulness  of 


206  THE  PRECIOUS  ANOINTING. 

the  Spirit  that  dwelt  in  Him  was  not  for  Him- 
vself  alone,  but  to  be  comniunicated  to  all  the 
members  of  His  mystical  Body  Trace  the  course 
of  this  holy  oil  thus  poured  upon  the  head  of 
Aaron.  It  "  went  down  to  the  skirts  of  his  gar- 
ment." How  expressive  and  instructive  the  type ! 
In  virtue  of  our  union  with  Christ,  we  become  par- 
takers of  His  precious  anointing.  So  clearly  and 
indissolubly  are  we  one  with  Jesus,  the  Great  High 
Priest,  we  share  in  all  that  He  is,  and  partake  of 
all  that  He  possesses.  He  imparts  to  us  His 
life,  clothes  us  with  His  righteousness,  washes  us 
in  His  blood,  replenishes  us  from  His  fulness,  and 
will  finally  raise  us  to  His  glory,  share  with  us 
His  throne,  and  we  shall  reign  with  Him  for  ever. 
This  anointing  that  flows  from  Christ  is  re- 
ceived by  us  through  faith.  The  life  we  live 
amidst  daily  conflict,  trial,  and  toil,  we  live  by 
the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God.  This  is  the  channel 
through  which  the  sacred  anointing  -flows  down 
to  us.  What  a  iniglity  principle  is  this  !  When, 
at  the  close  of  the  day,  we  throw  our  head  upon 
our  pillow,  and  in  silent  reflection  review  its 
brief  history,  we  often  marvel  ,liow  we  travelled 
througli  it.  We  look  back  upon  the  pressure, 
the  temptation,  the  trial,  the  soirow,  and  we  are 


THE  PEECIOUS  ANOINTING.  207 

a  wonder  to  ourselves.  Wliat  was  it  that  bore 
up  and  brought  us  triumphantly  through  ?  Oh, 
it  was  the  power  of  faith  conveying  into  our  souls 
the  fulness  of  Christ !  It  was  the  downflowing 
of  this  holy  oil  of  grace  and  strength,  of  gladness 
and  joy,  from  our  enthroned  and  glorified  Head 
that  imparted  wisdom  in  the  perplexity,  clearness 
in  the  judgment,  strength  in  the  temptation,  for- 
titude in  endurance,  meekness  in  provocation, 
patience  in  suffering,  and  calmness,  peace,  and 
quietness  amidst  the  keenness  of  sorrow  and  the 
surgings  of  grief.  Faith  leaning  upon,  and 
drawing  from,  Christ,  is  the  secret  of  it  all. 

But  not  merely  in  virtue  of  union  to  Christ,  or 
through  the  medium  of  faith,  are  we  the  reci- 
pients of  this  precious  anointing.  It  flows  from  the 
loving  heart  of  Christ,  and  is  the  free,  spontaneous 
bestowment  of  His  grace.  There  is  not  a  being 
in  the  universe  that  Christ  loves  as  He  loves  the 
saints.  He  is  constantly  ordering,  and  arranging, 
and  disposing  all  events  and  circumstances  for 
the  promotion  of  their  v/ell-being.  He  would 
have  His  joy  remain  in  us,  and  ou?'  joy  to 
be  full.  And  every  feeling  of  holy  gladness 
that  thrills  us,  every  spring  of  sacred  joy  that 
refreshes  us,  every  gleam  of  divine  sunshine  that 


208  THE  PRECIOUS  ANOINTINO. 

falls  upon  our  path,  is  an  emanation  from  the 
Divine  anointing  that  distils  from  Chiist  upon 
our  souls.  Love  is  the  source  of  it  all,  love  is 
the  conveyancer  of  it  all,  love  is  the  end  of  it  all. 
Light  pours  not  more  freely  from  the  sun,  nor 
water  from  the  fountain,  than  does  the  "  oil  of 
gladness"  flow  from  the  heart  of  Jesus  into  the 
hearts  of  His  saints.  See  how  freely  the  precious 
anointing  flows — "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  God 
is  upon  me  ;  because  the  Lord  hath  ajiointed  me 
to  preach  good  tidings  unto  the  meek  ;  He  hath 
sent  me  to  bind  up  the  broken-hearted,  to  pro- 
claim liberty  to  the  captive,  and  the  opening  of 
the  prison  to  them  that  are  bound ;  to  appoint 
unto  them  that  mourn  in  Zion,  to  give  unto  them 
beauty  for  ashes,  the  oil  of  joy  for  mourning,  the 
garment  of  praise  for  the  spirit  of  heaviness." 
0  wonderful  words  !  0  precious  announcements ! 
Come,  my  soul,  and  listen  !  Jesus'^  anointing 
was  not  for  Himself,  but  for  others.  It  was  for 
the  "meek,"  it  was  for  the  " broken-liearted,"  it 
was  for  the  "mourners  in  Zion,"  it  was  for  the 
"  captive,"  it  was  for  "  them  that  are  bound,"  it 
was  for  those  who  are  bowed  down  to  the  dust 
with  the  "  spirit  of  heaviness."  It  was  for  poor, 
empty  sinners — souls  that  hunger  and  thirst  for 


THE  PEECIOUS  AXOINTING.  209 

righteousness — who  feel  their  vileness,  necessity, 
and  nothingness ;  who  come  to  Him  as  empty 
sinners  to  a  full  Saviour.  Who  lowers  a  full 
bucket  into  the  well  ?  Who  carries  a  full  pitcher 
to  the  spring  ?  It  is  emptiness  that  travels  to  ful- 
ness. So  must  you  come  to,  deal  with,  live  upon, 
and  receive  from,,  Jesus.  A  full  Christ  and  an 
empty  sinner  travel  the  same  road,  side  by  side, 
step  by  step,  hand  in  hand,  to  glory.  With  no 
other  will  Christ  walk.  The  proud,  the  self-suffi- 
cient. He  knoweth  afar  off;  and  they  know  Him 
afar  off.  But  the  spiritual  mourner,  the  broken- 
hearted, the  poor  in  spirit,  these  are  they  upon 
whom  Jesus  delights  to  pour  the  oil  of  joy  and 
gladness,  which  causes  their  hearts  to  glow,  their 
faces  to  shine,  their  lips  to  praise.  "  Ointment 
and  perfume  rejoice  the  heart."  One  drop  of 
this  precious  anointing  will  turn  thy  sorrow  into 
joy,  thy  mourning  into  dancing,  thy  complaining 
into   sinoinoj ;    make    the  name,   the  work,  and 

CD         O    5  '  ' 

sympathy  of  Jesus  more  fragrant  and  precious, 
and  cause  the  lamp  of  love  and  holiness  to  burn 
more  freely  and  more  brightly  than  ever.  Such 
are  some  of  the  precious  privileges  and  blessings 
of  a  vital,  inseparable  union  of  a  believing  bia- 
ner  with  the  Lord  Josus. 
o 


210  THE  PRECIOUS  ANOINTING. 

One  instructive  point  yet  remains  to  be  con- 
sideredy  The  precious  ointment  that  was  on  the 
head  of  Aaron  went  down  to  the  skirts  of  his 
garments :  it  reached  to  the  extremity  of  his 
sacred  person.  The  spiritual  significance  of  this 
is  peculiarly  precious  and  encouraging  to  the 
"  poor  in  spirit/' — to  those  whose  self-acquaint- 
ance leads  them  to  walk  humbly  witli  God.  The 
humhle,  believing  soul,  that  lies  the  nearest  and 
the  lowest  at  Christ' s  feet,  receives  the  most  abun- 
dantly of  this  overflowing  and  downflowing  grace. 
There  is  no  spot  in  the  universe  which  concen- 
trates upon  itself  so  much  blessedness — where 
meet  and  cluster,  in  focal  power,  so  many  holy, 
precious  privileges,  as  the  feet  of  Jesus.  There 
we  learn,  there  we  receive,  there  we  shelter.  We 
are  safe,  because  we  are  low — we  are  liajjpy,  be- 
cause we  are  near.  "  He  giveth  grace  to  the  lowly,"' 
and  the  lowliest,  the  most  near,  receive  the  most 
grace.  Is  this  your  place,  0  believer?  Think 
not  meanly  of  it.  There  is  but  one  that  surpasses 
it — it  is  the  foot  of  the  throne  in  glory !  And  no 
soul  will  find  itself  at  the  foot  of  the  throne  in 
heaven,  that  does  not  find  itself  at  tiie  feet  of  the 
Saviour  on  earth.  The  lowliness  of  the  posture 
may  possibly  blind  the  eye  to  its  peculiar  blessed- 


THE  PEECIOUS  ANOINTING.  211 

ness  :  a  bolder  and  more  confident  one  may  be 
considered  preferable.  But  let  us  not  be  deceived  ; 
give  me  Mary's  tears  rather  than  Peter's  boast- 
ing. Let  me  sit  witb  her  at  the  feet  of  Jesus, 
rather  than  stand  with  the  self-confident  apostle 
in  the  judgment-hall.  In  pleading  for  this  lowly 
posture,  we  plead  not  for  a  state  of  mind  that 
excludes  holy  joy,  and  an  assured  hope,  as  ele- 
ments foreign  to  this  condition,  Far  from  it. 
The  anointing  of  Christ — is  it  not  the  "  oil  of 
gladness  ? "  and  does  He  not  give  "  the  oil  of 
joy  V  Most  assuredly.  Then,  the  believing  soul 
that  lies  prostrate  at  His  feet — close  to  the  Foun- 
tain of  all  grace,  sympathy,  and  love — partakes 
the  most  largely  of  the  "joy  of  the  Lord,  which  is 
the  strength  of  their  soul;"  for  "the  meek  shall 
increase  their  joy  in  the  Lord."  There,  too,  hope 
sheds  her  brightest  beams.  For  if  ever  the  "  good 
hope  through  grace"  which  the  gospel  un vails, 
shines  the  most  resplendent  upon  the  soul,  it  is 
when,  reclining  at  Jesus'  feet,  it  clings  in  faith, 
glows  in  love,  and  melts  in  contrition. 

Be  exhorted,  beloved  reader,  not  to  be  content 
without  the  consciousness  of  this  precious  anoint- 
ing. Rest  not  satisfied  with  but  a  "  name  to  live/' 
Do  not  surmise  or  trust  that  you  are  Christ's  di*- 


212  THE  PRECIOUS  ANOINTING. 

ciple,  or  child  of  God,  but  seek  this  inward,  divine 
testimony.  Plead  with  God  the  Holy  Ghost  to 
communicate  to  your  soul  freely  and  daily  of  this 
precious  anointing.  This  holy  oil  will  impart 
clearness  to  your  mind,  so  that  you  shall  have  a 
"right  judgment  in  all  things;''  it  will  impart 
sweetness  to  your  temper,  gentleness  to  your 
spirit,  and  will  give  you  a  lowly,  loving,  self-con- 
demning heart.  It  will  make  more  Christ-like 
your  carriage  towards  others.  Vacating  the  judg- 
ment-seat, and  ceasing  to  be  censorious,  fault- 
finding, and  condemning,  you  will  be  filled  with 
charity  and  love :  the  grace  of  kindness  will  be 
in  your  heart,  and  the  law  of  kindness  on  your  lip. 
This  precious  anointing  is  so  soul-transforming,  so 
Christ-assimilating  in  its  influence,  that  it  is  im- 
possible to  partake  of  it  in  any  degree  and  not  be 
like  Jesus.  When  you  see  a  religious  professor 
2)roud  in  heart — lofty  in  spirit — covetous  in  his 
aims — condemning  others,  justifying  himself — ■ 
detracting,  unsympathising,  harsh, — you  see  one 
lacking  this  anointing.  He  is  not  sitting  at  the 
feet  of  Jesus.  It  is  only  there  that  tlie  believer 
sees  so  much  to  censure,  to  loathe,  and  to  condemn 
in  himself,  tliat  he  has  not  an  eye  to  discover,  nor 
a  tongue  to  revile,  nor  a  hand  to  unvail  the  faults 


THE  PEECIOTJS  ANOINTING.  213 

and  imperfections  of  a  brother.  The  holy  oil 
empties  and  lays  low.  If  in  faithfulness  it  j)rompts 
to  admonish  and  to  rebuke,  it  will  impart  such 
tenderness,  gentleness,  and  kindness  of  spirit,  of 
tone,  and  of  words,  as  shall  be  an  "excellent  oil" 
upon  a  Christian  brother's  head,  winning  him 
back  to  Christ  by  the  irresistible  law  of  love. 
And,  oh,  if  your  soul  thirsts  to  know  more  of 
Jesus,  seek  more  abundantly  the  influence  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  Eest  not  until  He  reveals  Christ  to 
you.  As  a  royal  priest,  anointed  of  God,  you  pos- 
sess tliat  indwelHng  Spirit,  who  is  pledged  to  in- 
struct, sanctif}^,  and  comfort  you,  until  the  Master 
comes  and  takes  you  home.  "  This  anointing 
which  ye  have  received  of  him  abideth  in  you, 
and  ye  need  not  that  any  man  teach  you  :  but 
as  the  same  anointing  teacheth  you  of  all  things, 
and  is  truth,  and  is  no  lie,  and  even  as  it  hath 
taught  you,  ye  shall  abide  in  him."  Living  be- 
neath this  anointing  that  floweth  from  the  Head 
of  His  Church,  down  to  the  lowest,  meanest, 
poorest,  obscurest,  feeblest  member  of  His  body, 
your  heart  will  often  sigh  and  long  for  his  ap- 
pearing, and  will  pray — "Come,  Lord  Jesus; 
eowe  quickly/' 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  CHILDREN. 

"  The  precious  sons  of  Zion,  comparable  to  fine  gold.'* — • 
Lamentations  iv.  2. 

Ix  our  endeavour  to  evade  what  from  conviction 
we  deem  to  be  erroneous,  there  is  often  a  tendency 
to  verge  to  an  opposite  extreme  of  error.  One 
of  the  most  serious  and  popular  eiTors  amongst 
the  many  by  which  the  truth  of  God  is  assailed 
is,  the  exaltation  of  the  Church  above  its  legiti- 
mate and  assigned  j^osition  in  the  Christian  eco- 
nomy. With  nmltitudes  the  Church  is  an  idol, 
virtually  a  saviour.  It  is  elevated  to  a  pinnacle, 
enthroned  as  a  sovereign,  and  invested  with  an 
authority  and  power  which  God  never  designed. 
Awful  perversion  of  truth  !  In  a  word,  the  creed 
and  the  religion  of  numbers  substitutes  the 
Church  for  Christ,  invades  the  legislative  autho- 
rity of  God,  and  imposes  upon  the  conscience  of 
Clirist's  free  disciples  yokes  which  Christ's  gospel 
nowhere  enjoins.     In  avoiding  this  error  we  are, 


THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  CHILDEEN".      215 

Avitliout  due  caution  and  study,  liable  to  run  into 
its  opposite  —  the  setting  aside  tlie  value,  the 
mission,  and  the  glory  of  the  Church  of  Christ 
altogether.  Both  these  extremes  are  antlchris- 
tian  and  fatal.  Let  us  endeavour  to  find  the  truth 
that  lies  midway  between  them  ;  and  thus  v/alk- 
ing  in  the  middle  path,  hold  the  truth  in  an  equal 
balance,  finding  it  instructive,  sanctifying,  and 
comforting.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Stand  ye  in 
the  ways,  and  see,  and  ask  for  the  old  paths, 
where  is  the  good  way,  and  walk  therein,  and  ye 
shall  find  rest  for  your  souls."  (Jer.  vi.  16.) 

,  It  is  the  glory  of  God  that  He  has  in  the  Avorld 
A  CiiUECH — that  it  is  composed  of  His  elect, 
chosen  from  eternity,  redeemed  by  Christ,  and 
called  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  a  people  gathered  out 
of  all  lands,  found  in  all  Christian  communions, 
and  constituting,  as  a  whole,  an  incorporate  body, 
of  which  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Head. 
This  body  may  be,  as  alas  !  it  too  much  is,  divided 
and  sundered  by  difierences  of  judgment  on  ex- 
ternal and  unvital  points,  but  essentially  and  in- 
divisibly  it  is  ONE  Church  of  God — one  Family 
— one  Bride  of  the  Lamb — one  spiritual  house 
— and  "  all  built  upon  the  foundation  of  apostles 
and  prophets,   Jesus    Christ   himself  the  chief 


216      THE  PEECIOIJSNESS  OF  GOD'S  CHILDREN. 

corner-stone/'  of  wliom,  as  such,  we  shall  in  a 
subsequent  chapter  of  this  v/ork  more  j^articularly 
speak.  Our  present  object  is  not  so  much  to 
define  the  nature  or  expound  the  principles  of 
Christ's  one  Church,  as  to  assert  its  existence, 
unfold  and  illustrate  its  worth  and  preciousness. 
There  is  much  sanctifying,  comforting  teaching 
involved  in  this  truth — the  preciousness  of  God's 
children.  It  is  impossible  to  study  it,  and  not 
rise  from  an  admiration  of  the  beauty,  glory,  and 
preciousness  of  the  Church,  to  the  transcendent 
beauty,  glory,  and  preciousness  of  Him  whose 
Church  she  is,  in  whose  righteousness  she  is 
clothed,  and  in  whose  comeliness  she  is  comely. 
"The  precious  sons  of  Zion,  comparable  to  fine 
gold."  Let  us  consider  the  title,  and  the  pre- 
ciousness of  God's  people,  as  suggested  to  our 
minds  by  this  passage. 

It  is  a  high  and  honourable  appellation  "the 
sons  of  Zion."  The  world  holds  the  Church  of 
God  very  cheap.  No  gold,  nor  fine  gold  is  it  in 
the  eye  and  estimation  of  the  nngodly.  And  yet 
the  world  owes  its  existence  to  the  Church.  The 
Church  of  Christ  is,  instrumentally  and  subordi- 
nately,  the  world's  saviour.  It  is  the  conservator  of 
the  world,  its  salt,  its  light.  Take  out  of  the  wf7rld 
all  who  are  witnesses  for  God,  for  Christ,  and  for 


THE  PEECTOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  CHTLDEEN.      217 

tlie  Gospel— all  who  are  living  "godly,  lightconsly, , 
and  soberly  in  this  present  evil  world" — all  who 
mourn  for  sin,  who  trample  on  their  own  right- 
eousness, and  trust  alone  in  the  righteousness  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  ;  in  a  word,  all  the  good  and  holy 
and  useful,  and  what  remains  but  a  mass  of  un- 
mitigated evil — ^a  world  of  unrelieved  corruption 
— an  empire  wholly  in  rebellion  against  God, 
and  in  supreme  subjection  to  Satan? 

Thus,  extract  the  salt,  extinguish  the  light,  sift 
the  wheat,  separate  the  gold,  and  eliminate  the  pure 
truth  from  the  mass  of  error,  and  nothing;  is  left 
but  fuel  for  the  final  and  fearful  conflagration. 
This  is  the  doom  that  awaits  it  when  the  last  son 
of  Zion  sliall  have  shaken  its  dust  from  his  feet, 
and  this  earth  shall  no  longer  be  the  home  and 
dwelling-place  of  the  Church.  Unclasp  the  vine 
that  imparts  beauty  to,  that  climbs  around,  holds 
together  and  preserves  the  decayed  and  crumbling 
trunk,  and  it  falls  to  dust  and  ruin.  Thus  will  it  be 
with  this  world  when  the  Lord  shall  come  and  re- 
move from  it  the  Church  wdiich  has  so  long  been  its 
moral  preservation  and  its  beauty.  But  the  Church 
of  God  is  His  Zion,  whom  He  loves,  His  dwelling- 
place.  "  Jehovah-Shammah '' — The  Lord  is  there 
— is  its  name.  His  Church  is  His  only  home  upon 
earth.    He  dwells  not  in  temples  made  with  hands 


218      THE  PSECIOUSNESS  OF  GOd's  CHILDREN. 

— the  gorgeous  catlicclral,  the  Gothic  abbey,  the 
costly  sanctuary,  the  material  structure,  planned, 
reared,  and  adorned  by  human  device  and  art. 
A  spiritual  being,  He  can  only  dwell  in  the 
spiritual.  "  God  is  a  Spirit/'  and  His  temple, 
His  worship,  and  His  offerings  must  be  spiritual. 
Therefore  has  He  declared  that  His  iit,  favourite, 
and  only  dwelling  upon  earth  is  the  humble  mind, 
the  broken  heart,  the  contrite  sjoirit,  the  empty, 
lowly,  penitent,  and  believing  soul.  Listen  to  His 
solemn  averment  of  this  great  and  holy  truth  : — 
"  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  The  heaven  is  my  throne, 
and  the  earth  is  my  footstool :  where  is  the 
house  that  ye  build  imto  me  ?  and  where  is  the 
place  of  my  rest?  For  all  those  things  hath 
mine  hand  made,  and  all  those  things  have  been, 
saith  the  Lord :  but  to  this  man  will  I  look, 
even  to  him  that  is  poor,  and  of  a  contrite  spirit, 
and  trembleth  at  my  word."  (Isa.  Ixvi.  1,  2.) 
TJiis  is  the  house  we  will  build  to  the  Lord,  and 
this  is  the  place  of  His  rest !  Does  this  page  meet 
the  orlance  of  such  a  one  ?  Blessed  saint !  There 
rears  not  its  proud  head  a  structure  in  the  uni- 
verse so  distinguished  as  you.  Your  soul  is  the 
•habitation  of  Him  who  is  the  "  high  and  lofty  One 
tliat  inhabitcth  eternity,  whose  name  is  Holy,"  who 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  CHILDREIT.      219 

has  said,  "  I  dwell  in  the  liigli  and  lioly  place,  with 
him  also  that  is  of  a  contrite  and  humble  spirit." 
The  Church  of  God,  then,  is  His  Zion.  His 
'people  are  denominated  the  "sons  of  Zion,"  in 
reference  to  the  fact  of  the  Church  being  the 
spiritual  birth-place  of  His  peojDle.  "As  soon  as 
Zion  travailed,  she  brought  forth  her  children." 
(Isa.  Ixvi.  8.)  ''And  of  Zion  it  shall  be  said, 
This  and  that  man  was  born  ■  in  her."  (Ps. 
Ixxxvii.  5.)  The  Church  of  God  is  the  spi- 
ritual birth-place  of  His  people.  Every  true 
child  of  God,  every  convert  to  Christ,  is  a  son 
and  a  denizen  of  this  city.  He  is  born  through 
the  labours  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  he  is  nour- 
ished by  the  instructions  of  the  Church  of  Christ, 
he  is  Avatched  over  and  trained  for  heaven  by  the 
care  and  discipline  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  "  who 
is  the  mother  of  us  all."  And  "the  Lord  shall 
.count,  when  he  writeth  up  the  people,  that  this 
man  was  born  there.''  Oh  precious  privilege  this, 
to  be  registered  among  God's  people,  to  be  "  writ- 
ten amongst  the  living  in  Jerusalem,"  to  be  num- 
bered with  the  children  of  God !  Have  you,  my 
reader,  any  evidence  that  this  is  your  honoured 
place  ?  Does  your  name  stand  upon  the  sacred 
roll  of  those  who  are  "  called  to  be  saints  l'     What 


220      THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  CHILDREN. 

if  it  should  not  appear  wlieii  the  Lord  "  writeth 
lip  the  people  ! "  Search,  examine,  and  ascertain. 
Are  you  amongst  the  "  mourners  in  Zion  ? "  Do 
you  "  love  her  solemn  feasts,"  and  are  you  walking 
in  her  holy  ways,  your  face  fully  set  towards  the 
Mount  Zion  of  glory,  of  which  John  in  the  Apo- 
calypse had  a  vision,  "  And  I  looked,  and,  lo,  a 
Lamb  stood  on  the  mount  Sion,  and  with  Him  an 
hundred  forty  and  four  thousand,  having  His 
Father's  name  written  in  their  foreheads  ?"  If  this 
is  your  present  condition,  the  Zion  of  God  your 
spiritual  home,  and  the  God  of  Zion  your  cove- 
nant God,  then  may  you  clap  your  hands  with 
joy.  "  Glorious  thiugs  are  spoken  of  thee,  0  city 
of  God  f  and  in  these  "  glorious  things"  that 
now  are,  and  that  are  yet  to  be  revealed,  you 
shall  share.  Of  the  preciousnesa.  of  the  Lord's 
people — these  sons  of  Zion — let  us  now  speak. 

The  Holy  Ghost  compares  them  to  "  fine  gold." , 
"  The  precious  sons  of  Zion,  comparable  to  fiue 
gold."  We  have  yet  much  to  learn,  even  the  most 
deeply  instructed,  concerning  the  preciousness  and 
privileges  of  God's  j^eople.  Are  we  not  in  great 
danger  of  takiug  divine  truth  for  granted?  In- 
stead of  siftiuo-  its  evidences,  search ino;  into  its 
blessedness,  and  realising  its  power  and  sweet- 


THE  PEECIOUENESS  OF  GOD's  CHILDEEK      221 

ness  in  our  souls,  we  give  to  it  too  much  of  a 
cold  intellectual  assent.^  We  assume  that  the 
Lord's  people  are  a  privileged  and  precious  people, 
but  we  little  surmise  how  much  blessedness, 
sweetness,  and  holiness  is  bound  up  in  this  truth 
■ — how  much  there  is  of  God  and  of 'Christ  in  it. 
It  is  impossible,  as  we  have  remarked,  to  study 
the  character  and  trace  the  history  of  God's 
Church,  and  not  know  more  of  the  v/isdom,  power, 
and  love  of  God.  It  is'  in  the  salvation  of  this 
Church  that  He  has  embarked  all  His  glory,  and 
has  revealed  Himself  in  a  way  that  will  iill  all 
the  celestial  intelligences,  saints  and  angels, 
with  wonder,  love,  and  praise  through  eternity. 
My  reader,  study  the  history  of  God's  Church, 
for  therein  God  is  revealed  in  a  volume  second 
only  in  its  grandeur,  interest,  and  importance  to 
the  volume  of  His  revealed  Word.  And  now  let 
us  proceed  to  illustrate  and  open  up  the  precious- 
ness  of  the  Lord's  people — "  The  precious  sons 
of  Zion,  comparable  to  hue  gold." 

We  begin  with  the  groundwork  of  the  subject 
— tJie  preciousness  of  God's  people  to  God  Him- 
self. The  proof  He  has  given  of  this  is  His  ever- 
lasting love  towards  them  ;  His  eternal  choice  of 
them  to  salvation  ;  His-  anticipation  of  their  fall 


222   THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  CHILDREN. 

in  the  first  Adam,  and  His  provision  for  their 
recovery  in  the  second  Adam.  Who  can  read 
the  following  declarations,  and  not  rise  to  a  lofty 
conception  of  God's  estimate  of  the  worth  and 
preciousness  of  His  peoj^le  ? — ''  Blessed  be  the  God 
and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  hath 
blessed  us  with  all  spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly 
places  in  Christ :  according  as  he  hath  chosen 
us  in  Him  before  the  foundation  of  the  world, 
that  we  should  be  holy  and  without  blame  before 
Him  in  love :  having  predestinated  us  unto  the 
adoption  of  children  by  Jesus  Christ  to  Himself, 
according  to  the  good  pleasure  of  His  will,  to  the 
j^raise  of  the  glory  of  His  grace,  wherein  He  hath 
made  us  accepted  in  the  Beloved/'  (EjdIi.  i.  3-6.) 
Not  His  election  of  them  only,  which  is  the  spring- 
head of  all  the  subsequent  displays^  of  His  grace 
and  favour,  but  His  provision  for  their  salvation, 
in  the  gift  of  His  beloved  Son,  demonstrates  God's 
estimate  of  their  preciousness.  Ponder  the  decla- 
ration of  this  truth — "  In  this  was  manifested  the 
lov^e  of  God  toward  us,  because  that  God  sent 
His  only  beg-}tten  Son  into  the  world,  that  we 
niiaht  live  through  Him.  Herein  is  love,  not 
that-^v/e  loved  God,  but  that  He  loved  us,  and 
gent  His  Son  to  be  the  propitiation  for  our  siua*" 


THE  PEECIJUSNESS  OF  GOB'S  CHILDEEX.      223 

{1  John  iv.  9,  10.)  Beliold,  beloved,  how  pre- 
cious you  are  to  God !  That  which  God  chooses, 
upon  which  He  sets  His  eternal  mind  and  heart, 
that  which  He  secures  to  Himself  at  a  sacrifice 
so  great  and  costly,  must  be  precious  to  Him. 
Upon  no  beings  has  He  expended  so  much  divine 
perfection,  and  in  none  has  He  made  such  illus- 
trious displays  of  His  glory,  as  His  saints.  All 
His  eternal  decrees  and  purposes — all  His  ever- 
lasting grace  and  love — all  His  marvellous  works 
in  time,  centre  in  this  one  body — His  elect,  re- 
deemed Church,  "  to  the  intent  that  now,  unto 
the  principalities  and  powers  in  heavenly  places, 
might  be  known  hy_  the  church  the  manifold 
wisdom  of  God."  His  adojJtion  of  His  people,  in 
union  with  their  election  and  salvation,  forms 
another  striking  illustration  of  their  preciousness 
to  God's  heart,  and  of  their  beauty  in  His  eye. 
"Having  predestinated  us  unto  the  adoption  of 
children  by  Jesus  Christ  to  Himself."'  "  As  many 
as  received  Him,  to  them  gave  He  power"  (or  pri- 
vilege) "to  become  the  sons  of  God."  (John  i.  12.) 
"Behold,  what  manner  of  love  the^Father  hath 
bestowed  upon  us,  that  we  should  be  called  the 
sons  of  God  !"  (1  John  iii.  1.)  "And  because  ye 
are  sons,  God  hath  sent  forth  the  Spirit  of  His 


224      THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  CHILDEEN. 

Son  into  your  hearts,  crying,  Abba,  Father."  (Gal. 
iv.  Ij.)  What  more  shall  we  say  ?  Can  anything 
add  to  the  proof  of  God's  estimate  of  the  worth 
and  preciousness  of  His  pG0]3le  ?  He  has  loved 
them,  chosen  them,  adopted  them,  saved  them ; 
and  in  each  one  and  all  of  these  successive  de- 
monstrations, He  has  declared  to  the  universe 
liov/  dear  to  His  heart,  and  glorious  to  His  eye, 
are  "  the  precious  sons  of  Zion,  comparable  to  fine 
gold/'  In  this  Zion  of  His  love  and  choice  He 
dwells,  displays  the  tokens  of  His  especial  favour, 
and  shews  forth  His  greatest  glory.  "  For  the 
Lord  hath  chosen  Zion ;  he  hath  desired  it  for 
his  habitation.  This  is  my  rest  for  ever :  here 
will  I  dwell ;  for  I  have  desired  it.  I  will  abun- 
dantly bless  her  provision  :  I  will  satisfy  her  poor 
with  bread.  I  will  also  clothe  her  priests  with 
salvation  ;  and  her  saints  shall  shout  aloud  for 
joy."  (Psalm  cxxxii.  13-lG.)  And  in  the  assur- 
ances He  has  given  in  His  revealed  Word  of  their 
ultimate  and  eternal  glory — the  final,  full,  and 
certain  gathering  together  of  all  His  children  in 
their  "  Father's  house"  above — He  has  put  the 
climax  to  the  evidence  of  their  worth  and  pre- 
ciousness. "  And  they  shall  be  mine,  saith  the 
Lord  of  hosts,  in  that  day  when  I  make  up  my 


TBE  PEEOIOUSKESS  OF  GOD'S  CHILDEEN.      223 

jewels"  (pv,  special  treasure);  "and  I  will  spare 
thein,  as  a  man  spareth  his  own  son  that  servetli 
him."  (Mai.  iii.  17.)  Well  may  God  challenge  His 
people,  and  say,  "  And  now,  0  inhabitants  of 
Jerusalem,  and  men  of  Judah,  judge,  I  pray  you, 
betwixt  me  and  my  vineyard.  What  could  have 
been  done  more  to  my  vineyard,-  that  I  have  not 
done  in  it  ?"  (Isaiah  v.  3,  4.)  When  a  God  of  in- 
finite resources  says  He  could  have  done  no  more, 
oh,  what  a  stupendous,  marvellous,  overwhelming 
demonstration  have  we  of  the  preciousness  of  His 
Church  to  His  heart ! 

Thus  far  have  we  contemplated  the  Church  of 
God  in  its  collective  form.  But  all  that  Zion  is 
to  God  as  a  Church,  it  is  to  Him  in  its  individual 
capacity, — "  The  precious  sons  of  Zion."  Eacli 
son  of' Zion  is  equally  precious  to  Him  as  the 
whole.  It  cost  Him  as  much  love,  as  much  power, 
as  much  grace,  as  much  glory  to  save  one  sinner, 
as  to  save  His  whole  elect  Church.  Who,  then, 
can  decide  how  dear  you  are  to  the  Father  ?  your 
person,  your  love,  your  obedience,  your  service, 
your  offerings,  regarded  as  His  especial  treasure, 
and  as  accepted  in  the  Beloved  ?  Angels  are  not 
so  near  or  so  dear  to  God  as  you.  Their  music 
is    not    so    melodious   as   your    poor,   faltering 


226      THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  CIIILDREK 

praises.  Tlieir  persons  are  not  so  glorious  to  Hiio 
as  yours,  clothed  with  t-he  righteousness  of  Hifc 
Son.  Their  tributes  of  adoration  and  glory  are 
not  so  fragrant  to  Him  as  your  sacrifices  offered 
in  faith  and  love,  all-perfumed  with  the  atoning 
merits  of  Jesus.  He  has  pardoned  ^our  sins — ■ 
has  justified  your  persons — has  provided,  in  Christ, 
for  your  necessities — is  schooling  and  training 
you,  by  the  hallowed  discipline  of  the  covenant), 
for  the  many-mansioned  home  He  has  provided, 
and  Christ  is  preparing  for  you;  and  you  shall 
dwell  in  His  presence,  and  swim  in  His  love,  and 
bask  in  His  glory  through  endless  ages.  Child 
of  GrOd  !  Son  of  Zion  !  is  not  tliis  enough  ? 

Equally  precious  are  the  "  precious  sons  of 
Zion"  to  the  Eternal  Son  of  God.  How  shall  we 
attempt  to  vindicate  and  unfold  the  dove  of  Christ 
to  His  people — the  great  and  costly  proof  of  that 
affection  which  He  has  given  ?  Who  can  fathom 
its  depth,  scale  its  height,  or  measure  its  length 
and  breadth  ?  That  which  is  infinite  is  measure- 
less ;  that  which  is  eternal  is  boundless.  And 
yet,  though  vre  may  not  compass  its  dimensions 
■ — for  it  is  "a  love  that  passeth  knowledge" — we 
may  "  know  the  love  of  Christ."  For  the  aifection 
He  bore  us  He  voluntarily  espoused  our  cause  in 


THE  PEECI0U3NESS  OF  GOD'S  CHILDEEN.      227 

eternity — bound  Himself  in  an  unalterable  cove- 
nant to  accomplisli  bur  redemption,  and,  travail- 
ing in  tlie  greatness  of  His  power  and  love, 
finished  it.  His  love  made  Him  willing  to  become 
incarnate,  to  assume  our  curse,  to  bear  our  sins, 
and  to  suffer  and  die  in  our  stead.  Kising  from, 
the  dead,  He  completed  our  justification ;  and 
ascending  up  on  high,  He  passed  within  the  vail, 
"now  to  appear  in  the  presence  of  God"  as  our 
Advocate  and  Intercessor.  There  is  no  other  ob- 
ject upon  earth  that  engages  the  thoughts  or  fills 
the  heart  of  Jesus  but. His  people.  His  presence, 
invisible  and  noiseless,  yet  real  and  powerful, 
perpetually  surrounds  them.  Where  the  Kingdom 
is,  there  is  the  Sovereign  ;  where  the  Body  is, 
there  is  the  Head  ;  where  the  Church  is,  there  is 
Christ.  *'  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  (literally,  all 
days)  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world."  For  the 
accomplishment  of  the  number  of  His  elect.  He 
preserves  the  world  in  existence — makes  and  un- 
makes empires — putteth  down  one,  and  raiseth 
up  another — is  guiding  the  deliberations  of  cabi- 
nets— is  employing  all  human  agenoies — and  is 
overruling  every  event  and  circumstance  in  the 
history  of  this  vast  universe. 

But  how  precious  to  Him  are  the  sons  of  Zion 


228      THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  CHILDREN". 

ill  tlieii  individual  relation  and  liistory.  Is  there 
one  who  has  ventured  to  appeal  to  His  love — to 
trust  in  His  grace — to  accept  His  salvation,  wlio 
is  not  more  dear  and  precious  than  all  the  angels 
in  heaven  ?  Oh,  how  precious  to  Him  the  tear  of. 
godly  sorrow — the  touch  of  trembling  faith — the 
look  of  lowly  love — the  offering  of  sincere  gra- 
titude— the  yearning  and  longing  of  holy  desire ! 
So  precious  to  Him  are  they,  His  ear  is  attentive 
to  their  faintest  cry — His  thoughts  are  never  with- 
drawn from  them  for  a  moment — His  hand  is  ever 
extended  to  succour,  and  they  that  touch  them 
touch  the  apple  of  His  eye.  So  precious.  He  sits 
at  the  fountain  of  grace  to  supply  all  their  need — • 
He  bows  His  shoulder  to  their  heaviest  burden — ■ 
He  unvails  His  heart  to  their  deepest  sorrow; 
and  in  all  places  where  they  dwTll,  fulfils  in  their 
experience  the  beautiful  prediction  of  the  propliet> 
"  He  shall  feed  His  flock  like  a  shepherd;  He  shall 
gather  the  lambs  with  His  arm,  and  carry  them  in 
His  bosom,  and  shall  gently  lead  those  that  are 
with  young."  0  believer,  live  not  without  a  deep, 
constant  realisation  of  your  ];)reciousness  to  Christ, 
and  of  the  de^jth,  tenderness,  and  constancy  of  the 
love  He  bears  towards  you.  All  your  present  holi-* . 
ness,  happiness,  and  succour,  springs  from  yoiir 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  CHILDREN.      229 

believing  apprehension  of  this  fact,  that  you  are 
precious  to  the  heart  of  Jesus.  Let  your  faith 
grasp  it,  amidst  the  varied  phases  and  changes 
of  your  Christian  course,  and  it  will  be  as  a  sweet 
flowing  stream  gliding  and  sparkling  by  your  side 
all  through  the  sandy  desert,  imparting  swiftness 
to  your  feet  in  travel,  strength  to  your  hand  in 
labour,  nerve  to  your  arm  in  battle, — soothing, 
reviving,  and  refreshment  to  your  spirit  vfhen 
sad,  faint,  and  drooping  by  the  way.  The  Holy 
Spirit,  testifying  to  your  soul  of  the  love  the  Sa- 
viour bears  you,  will  remove  all  that  constraint, 
shyness,  and  following  Him  at  a  distance,  wdiich 
too  much  characterises  the  bearing  of  so  many 
of  His  disciples.  Be  assured  of  your  personal 
interest  in  Christ,  of  your  place  in  His  affections, 
of  your  home  and  sanctuary  in  His  heart,  and  no 
act  of  obedience,  of  love,  or  of  service  on  your  part, 
will  be  too  costty.  Your  love  to  Him  will  be  the  in- 
spiration and  reflection  of  His  love  to  you,  propor- 
tioned in  its  degree  and  intensity  to  tlie  vividness 
with  which  His  is  seen  and  realised.  Nor  for  tliis 
alone  would  we  love  Him.  Apart  from  all  that 
He  has  done,  and  is  doing  now,  Jesus  challenges 
our  admiration  and  affection.  His  personal  worth, 
His  official  work,  His  glory,  and  His  government, 


230      THE  PEECIOUSNESS  (  F  GOD's  CHILDEE^. 

all  demand  our  profoundest  homage.  This  Ha 
receives  from  celestial  beings,  who,  not  having 
sinned,  need  no  repentance,  and  not  having  fallen, 
need  no  Saviour  ;  and  this  He  will  receive,  in  that 
day  when  to  Him  every  knee  shall  bow,  and  every 
tongue  shall  confess ;  how  much  more  is  He  wor- 
thy of  it  from  those  whom  He  has  redeemed  with 
His  most  precious  blood  !  Keader,  has  your  eye 
seen  His  beauty?  has  your  heart  bowed  before 
His  cross?  have  you  fallen  at  his  feet?  and  have 
you  crowned  Him  Lord  and  Sovereign  of  your 
soul  ?  Oh,  what  is  Christ  to  you — despised,  liated, 
and  rejected? — or,  adored,  loved,  and  welcomed? 
Have  you  received  Him,  not  as  a  helper,  but  as  a 
Saviour — not  as  a  model,  but  as  a  Redeemer? 
Is  He  all  in  all  to  you  ?  If  so,  then  doubt  not 
your  preciousness  to  Him.  "  I  love  them  that  love 
me."  If  His  name  is  as  ointment  poured  forth  to 
your  soul,  it  is  an  evidence  that  He  has  set  you  as 
a  seal  upon  His  heart  and  upon  His  arm,  and  will 
wear  you  as  an  ornament  for  ever. 

Not  less  precious  to  the  Holy  Ghost  are  the 
children  of  God.  It  must  be  so,  since  He  has 
renewed,  sanctified,  and  made  them  His  temple. 
The  w^ork  of  the  Spirit  is  as  essential  to  our  sal- 
vation as  the  finished  work  of  Jesu.«.    There  is  im 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  CHILDEEK      281 

many  a  tendency  to  regard  it  as  less  important, 
and  consequently,  with  proportionally  less  rever- 
ence and  interest.  Individuals  who  would  shrink 
from  holding  a  view  of  Christ's  Atonemt^nt  deroga- 
tory to  the  essential  value  and  glory  of  that  work, 
or  calculated  to  neutralise  its  power,  have  yet 
been  found  to  entertain  views  of  the  Godhead  and 
work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  effect  of  which  has 
been  to  vail  the"  glory  of  His  divine  person,  and 
render  nugatory  His  regenerating  and  sanctifying 
operation.  And  yet  it  is  just  as  fatal  an  error  to 
believe  in  the  dogma  of  Baptismal  Kegeneration 
• — the  antagonistic  error  to  the  work  of  the  Spirit 
— as  to  believe  in  the  dogma  of  the  Mass — the 
antagonistic  error  of  Christ's  sacrifice.  So  essen- 
tial, then,  is  the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  the  heart 
of  the  regenerate,  so  divine,  holy,  and  efficacious 
is  it,  that  all  in  whom  it  is  wrought,  however 
feeble  and  obscure  it  may  be,  are  to  Him  "  the 
precious  sons  of  Zion."  So  glorious  and  so  pre- 
cious to  Him  is  the  new  creation  of  the  soul,  the 
universe  has  no  beauty,  no  grandeur,  no  subli- 
mity in  His  eye  in  comparison  of  it.  Dwelling 
in  the  soul,  He  guards  with  a  sleepless  eye  that  new 
cieation  which  His  own  Divine  power  and  skill 
has  wrought,  and  which  no  inward  corruption  oy 


232      THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOL'S  CHILDREIT. 

outward  assault  shall  ever  destroy.  Precious  to 
Him  is  every  spiritual  desire,  every  heaven-sent 
thought,  every  holy  aspiration,  every  feeble,  lan- 
guid, yet  sincere  hunger  and  thirst  of  the  quick- 
ened soul  after  righteousness.  All  your  grateful 
remembrances  of  God,  all  your  loving  thoughts' 
of  Jesus,  all  your  breathings  after  Him,  all  your 
pantings  for  deejoer  sanctification,  your  daily  and 
sore  conflicts  with  sinful  desires,  and  wandering- 
thoughts,  and  vain  imaginations  ;  your  infirmities 
in  prayer,  your  derelictions  in  duty,  your  failures 
in  service,  your  falterings  in  obedience — all,  all 
are  cognisant  to  His  unslumbering  eye.  And 
but  for  His  inbeino-  His  ceaseless  vio^ilance 
and  divine  power,  this  flood  of  CAdl,  this  whirl- 
wind of  passion,  would  upheave  the  foundations 
"and  carry  away  the  edifice  of  your  faith  and  hope. 
But  the  Holy  Ghost  is  enshrined  in  every  believer, 
and  He  guards  this  blood-ransomed,  grace-won, 
and  heaven-kept  soul  night  and  day,  lest  any  being 
.or  anything  hurt  it.  Oh  that  our  hearts  may  bow 
in  profounder  adoration  before  this  Divine  Spirit, 
and  ascend  on  the  v»dng  of  more  ardent,  glowing, 
praiseful  love  to  Him — listening  to  His  voice 
more  attentively,  grieving  His  heart  less  fre- 
quently, and  obeying  His  promptings  more  im- 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OP  GOD'S  CHILDEEN.      283 

plicitly,  who  has  wrought  so  great,  so  holy,  so 
indestructible  a  work  in  our  souls  ! 

"  The  precious  sons  of  Zion,  comparable  to  fine 
gold."  By  this  figure  the  Holy  Ghost  seeks  to 
illustrate  the  relative  preciousness  of  the  Lord's 
people.  Their  clothing  is  costly,  it  is  of  "  wrought 
gold,"  even  the  righteousness  of  God  by  faith  in 
Christ  Jesus.  Their  ornaments  are  costly,  "  com- 
parable to  fine  gold,"  even  the  graces  of  the 
Sj^irit — "love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  gentle- 
ness, goodness,  faith,  meekness,  temperance" — 
awakening  the  admiration  of  those  who  have  a 
spiritual  discernment  of  their  beauty :  "Thy  cheeks 
are  comely  with  rows  of  jev/els,  thy  neck  with 
chains  of  gold."  (Song  Sol.  i.  10.)  This  commen- 
dation of  the  Church,  which  is  the  commenda- 
tion of  all  the  Lord's  people,  is  all  the  more 
precious,  since  it  follows  her  own  humiliating 
confession  of  unworthiness — "I  am  black."  When 
the  believer  is  low  in  his-  own  eyes,  he  is  exalted 
in  Christ's.  We  are  never  more  lovely  in  His 
view  than  when  we  appear  the  most  uncomely  in 
our  own.  These  words  of  her  Lord  teach  that 
though  His  people  have  many  infirmities,  yet 
there  is  exceeding  great  loveliness  to  be  seen  in 
them — they  are  "  comparable  to  fine  gold."    There 


2M      THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  CHILDEEN. 

is,  too,  a  plurality  of  ornament  in  the  believer— 
not  one  jewel,  but  "jewels;"  not  one  cliain,  but 
"  chains  of  gold."  The  graces  of  the  Spirit  are 
not  solitary  and  isolated,  they  are  always  con- 
joined and  blended  v/ith  others.  The  grace  of 
imputed  justification  is  a  cognate  grace  of  int- 
parted  sanctifi cation,  never  separated  in  the  be- 
lieving soul.  He  who  has  one  grace  has  all 
liTaces.  How  minutely  does  God  describe  the 
beauty  with  Vvhich  He  adorned  the  soul  in  con- 
version, and  this  is  the  distinguished  condition 
of  every  true  believer  in  the  Lord  Jesus — "I 
decked  thee  also  with  ornaments,  and  I  put 
bracelets  upon  thy  hands,  and  a  chain  on  thy 
neck.  And  I  put  a  jewel  on  thy  forehead,  and 
earrings  in  thine  ears,  and  a  beautiful  crown 
upon  thine  head.  Thus  wast  thou  decked  with 
gold  and  silver."  (Ezek.  xvi.  11-13.)  Let  us 
select  one  or  two  of  these  spiritual  ornaments,  as 
illustrating  the  preciousness  of  the  believer  to 
Christ. 

How  precious  to  Him  is  your  love.  Sincere 
love  is  precious,  even  as  a  human  affection,  find 
it  in  what  heart  you  may.  What  must  be  His 
estimate  of  divine  love  in  the  human  heart  whose 
essence  is  '  love  V    Oh,  with  what  ineffable  delight 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  CHILDEEN.      235 

He  gazes  down  upon  a  soul  pulsating  with  a 
holy,  divine  affection  towards  Himself  !  Can  you, 
beloved  reader,  say,  "  Lord,  though  I  am  the  chief 
of  sinners,  the  meanest  of  Thy  saints,  unworthy 
to  loose  the  shoe-latchets  of  Thy  disciples,  a  poor 
backslider,  a  slow  traveller,  a  dull  learner,  a  rebel- 
lious child,  yet  Thou  knowest  that  I  love  Thee, 
that  Thou  art  the  sovereign  of  my  affections,  the 
beloved  of  my  heart ;  that  I  am  in  covenant  with 
Thee,  Thy  child.  Thy  servant,  one  of  Thy  precious 
sons  of  Zion,  comparable  to  fine  gold?" — then, 
beloved,  your  affection  is  inconceivably  precious 
to  the  Lord. 

How  precious  to  Him  is  the  obedience  of  His 
people.  The  loving,  prompt  obedience  of  a  cliild 
• — how  grateful  to  a  parent's  heart  1  There  is  not 
an  evidence  of  the  sincerity  of  filial  love  more 
true  or  j)recious.  The  loving  child  is  the  obe- 
dient child ;  he  oheys  because  he  loves.  Such  is 
the  test  of  love  our  adorable  Lord — "  the  ever- 
lasting Father "  of  His  people — has  demanded. 
"  If  ye  love  me,  keep  my  commandments."  The 
Lord  delights  in  the  obedience  of  His  people.  He 
lo's  OS  it  above  any  other  evidence  of  love.  "  To 
obey  is  better  than  sacrifice," — the  most  rare  and 
costly  you  can  lay  upon  God's  altar.     One  holy 


236   THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD  S  CHILDEEN. 

precej^t  observed,  one  divine  law  obeyed,  ou8 
lowly  cross  taken  up,  one  cherished  sin  laid  down 
for  Christ's  sake,  has  more  of  fragrance  and 
acceptance  in  it  to  Jehovah  than  the  most  glow- 
ing, blinded  zeal  that  ever  bore  a  martyr  to  the 
stake.  Beloved,  in  this  spirit  of  filial  love,  search 
and  study  the  commands  af  Christ,  the  laws  and 
institutions  of  His  kingdom,  the  precepts  and 
examples  of  His  gospel.  Tamper  not  with  con- 
victions, do  no  violence  to  conscience,  resist  not 
the  teaching  and  promptings  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
If,  on  a  careful  research  into  God's  Word,  and  a 
faithful  examination  of  your  own  walk,  you  dis- 
cover a  command  unobeyed,  a  precept  unobserved, 
a  self-denying  cross  from  which,  checked  by  the 
fear  of  man,  you  have  shrunk,  bev\^are  of  a  per- 
sistent course  of  disobedience  !  Oh,  by  all  the  love 
you  profess  to  the  Saviour,  walk  in  obedience  to 
His  commands  !  They  are  not  grievous,  but 
pleasant ;  they  are  not  arbitrary,  but  loving  ;  they 
are  not  optional,  but  binding.  Essential  they 
may  not  be  to  salvation ;  essential  they  are  to  a 
holy  and  happy  walk.  We  have  already  cited 
obedience  to  Christ  as  the  test  of  love.  Our 
Lord,  on  the  same  principle,  has  made  conformity 
to  His  precepts  an  evidence  of  Christian  disciple- 


THE  PEEC:OUSIJESS  OF  GOD'S  CHILDEEN.      237 

sMp.  "Whoever  doth  not  bear  his  cross,  and 
come  after  me,  cannot  be  my  disciple."  And, 
as  if  to  win  our  reluctant  hearts  to  obedience, 
in  another  2olace  He  emphatically  says — "Take 
my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me ;  for  I  am 
meek  and  lowly  in  heart :  and  ye  shafi.  find  rest 
unto  your  souls.  For  my  yoke  is  easy,  and  my 
hm^den  is  light!'  Soon  you  will  have  done  with 
the  judgment  of  this  poor  world.  With  your 
head  pressed  upon  a  dying  pillow,  and  with  eter- 
nity slowly  rising  upon  your  view,  human  opinion 
will  weigh  but  little  with  you  then.  Oh  to  meet 
the  Saviour  as  a  loving  disciple,  as  an  obedient 
child,  bearing  the  "marks  of  the  dying  of  the 
Lord  Jesus,"  the  scars  and  chafings  of  the  rude 
and  heavy,  yet  blessed  cross,  borne  for  Him !  It 
will  then  ho,  of  little  moment  whether  you  ruled 
an  empire,  or  swept  a  crossing ;  wore  a  mitre,  or 
served  the  Saviour  in  the  m'ost  obscure  and  lowly 
sphere  of  His  Church.  Found  in  Christ,  standing 
"  complete  in  all  the  will  of  God,"  you  will  hear 
the  plaudit  and  receive  the  welcome  of  your  Lord 
and  !RLister — "  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  ser- 
vant :  thou  hast  been  faithful  over  a  few  tilings, 
I  will  make  thee  ruler  over  many  things :  enter 
thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord." 


238      THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  CHILDREN. 

At   belonoino'  to  the  blessed  number  of  the 

o      o 

sons  cf  God,  remember  that  filial  and  cheerful 
acquiescence  with  His  parental  will  is  a  distinc- 
tive feature.  The  j)^ecious  sons  of  Zion  are 
known  by  their  submission  to  God.  It  is  for  this 
that  they  m^e  chastened  and  disciplined,  tried  and 
purified  ;  that,  comparable  to  fine  gold,  they  may 
emerge  irom  the  furnace  a  pure  and  holy  reflec- 
tion of  the  Divine  imao'e.  This  is  the  eTcat  secret 
of  repose  amidst  restlessness,  calmness  amidst 
agitation,  confidence  amidst  dark  providences, — 
the  will  brought  into  complete  subjection  to  the 
Divine  will, — the  heart  beating  in  unison  with 
Christ's  heart.  The  moment  you  are  led  to  see 
that  all  is  riyht,  that  God  has  done  it,  and  that 
it  must  be  w^ll  done,  you  are  happy.  /  There  is 
no  happiness — not  a  moment's — in  opposing  God. 
Fretting  against  His  dispensations,  murmuring 
at  His  disposals,  fighting  against  His  dealings, 
resisting  His  providences,  tossed  amidst  the 
waves  of  second  causes,  is  just  the  uplifting  of 
the  flood-gates  of  all  distress  into  the  soul.  But 
to  lie  down  at  His  feet,  as  the  wheat  His  hand 
lias  sifted, — to  repose  in  His  heart,  as  the  child 
Kis  rod  has  smitten, — to  drink  the  cup  His  love 
has  mingled,  exclaiming,  "Not  my  will,  0  my 


THE  PEECIOTJSNESS  OP  GOD's  CHILDREN.      239 

Father,  but  thine  be  done!" — this  is  happiness 
indeed  !  Ye  tried,  afflicted  sons  of  Zion,  not  less 
precious  to  the  heart  of  Jeeus  are  you  because  you 
are  chastened.  You  have  argued  against  your- 
selves, and  have  impleaded  against  God  from  the 
afflictive .  dispensations  of  His  providence.  You 
have  deemed  yourselves  cast  out  of  His  heart, 
and  out  of  His  mind,  and  out  of  His  sight, — "  re- 
probate silver,"  and  not  "  fine  gold," — because  He 
has  cast  you  into  the  "  furnace  that  is  in  Zion." 
Listen  to  the  language  of  one  who  thus  reasoned, 
but  soon  discovered  how  false  that  reasoning  was 
— "  I  said  in  my  haste,  I  am  cut  off  from  before 
?Lhine  eyes  :  nevertheless  Thou  heardest  the  voice 
of  my  supplications  when  I  cried  unto  Thee."' 
(Ps.  xxxi.  22.)  Be  not  hasty  in  the  conclusion 
you  draw  from  God's  dealings  with  you.  Wait 
patiently  until  He  unvails  the  purpose,  and 
clearly  shev/s  you  the  end  of  the  Lord,  "Be 
of  good  courage,  and  He  shall  strengthen  your 
heart,  all  ye  that  hope  in  the  Lord."  Oh  the 
blessedness,  the  quietness,  the  perfect  peace  of  a 
cheerful  acquiescence  in  the  will  of  God  !  To 
have  a  blended  will,  a  united  heart,  a  submissive 
spirit  with  Him  in  His  government  of  you,  i^ 
to  be  like  God.     There  is  nothing  more  divinely 


240      THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  CHILDREN. 

assimilating  and  Christ-like.  To  be  like  Christ  in 
Gethsemane  is  to  be  like  Christ  in  the  glory  of 
His  throne.  To  drink  the  cup  in  His  spirit  of 
profound  submission,  is  to  reign  with  Him  for 
ever  and  ever.  The-  Lord  pardon  where  we  have 
cherished  the  least  rebellion  against  His  dealings, 
— when  we  have  refused  to  drink  the  cup, — when 
we  have  thought  Him  hard,  and  harsh,  and  arbi- 
trary,— when  we  have,  in  our  ignorance,  supposed 
we  could  have  devised,  and  planned,  and  arranged 
with  more  skill  and  wisdom,  and  with  a  happier 
result  than  He !  May  the  intercession  of  Jesus  on 
our  behalf  avert  the  correction  which  our  mur- 
muring, repining,  and  rebelKon  have  evoked] 
'J\Iay  the  sprinkled  blood  blend  every  though^ 
and  feeling,  and  desire  witli  Jesus ! 

"  I  did  Thee  wrong,  my  God, 

I  wrong'd  Thy  truth  and  love; 
I  fretted  at  the  rod, — 

Against  Thy  power  I  strove. 

**  Come  nearer,  nearer  still ; 
Let  not  Tliy  light  depart; 
Bend,  break  this  stubborn  will; 
Dissolve  this  iron  heart  I 

**  Less  wayward  Kt  me  be, 
More  pliable  and  mild ; 
In  glad  simplicity  « 

More  like  a  trustful  child 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  CHILDREN      24il 

"  Less,  less  of  self  each  day, 

And  more,  my  God,  of  Thee  5 
Oh,  keep  me  in  the  way, 
However  rough  it  be. 

**  Less  of  the  flesh  each  day. 
Less  of  the  world  and  sinj 
More  of  Thy  Son,  I  pray, 
More  of  Thyself  within. 

"  Here  moulded  to  Thy  will. 
Lord,  let  Thy  servant  be ; 
Higher,  and  higher  still. 

More,  and  still  more  like  Thee  !  " 

It  would  be  an  imperfect  close  of  this  chapter 
were  the  ■  spiritual  reader  not  reminded  of  the 
animating  truth,  that  among  the  "glorious  things" 
that  are  "  spoken  of  Zion,  the  city  of  our  God,"  is 
the  future  glory  that  awaits  all  her  ''precious 
sons.''  The  latter-day  glory  of  the  Church,  the 
new  Jerusalem  of  the  saints,  the  return  of  all  the  ■ 
scattered  children  of  Zion  in  triumph  and  joy  to 
their  final  and  eternal  home  in  the  new  earth  all 
radiant  with  righteousness,  with  a  new  heaven  \ 
smihng  from  above,  presents  the  most  animating  1 
and  sanctifying  prospects  that  ever  unvailed  to 
mortal  eye.  .The  coming  of  the  Loed  Jesus  in 
personal  majesty  and  official  glory  to  make  up  His 
jewels,  to  perfect  the  number  of  His  elect,  to 
gather  together  in  one  the  scattered  sons  and 
Q 


242      THE  PEECIOUSXESS  OF  COD's  CHILDREN'. 

daughters  of  Zion,  and  to  present  them  in  tlieir 
essential  and  visible  unity,  "  a  glorious  Church/* 
to  the  Father,  as  His  Bride,  is  the  one  all-revealed, 
all-consoling,  all-inspiring,  all-sanctifying  hope  of 
the  saints.  "  Looking  for  that  blessed  hope,  and 
the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God  and  our 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  "  Christ  was  once  offered 
to  bear  the  sins  of  many,  and  unto  them  that 
look  for  Him  shall  He  appear  the  second  time 
v/ithout  a  sin-offering  unto  salvation."  With  a 
hope  before  you  so  blessed  and  assured,  what  a 
motive  to  believers — what  an  incentive  to  devoted- 
ness — what  a  reason  for  watchfulness — what  a 
bond  of  unity !  What  manner  of  persons  ought 
we  to  be  in  all  holy  conversation  and  godliness ! 
What  separation  from  the  world — what  crucifixion 
of  sin — what  unreserved  consecration  to  Christ — 
what  wakeful  vigilance — what  j^atience  in  suffer- 
ing— what  'meekness  in  persecution — what  com- 
munion with  the  Invisible — what  vivid  realisa- 
tion of  eternal  realities,  should  trace  and  track 
our  every  step  towards  the  full  consummation  of 
our  bliss  I  The  Lord  is  at  hand  !  Christ  is 
coming !  The  Bridegroom  is  putting  on  His 
royal  robes  !  The  Bride  is  longing  for  His  com- 
ing!     All  things  indicate  the  nearness  of  His 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  CHILDEEN.   243 

approacli!  The  snow-clad  mountains  of  this 
wintry,  dreary  world  are  already  edged  with  the 
golden  streaks  of  the  up-rising  Sun.  Soon  will 
that  Sun  appear  in  its  full,  its  meridian  splen- 
dour. "Let  me  go,  for  the  day  breaketh!"  Sin 
— enchain  me  no  longer !  world — attract  me  no 
more  I  creatures — leave  your  shrine,  and  loosen 
your  hold  upon  my  affections !  sorrow,  suffer- 
ing, trial — your  hours  are  numbered !  •  My  Re- 
deemer is  coming !  My  Beloved  is  hastening  ! 
My  Lord  will  soon  appear,  and  receive  me  to 
Himself  !  "  Let  me  go,  for  the  day  breaketh  ! " 
*'  In  a  little  while  He  that  shall  come  will  come," 
for  "  the  night  is  far  spent,  the  day  is  at  hand." 
Then  will  the  magnificent  vision  of  the  Apoca- 
lypse be  realised,  "  I  John  saw  the  holy  city,  new 
Jerusalem,  coming  down  from  God  out  of  heaven, 
prepared  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her  husband. 
And  I  heard  a  great  voice  out  of  heaven  sajdng, 
Behold,  the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men,  and 
He  will  dwell  with  them,  and  they  shall  be  His 
people,  and  God  himself  shall  be  with  them,  and  be 
their  God.  And  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears 
from  their  eyes ;  and  there  shall  be  no  more 
death,  neither  sorrow,  nor  crying,  neither  shall 
there  be  any  more  pain :  for  the  former  tliinga 


244      THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  CHILDEEN. 

are  passed  away."  Sons  and  daughters  of  Zion! 
on,  then,  and  still  on,  praying,  fighting,  toiling, 
suffering,  enduring,  hoping,  for  "  the  morning 
Cometh."  Then,  "  the  ransomed  of  the  Lord  shall 
return,  and  come  to  Zion  with  songs  and  everlast- 
ing joy  upon  their  heads  :  they  shall  obtain  joy 
and  gladness ;  and  sorrow  and  sighing  shall  flee 
away." 

*'  Saviour  !  if  of  Zion's  city 

I  througli  grace  a  member  am, 
Let  tlie  world  deride  or  pity, 
I  will  glory  in  Thy  name. 

*  Fading  is  the  worldling's  pleasure, 
All  his  boasted  pomp  and  show  I 
Solid  joys  and  lasting  treasure, 
Ko&«  but  21ion'8  children  knotr." 


CHAPTEE  IX. 

THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  TVOED. 

"  Tlie  word  of  the  Lord  was  precious  in  those  dajs." — 
1  Sam.  iii.  1. 

Amongst  the  precious  things  of  God  the  saints  of 
the  Most  High  will  ever  regard  as  transcendently 
precious  His  revealed  Word.  But  for  this  reve- 
lation Yfe  had  known  nothing  of  those  precious 
things  upon  which  this  volume  is  designed  to 
eno^ao'e  the  reader's  thouohts.  The  works  of 
creation,  varied  and  rich  in  their  forms  of  beauty, 
while  the/  testify  to  "  His  power  and  Godhead/' 
— thus  leaving  man  inexcusable  for  his  atheism, 
— ^nowhere  supply  an  answer  to  the  momentous 
question,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?"  They 
bear  a  palpable  and  solemn  witness  to  man's 
apostasy,  but  they  testify  nothing  to  his  recovery. 
They  tell  of  a  fallen,  but  not  of  a  restored  hu- 
manity. They  speak  not  of  a  Saviour — of  a  sal- 
vation— of  hope: — of  heaven.  I  may  wander  in 
sad  and  pensive  thought  upon  the  sumiy  banks  of 


246       THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  WOED 

its  flowing  rivers,  I  may  tread  its  carpeted  vales, 
or  climb  its  cloud-capped  mountains,  revelling 
amidst  its  beauty,  its  grandeur,  and  sublimity, 
and  yet  find  no  repose  for  this  restless  mind,  no 
peace  for  this  troubled  heart,  no  hope  for  this 
sinful  and  lost  soul.  Not  a  flower  below,  not  a 
star  above,  tells  me  of — Jesus,  a  Saviour  !  I  turn 
to  the  "  GLOEious  GOSPEL  of  the  blessed  God," 
and  my  case  as  a  ruined,  self-destroyed,  con- 
demned sinner,  is  met  by  that  single,  but  com- 
prehensive and  sublime  announcement — "  This  is 
a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation, 
that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save 
sinners."  Beloved  reader,  the  kingdom  of  nature, 
replete  as  it  is  with  the  wisdom,  power,  and  be- 
nevolence of  Jehovah, — every  spire  of  grass,  every 
lowly  flower,  every  towering  mountain,  every 
glimmering  star,  rebuking  the  "fool's"  denial 
of  a  God, — can  never  disclose  how  you  may  be 
pardoned,  justified,  and  saved.  No  solution  can  it 
supply  to  the  great  moral  pro1;lem  of  the  uni- 
verse— how  God  can  be  just,  and  yet  the  justifier 
of  the  ungodly.  The  "  gospel  of  the  grace  of 
God,"  which  these  pages  propose  to  unfold, 
meets  to  the  utmost  your  case  as  a  sinner,  bring- 
ing life  and  immortality  to  light',  and  thus  re- 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  WOED.         247 

vealing  to  you  a  hope,  resplendent  and  eter- 
nal, beyond  the  gloom  and  corruption  of  the 
grave. 

In  the  prosecution  of  our  subject,  let  it  be 
premised  that  there  are  points  which  it  "is  not  our 
province  to  discuss.  The  reasonableness  of  a  re- 
velation from  God, — the  necessity  of  a  revelation, 
— the  fact  that  such  a  revelation  is  given  to  us  in 
the  Bible,  are  questions  we  must  assume  as  estab- 
lished. It  is  rather  to  the  worth  and  precious- 
ness  of  God's  Word,  than  to  any  line  of  argument 
in  proof  of  its  divinity,  that  we  must  bend  our 
thoughts.  And  yet,  let  it  not  be  supposed  that 
we  slight  or  undervalue  evidence  as  substantiating 
the  truth  of  the  Bible.  Everything  that  is  solemn 
and  precious  to  us  as  believers  is  bound  up  in  the 
fact,  that  the  Book  upon  which  we  ground  our 
hope  of  the  future  is,  what  it  declares  itself  to 
be,  the  Word  of  the  Loed.  The  moment  our 
faith  in  the  divinity  of  the  Holy  Scri23tures  is 
shaken,  everything  else  trembles  with  it.  Life,  in 
alkits  moral  relations,  wears  another  and  a  totally 
different  aspect.  Its  foliage  is  withered,  its  flowers 
are  blighted,  its  springs  are  embittered,  and  the 
entire  landscape  of  the  present  and  the  future  is 
enshrouded  in  gloom  and  despair.     No  marvel, 


248         THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  WORD. 

tlien,  that  error  should  ])lant  its  strong  and  stern 
battery  in  front  of  tliis  the  most  precious  doc- 
trine of  our  faith — the  Divine  inspiration  of 
the  Scriptures.  How  truly  has  the  apostle  de- 
scribed the  unbelieving  mind — "  The  god  of  thi§ 
world  hath  blinded  the  minds  of  them  which 
believe  not,  lest  the  light  of  the  glorious  gospel 
of  Christ,  who  is  the  image  of  God,  should  shine- 
unto  them."  We  hold  it,  then,  of  infinite  mo- 
ment that  our  faith  in  the  divinity  of  the  Bible, 
in  the  plenary  inspiration  of  the  Scriptures, 
should  grow  stronger  and  stronger;  and  that 
whatever  tends  to  instruct  and  confirm  us  in  this 
doctrine  of  our  faith, — be  it  a  fact  in  history,  a 
discovery  in  science,  or  a  page  in  the  volume  of 
our  personal  history, — should  be  welcomed  by  us 
with  eagerness,  and  be  acknowledged  with  devout 
thanksgiving  and  praise.  The  Lord  keep  you, 
my  reader,  from  the  low  views  of  divine  inspira- 
tion prevalent  in  this  day  1  If  this  foundation  be 
destroyed,  or  even  apparently  shaken,  what  else 
has  your  immortal  soul  to  build  upon  but  quick- 
sand, every  step,  passing  to  eternity,  over  which 
sinks  your  soul  deeper  and  deeper  in  doubt, 
darkness,  and  despair? 

As  the   Word  of  the  Lord,  then,  it  is  most 
precious.      It  could    possess  no  real  intrinsic 


THE  PRECIOUSNES^  OP  GOD's  WORD.         249 

worth  apart  from  this  fact.  The  Bible  claims  to 
be  nothing  less  than  the  Woed  of  God.  "  All 
scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  from  God,"  and 
"  holy  men  of  God  spake  as  they  were  moved  by 
the  Holy  Ghost."  We  part  the  lids  of  this  sacred 
volume,  and  we  listen  to  God's  voice, — sometimes 
in  terrific  thunder,  at  others  in  entrancing  music ; 
now  in  sublime  majesty,  then  gentle  as  an  in- 
fant's whisper,— in  mercy  and  in  judgment  God's 
Word  speaketh.  That  infidelity  should  wish  to 
disbelieve  and  stifle  this  divine  voice  speaking 
from  the  Bible,  is  no  marvel,  since,  if  the  Bible 
be  true,  infidels  have  no  hopa  An  illustration 
of  this  may  be  cited.  The  late  William  Wilber- 
force,  when  passing  through  a  town  in  which  a 
noted  infidel  was  imprisoned  for  blasphemy, 
called  to  see  him.  He  endeavoured  to  engage  the 
unhap23y  sceptic  in  a  conversation  upon  the 
Scriptures,  but  he  declined,  saying,  that  he  had 
made  up  his  mind,  and  did  not  wish  his  conclu- 
sions disturbed.  Pointing  to  the  Bible  in  the 
hands  of  his  visitor,  he  remarked,  in  a  manner 
which  betrayed  deep  malignity  of  heart,  blended 
with  mental  despair,  "  How,  sir,  do  you  suppose 
that  I  can  like  that  Book,  since,  if  it  be  true,  I 
am  undone  for  ever?"  "  No,"  replied  the  illus- 
trious philanthropist  and  Christian,  "  this  is  not 


250        THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  WORD. 

a  necessary  consequence,  and  need  not  be.  This 
Book  excludes  none  from  hope  who  will  seek 
salvation  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  died  for 
us,  that  whetiier  we  wake  or  sleep  we  may  live 
together  with  Him."  Thus  infidelity  rejects  the 
Bible  for  fear  it  is  true  !  We  recur  to  the 
thought  that  God's  Word  is  precious  because  it 
is  truly  and  emphatically  His  Word, — the  Word 
of  Jehovah.  And  when  the  believer  opens  the 
Bible,  it  is  with  the  profound  and  solemn  convic- 
tion that  he  is  about  to  listen  to  the  voice  of  God ! 
But  not  only  is  the  Word  of  God  precious  as  a 
revelation  of  His  being  and  perfections,  but  to  the 
child  of  God  it  is  peculiarly  so  as  revealing  th-t* 
mind  and  will  of  God.  What  the  thoughts  and 
purposes  of  God  were  could  be  but  dimly  gathered 
from  the  external  works  and  operations  of  nature. 
If  these  divine  thoughts  were  ever  made  known 
to  man,  GoD  himself  niust  reveal  them.  "  Canst 
thou  by  searching  find  out  God  ?  canst  thou  find 
out  the  Almighty  unto  perfection  V  We  cannot 
fully  fathom  even  the  finite  mind;  how  muchlesR 
the  Infinite  !  If  at  all  acquainted  with  the  science 
of  physiognomy,  we  may  trace  some  faint  glimmer 
in  the  human  countenance  of  the  mental  emo- 
tions, but  thi>  is  all  the  index  we  have  of  the 


THE  PEECIOtJSNESS  OF  GOD  S  WOED.         251 

hidden  thoughts  and  feelings  of  the  soul.  Now, 
by  a  similar  pi'ocess,  we  may  learn  something  of 
God.  The  face  of  nature — the  natural  counte- 
nance of  God — is  replete  with  his  power,  wisdom, 
and  beauty.  There  is  enough  of  His  Godhead  to 
confound  and  silence  thedeepest  and  loudest  athe- 
ism of  man.  But  nature  can  go  no  further.  It  leads 
me  to  the  vestibule,  but  cannot  conduct  me  into 
the  glory  within.     It  tells  me  there  is  a  God,  but  it 

reveals  not  His  nature  and  character  as  a  Father 

w 
and  a  sin-forgiving  G od.    But  where  nature  leaves 

me,  revelation  comes  to  my  aid.  Hence  the  high 
estimate  in  which  God  is  represented  as  regard- 
ing His  own  Word,  "  Thou  hast  magnified  Thy 
Word  above  all  Thy  name."  That  is,  God  has 
magnified  His.  Word  above  every  other  manifes- 
tation of  His  name, — there  being  no  such  reve- 
lation and  illustration  of  the  Deity  as  is  found 
in  His  revealed  Word.  Do  the  heavens  and  the 
earth  declare  the  glory  of  God  ?  Does  providence 
testify  to  His  divine  government  ?  How  much 
more  His  revealed  truth !  Truly,  "  Thou  hast 
magnified  Thy  Word' above  all  Thy  name." 

As  a  revelation  of  His  character,  the  Word  of 
God  is  precious.  What  we  gather  of  God's 
moral  character  fro^i  the  kingdom  of  nature  is 


252         THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  WORD. 

more  inferential  than  positive.  From  its  crea- 
tion, we  infer  the  being  of  God ;  from  its  loveli- 
ness, we  infer  that  God  is  beautiful ;  from  its 
wonders,  we  infer  that  God  is  great ;  from  the 
admirable  unity  and  fitness  of  all  its  parts,  we 
infer  that  God  is  wise  ;  from  the  merciful  bless- 
ings so  richly  and  profusely  scattered  over  its 
surface,  we  infer  that  God  is  good  ;  and  from  the 
judgments  which  follow  sin,  and  light  upon  the 
sinner,  we  infer  that  God  is  holy  and  just.  But 
for  the  clear,  positive,  and  complete  revelation  of 
God's  character  as  a  righteous,  holy,  wise,  merci- 
ful, and  sin-pardoning  God,  we  must  repair  to 
His  written  Word.  God  has  unfolded  more  of 
His  moral  character,  perfections,  and  glory  in 
the  following  words,  spoken  to  Moses  on  Mount 
Sinai,  amidst  the  awful  emblems  of  His  majesty, 
than  in  all  the  beauties,  wonders,  and  sublimities 
of  His  created  work  : — "  And  the  Loed  descended 
in  the  cloud,  and  stood  with  him  there,  and  pro- 
claimed the  ilame  of  the  Lord.  And  the  Lord 
passed  by  before  him,  and  proclaimed.  The  Lord, 
the  Lord  God,  merciful  and -gracious,  long-suffer- 
ing, and  abundant  in  goodness  and  truth,  keep- 
ing mercy  for  thousands,  forgiving  iniquity  and 
tran.^gression  and  sin,  and  that  w^ill  by  no  means 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  WOED,         253 

clear  the  guilty  ;  visiting  the  iniquity  of  the 
fathers  upon  the  children,  and  upon  the  children's 
children,  unto  the  third  and  to  the  fourth  gene- 
ration." (Exod.  xxxiv.  5-7.)  What  a  glorious 
unfoldino^  of  God  !  What  a  foreshadowino^  of 
the  yet  richer  unfolding  of  the  gospel !  If  God 
was  so  glorious  on  Mount  -Sinai,  what  must  be 
His  glory  as  revealed  on  Mount  Calvary  ! 

As  a  revelation  of  the  love  of  God,  His  Word 
is  inex^^ressibly  precious.  We  want  to  know 
more  than  the  mind  of  God.  We  are  sinners, 
and  we  want  to  read  His  heart — His  loving, 
gracious,  sin-forgiving  heart.  We  want  to  know, 
not  only  what  His  thoughts  and  purposes  are, 
but  what  are  His  feelings  towards  us.  Does  He 
love  us  ?  Does  His  justice  smile  on  us  ?  Does 
His  heart  expand  with  mercy,  and  glow  with  affec- 
tion towards  us  ?  The  Bible  alone  supplies  the 
answer  to  these  momentous  questions.  There  we 
read — as  we  read  it  tableted  in  no  part  of  this 
vast  and  beautiful  universe — "  GoD  is  love.'" 
And  when  we  approach  the  subject  yet  closer, 
penetrate  more  deeply  into  the  heart  of  God, 
what  a  transcendent,  marvellous  unfolding  of  His 
love  is  presented  in  the  gift  of  His  beloved  Son  I 
Bead  the  declaration,  often  read  before,  yet  to  be 


254         THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  WORD. 

read  again  and  again  with  deepening  Vv'onder,  gra- 
titude, and  praise — "  God  so  loved  the  world,  that 
He  gave  His  only  begotten  Son,  that  v/hosoever 
believeth  in  Him  should  not  perish,  but  have 
everlasting:  life."  "  In  this  was  manifested  the 
love  of  God  toward  us,  because  that  God.  sent 
His  only  begotten  Son  into  the  world,  that  we 
might  live  through  Him.  Herein  is  love,  not  that 
we  loved  God,  but  that  He  loved  us,  and  sent  His 
Son  to  be  the  i^ropitiation  for  our  sins/'  How  pre- 
cious ought  that  Word  to  be  to  our  hearts  which 
contains  such  declarations  and  reveals  such  truths 
as  these !  Well  may  the  apostle  exclaim,  "  Here- 
in is  love  ! "  as  if  he  had  said,  and  he  might  have 
added,  "  and  nowhere  else  but  here!"  Nowhere 
in  the  heavens  above,  or  in  the  earth  beneath,  or 
in  the  waters  under  the  earth,' — no  star,  no  flower, 
no  creature,  so  reveals,  expresses,  and  embodies 
the  love  of  God  as  the  gift  of  His  dear  Son  to  die 
for  our  sins.  Oh,  what  love  is  this  !  "  God  so 
loved  the  world !" — SO  loved,  that  He  gave  Jesus*! 
Jesus  is  the  most  precious  exponent  of  God's  love 
• — Jesus  descends  from  the  bosom  of  His  love — 
Jesus  draws  aside  the  vail  of  His  love — Jesus 
is  God's  love  expressed,  God's  love  incarnate, 
God's  love  speaking,  labouring,  dying,  redeeming. 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  WOED.         255 

Beyond  this  it  would  seem  impossible  that  love 
could  go.  Oh,  let  every  aflcction  of  our  h'eart, 
every  -faculty  of  our  soul,  every  power  of  our 
mind,  every  action  of  our  life,  embody  as  its 
grateful  response  the  words  of  the  adoring  apos- 
tle— "  Thanks  be  unto  God  for  His  unspeakable 
gift  !" 

We  are  conducted  to  another  view  in  the  pro- 
gress of  our  subject,  illustrating  the  preciousness 
of  God's  Word.  We  refer  to  its  gospel  announce- 
ments. In  this  light,  we  cannot  conceive  of  a  more 
costly,  precious  blessing  than  the  Word  of  God. 
The  GOSPEL  is  the  most  valuable  treasure  the 
believer  possesses.  Everything  else  is  shadowy, 
chimerical,  transitory,  passing  away.  Nothing 
is  real,  nothing  substantial,  nothing  satisfying 
and  abiding,  save  the  "  glorious  gospel  of  the 
blessed  God."  It  is  the  glorious  gospel,  be- 
cause it  is  replete  with  real  glory, — it  reveals 
a  ^-lorious  God, — it  makes  known  a  glorious 
Saviour, — it  proclaims  a  glorious  salvation, — 
and  it  unvails  the  hope  of  a  glorious  immor- 
tality. And  all  other  glory  in  comparison  of  the 
"glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  God"  is  as  vision- 
ary and  fleeting  as  a  midnight  dream.  Nowhere 
does  Jehovah  appear  so  glorious  as  iu  the  gos- 


256       TIIE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  WOBD. 

pel  of  His  grtice.  There  He  is  revealed  as  a 
sin-foroivino;  God ;  there  He  is  mirrored  forth 
as  a  "just  God  and  a  Saviour;"  there  He  is 
portrayed  as  a  reconciled  God  in  Christ;  and 
there  He  is  represented '  as  standing  in  the  rela- 
tion, and  exercising  the  love,  of  a — Father.  O 
glorious  gospel  that  presents  such  a  view  of 
God  to  the  sinner's  believing  eye!  "God  vras 
in  Christ,  reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself" 
What  declaration  can  more  clearly  indicate  the 
love  of  God  to  us,  as  the  movinoj,  orioinatinsc 
cause  of  our  salvation,  than  this  ?  There  is  a 
marked,  and  we  think,  essential  defect  in  the 
theology  of  many  Christians  touching  this  sub- 
ject, which  tends  much  to  obscure  the  Divine 
glory,  and  to  lessen  in  our  view  the  greatness  of 
God's  love  in  man's  salvation.  We  refer  tc  the 
statements  which  represent  God  as  angry,  in- 
censed, and  vindictive,  and  as  appeased,  pacified, 
and  reconciled  by  the  death  of  Christ.  Is  not 
this  an  essential  misapprehension  of  God's  ever- 
lasting love  to  His  people?  Would  it  not  ap- 
pear from  this  representation  of  God  that  the 
Atonement  of  Christ  was  the  originating  cause 
of  His  love,  rather  than  that  His  love  was  the 
originating  cause  of  the  Atonement?     We  think 


THE  PEECTOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  WOED.        257 

BO.  We  look  upon  this  notion  of  God  as  en- 
sbrouding  the  glory  of  redemption,  by  the  palp- 
ably false  view  it  presents  of  the  Divine  cha- 
racter. But  the  correct  statement  is  the  con- 
verse of  this.  God  loved  us — and  as  a  result, 
Christ  died  for  us.  The  Atonement  of  the  Son 
of  God  vi^as  not  the  procuring  cause,  but  the  con- 
sequence, of  the  Father's  love.  Christ'  did  not 
inspire  God  with  love  to  man,  but  exiwessed  it. 
He  did  not  die  to  originate  the  Divine  affection, 
but  to  expound  and  exhibit  it.  The  love  of  God 
to  His  people  was  as  eternal  as  the  eternity  of 
His  being,  as  everlasting  as  His  uncreated  nature. 
"  I  have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love!'  It 
panted,  it  yearned  for  an  outlet.  It  sought  and 
found  it  in  Christ.  The  Atonement  of  Jesus, 
uniting  and  harmonising  all  the  perfections  of  the 
Deity,  supplied  the  channel  through  which  the 
ocean  of  Divine  love  washed  the  shores  of  this 
earth,  its  soul-healing  waves  spreading  like  a 
sea  of  life  over  our  sin-tainted,  curse-blighted, 
sorrow-stricken  humanity.  When,  therefore,  the 
Scriptures  speak  of  Divine  reconciliation,  as  in 
the  passage  just  quoted,  we  are  to  understand  the 
full  expiatory  satisfaction  given  to  God's  moral 
government  through  the  Atonement  of  Christ,  by 


258        THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  WORD. 

which  His  law  is  honoured,  His  justice  is  satisfied, 
His  holiness  is  secured,  His  truth  is  maintained, 
and  He  appeared  upon  earth  walking  amongst 
men,  "  reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself." 

But  the  experience  of  the  believer  supplies,  per- 
haps, the  most  powerful  and  conclusive  testimony 
to  the  preciousness  of  God's  Word.  We  have 
not  been  advancing  a  vain  thing,  but^a  well- 
attested  fact,  in  affirming  the  divinity  and  value 
of  revelation.  We  are  now  about  to  cite  the 
child  of  God — yea,  the  whole  Church  of  Christ 
— as  testifying  to  the  preciousness  of  the  Word 
of  the  Lord.  How  many  a  truth-experienced, 
gospel-believing,  Christ-loving  heart  will  respond 
to  the  words  of  David,  "  How  sweet  are  Thy  words 
unto  my  taste !  yea,  sweeter  than  honey  to  my 
mouth."  What  says  Jeremiah?  "Thy  words 
were  found,  and  I  did  eat  them  ;  and  Thy  word 
was  unto  me  the  joy  and  rejoicing  of  my  heart." 
Coi-responding  with  this  is  the  experience  of  the 
universal  Church,  find  it  where  we  may,  whatever 
may  be  the  dissonance  of  opinion  prevailing  upon 
less  essential  and  important  questions  of  polity 
and  worship. 

It  is  precious  to  the  believer,  first,  because  it  is 
divine,  attested,  expei^ienced  teuth.     Is  it  not  so 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OP  GOD'S  WOKD.       259 

that,  to  you  who  believe  in  God's  Word,  every  other 
word  in  comparison  seems  a  fiction  and  a  fable  ? 
And  that,  as  you  grow  in  grace,  as  your  acquaint- 
ance with,  and  experience  of,  the  Word  of  God 
deepens,  as  you  near  eternity,  your  hold  upon 
everything  else  grows  fainter  and  fainter,  and 
your  grasp  upon  it  grows  firmer  and  firmer? 
Now,  God's  Word  is  truth.  He  who  is  emphati- 
cally "  the  Truth,"  because  He  is  essential  truth, 
and  the  substance  of  revealed  truth,  has  affirmed 
this  in  His  sublime  and  memorable  prayer — ^pro- 
perly the  Lord's  Prayer — "Thy  Word  is  truth." 
Pursue  this  thought  for  a  moment.  There  would 
seem  to  exist  a  necessity  that  it  should  be  so, 
since  it  is  the  Word  of  the  God  of  trutli,  partaking 
of  the  nature  of  that  God  whose  truth  it  is.  All 
that  emanates  from  God  must  be  a  transcript,  in 
some  degree,  of  what  He  is.  It  is  faintly  so  in  the 
works  of  nature  ;  yet  more  clearly  so  in  the  king- 
dom of  providence ;  perfectly  so  in  the  empire  of 
grace.  The  great  truth,  then,  to  which  these 
three  witnesses  testify  is  this,  '*  He  is  the  Rock, 
His  work  is  perfect :  for  all  His  ways  are  judg- 
ment: a  God  of  truth  and  without  iniquity,  just 
and  right  is  He."  (Deut.  xxxii.  4.)  It  follows 
then,  as  clearly  as  any  conclusion  can  from  its 


260       IHE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD*S  WORD. 

premise,  that  His  Word  is  true — eternaliy,  essen- 
tially, immortally  true.  True  in  the  Saviour  it 
reveals — in  the  salvation  it  declares — in  the  docr 
trines  it  ex230unds — in  the  precej)ts  it  enforces — 
in  the  promises  it  speaks — in  the  hopes  it  imvails 
— and  in  the  threatenings  it  denounces.  "Thy 
WoED  IS  truth/'  As  divine  truth,  then,  it  is 
most  precious  to  the  believer  who  has  staked 
his  all  of  future  and  eternal  happiness  upon  its 
veracity.  Let  your  faith,  beloved  reader,  have 
more  close  dealing  with  the  truth  of  God's  Word. 
Whatever  gloomy  and  untoward  providences  may 
gather  their  shadows  around  your  path,  hold  fast 
your  confidence  in  the  truth  of  God's  Word.  You 
shall  find  mutability  in  everything  but  this.  God 
will  vary  His  providences,  but  cannot  alter  His 
Word.  "  For  ever,  0  Lord,  Thy  Word  is  settled 
in  heaven."  Heaven,  with  its  resplendent  glory 
and  surpassing  wonder — earth,  with  its  countless 
myriads  of  beings,  its  beauty,  and  its  history,  shall 
be  a  thing  of  yesterday,  not  a  vestige  remaining 
to  tell  of  its  existence,  its  grandeur,  and  its  great- 
ness ;  but  "  the  Word  of  the  Lord  shall  endure  for 
ever."  All  that  God  has  whispered  in  mercy,  or 
has  thundered  in  judgment — the  promise  of  love, 
the  threatening  of  wrath — all  the  precious  words 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'SWORD.       261 

upon  wliicli  He  has  caused  our  souls  to  hope— ^ 
tJie  succouriiigs  pledged,  the  sure  mercies  cove- 
nanted, the  assurances  given,  the  consolations  en- 
gaged, the  oath  sworn,  shall  all  be  fulfillsd. 
Then,  amidst  the  fluctuations  and  the  vicissitudes 
of  all  sublunary  things, — the  home  of  childhood 
changed,  the  place  of  hallowed  memories  and 
sacred  associations  changed,  the  friends  and  com- 
panions of  our  choicest,  sunniest  years  changed, 
adversity  and  death  flinging  their  deep  shadows 
upon  life's  landscape, — we  will  approach  the  closer 
and  clino-  the  firmer  to  the  eternal,  unchano:eable 
TEUTH  of  our  God.  Your  faith,  beloved,  in  God's 
word  of  promise  may  be  severely  tried  by  God's 
dealings  with  you  in  providence — the  one  may 
appear  to  oppose  and  contradict  the  other — ^but 
ever  remember  that  God  cannot  deny  Himself, 
nor  alter  the  word  that  has  gone  out  of  His 
mouth.  If  the  sentence  of  death  seems  pro- 
nounced upon  the  promise  of  God  by  His  strange 
and  mysterious  procedure,  forget  not  that  there 
is  yet  life  in  the  Word  of  the  Lord;  and  that  when 
the  stone  that  sealed  the  tomb  of  all  your  mercy 
is  rolled  'away,  the  Word  upon  which  your  soul 
has  reposed,  upon  which  your  heart  has  lived,  to 
which  your  faith  has  clung,  and  which  has  kept 


2G2        THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  GOI)'S  WOED. 

alive  tlie  spark  of  hope  within  your  breast,  shall 
come  to  life  again,  every  sentence,  word,  and 
syllable  fulfilled  to  the  letter  by  Him  of  whom 
it  is  said,  "  It  is  impossible  that  God  should  lie/' 
Oh,  cling  then  to  Christ's  Word,  as  the  mariner 
to  the  plank,  as  the  mother  to  her  infant, — yea, 
as  a  humble  believer  in  that  divine  and  gracious 
Saviour  who  has  said,  "  Him  that  cometh  unto  me 
I  will  in  no  wise" — literally,  "I  will  never,  no, 
never,  cast  out." 

As  testifying  of  Jesus  and  His  salvation,  the 
Word  of  God  must  ever  be  transcendently  pre- 
cious to  the  believer.  The  Bible  is,  from  its  com- 
mencement to  its  close,  a  record  of  the  Lord 
Jesus.  Around  Him — the  divine  and  glorious 
Centre — all  its  wondrous  types,  prophecies,  and 
facts  gather.  His  Promise  and  Eoreshadowing, 
— His  holy  Incarnation,  Nativity,  and  Baptism, — 
His  Obedience  and  Passion, — His  Death,  Burial, 
and  Kesurrection, — His  Ascension  to  heaven, — IJis 
Second  Coming  to  judge  the  world,  and  to  set  up 
His  glorious  kingdom,  are  th.Q  grand  and  touching, 
the  sublime  and  tender,  the  priceless  and  precious 
truths  interwoven  with  the  whole  texture  of  the 
Bible,  to  wbich  the  Two  Witnesses  of  Revelation 
—the  Old  and  the  New  Testaments — bear  their 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OP  GOD's  WOED.        263 

harmonious  and  solemn  testimony.  Beloved,  let 
this  be  the  one  and  chief  object  in  your  study  of 
the  Bible — the  knowledge  of  Jesus.  The  Bible 
is  not  a  history,  a  book  of  science,  a  poem, — it  is 
a  record  of  Christ.  Study  it  to  know  more  of 
Him, — His  nature,  His  love.  His  work.  With  the 
magnanimous  Paul,  "  count  all  things  but  loss  for 
the  excellency  of  the  knowiedge  of  Christ  Jesus 
your  Lord."  Then  will  God's  Word  become  in- 
creasingly precious  to  your  soul,  and  its  truths  un- 
fold. You  will  trace  the  history  of  Jesus, — see  the 
glory  of  Jesus, — admire  the  work  of  Jesus, — learn 
the  love  of  Jesus, — and  hear  the  voice  of  Jesus,  in 
every  page.  The  whole  volume  will  be  redolent 
of  His  name,  and  luminous  with  His  beauty. 
Oh,  what  were  the  Bible  to  us  apart  from  its 
revelation  of  a  Saviour !  Is  there  not  great  dan- 
ger of  studying  it  merely  intellectually  and  scien- 
tifically, of  revelling  amongst  its  literary  beauties 
and  its  grandeur,  bKnd  to  its  true  value,  and  with- 
out any  desire  to  know  that  precious  Saviour  who 
died  for  sinners,  that  Divine  Redeemer  who  pur- 
chased the  ransom  of  His  Church  with  His  own 
blood,  that  Friend  who  loves  us,  that  Brother  who 
sympathises  with  us,  that  enthroned  High  Priest 
who  intercedes  for  us  within  the  vail  ?  May  we  not 


264       THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  WOED. 

resort  to  it  as  mere  controversialists,  polemics,  a^jl 
partisans,  searching  it  but  for  weapons  of  attack 
upon  a  Christian  brother's  system  or  creed,  or 
quoting  it  but  to  give  countenance  and  com- 
plexion to  a  favourite  dogma  ?  But  do  we  study 
the  "  Word  of  Christ"  spiritually  and  honestly,  as 
those  whose  souls  hunger  and  thirst  for  this  the 
bread  and  water  of  life  ?  Do  we  search  "it  dili- 
gently and  earnestly  as  for  hid  treasure — treasure 
beyond  all  price  ?  Can  we  say  with  David,  "  0 
how  love  I  thy  law  !  it  is  my  meditation  all  the 
day?" — "The  entrance  of  thy  Word  giveth  light ; 
it  giveth  understanding  unto  the  simple.  I  opened 
my  mouth,  and  panted:  for  I  longed  for  thy  com- 
mandments,"— "Thy  Word  is  a  lamp  unto  my 
feet,  and  a  light  unto  my  path."  Do  we  read  it 
with  a  child-like  mind,  receive  it  with  a  believing 
heart,  bow  to  its  teaching  with  reverence  of  soul, 
and  receive  its  decisions  in  all  questions  of  faith 
and  practice  as  decisive  and  ultimate  ?  In  a  word, 
do  we  search  the  Scriptures  humbly,  prayerfully, 
depending  upon  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit,  to 
find  Jesus  in  them  ?  Of  these  Scriptures  He  is 
the  Alpha  and  the  Omega — the  substance,  the 
sweetness,  the  glory — the  one,  precious,  absorbing 
THEME.     Listen  to  His  own  words,  "  Search  the 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  WOED.        205 

.Scriptures,  for  these  are  tliey  which  testify  of  me." 
Moses  wrote  of  Me — David  sano;  of  Me — seers 
proj^hesied  of  Me — evangelists  recorded  My  life 
— apostles  expounded  My  doctrine — and  martyrs 
have  died  for  My  name.  "These  aee  they 
WHICH  testify  of  Me.''  Yes,  Lord  !  Thy  word 
is  precious  to  our  souls,  because  it  reveals  to  us 
Thy  *glory,  and  tells  us  of  Thy  love ! 

Precious,  too,  is  the  Word  of  God,  as  contain- 
ing doctrine,  precept,  and  promise.  The  doc- 
trines are  precious,  as  affording  instruction  to 
i\\Q  mind,  and  establishment  to  the  faith  of  the 
child  of  God.  There  can  be  no  real,  stable  build- 
ing up  in  God's  truth  when  the  great  doctrines  of 
grace  are  faintly  believed  and  loosely  held.  These 
doctrines,  then,  which  exalt  the  Lamb  of  God, 
which  lay  the  glory  and  power  and  boasting  of  the 
creature  m  the  dust,  and  wliich  exhibit  the  elect- 
ing love  and  sovereign  grace  of  God  in  his  sal- 
vation, are  most  precious  to  the  truth-experienced 
heart  of  the  believer  in  Jesus.  Not  less  precious 
to  him  is  the  preceptive  teaching  of  God's  Word. 
When  there  is  a  real  experience  of  the  power  of 
the  doctrines,  there  will  be  a  love  of  the  precept 
You  will  desire  to  be  sanctified  as  well  as  justi- 
fied— to  have  your  heart  purified,  and  your  life 


1Si66       THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  WOED. 

moulded  by  the  holiness  of  the  truth.  The  pre- 
cept that  enjoins  separation  from  the  world — ^that 
teaches  us  to  deny  all  ungodliness,  and  to  live 
soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  this  present 
evil  world — that  bids  us  take  up  our  daily  cross 
and  follow  a  crucified  Saviour,  and  realising  our 
resurrection  life  in  Him,  thus  to  seek  those  things 
that  are  above,  where  Christ  sitteth  at  the  right 
hand  of  God — mus-t-  be  precious,  inconceivably 
precious,  to  a  Christ-lo^dng  heart.  The  rebukes, 
too,  of  God's  Word,  humbling  though  they  are, 
yet  are  welcome  to  the  believer.  The  Word  that 
gently  chides  your  backslidings,  unvails  your 
follies,  checks  your  inconsistencies,  lays  your 
pride,  self-seeking,  and  self-boasting  in  the  dust, 
is  precious  to  your  soul.  The  Christian  feels, 
that  "  all  Scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  of 
God,  and  is  profitable  for  doctrine,  for  reproof, 
for  correction,  for  instruction  in  righteousness, 
that  the  man  of  God  may  be  perfect,  thoroughly 
furnished  unto  all  good  w^orks,"  and  therefore  he 
welcomes  all.  Beloved,  count  not  less  dear  to 
your  heart,  or  as  less  the  tender  unfolding  of 
God's  love,  those  parts  of  His  truth  which  reprove, 
humble,  empty,  and  lay  you  low.  The  r(3bukes 
and  reproofs  of  God's  Word  are  as  valuable  and 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  WORD.        2(>7 

precious  in  themselves  as  the  promises,  since 
both  equally  seek  the  sanctification  of  the  be- 
liever, and  both  emanate  from  the  same  Divine 
mind,  and  flow  from  the  same  loving  heart. 

As  a  source  of  Divine  consolation  how  many 
will  testify  to  the  preciousness  of  God's  Word! 
The  Bible,  while  it  is  a  proclamation  of  mercy 
to  the  vilest  sinner,  is  equally  the  book  of  the 
afflicted.  As  a  system  of  consolation  Christianity 
has  no  equal.  No  other  religion  in  the  wide 
world  touches  the  hidden  springs  of  the  soul,  or 
reaches  the  lowest  depths  of  human  sorrow,  but 
the  religion  of  Christ.  Saints  of  the  living  God ! 
suff'ering  members  of  a  suffering  Head  1  we  cite 
you  as  witnesses  to  this  truth.  When  your 
hearts  have  been  overwhelmed,  when  adversity 
has  ■  wrapped  you  within  its  gloomy  pall,  when 
the  broken  billows  of  grief  have  swollen  and 
surged  around  your  soul,  how  have  you  fled 
to  the  Scriptures  of  truth  for  succour  and 'sup- 
port, for  guidance  and  comfort !  Nor  have  you 
repaired  to  them  in  vain.  "  The  God  of  all 
comfort"  is  He  who  speaks  in  this  Word,  and 
there  is  no  word  of  comfort  like  that  which  He 
speaks.  The  adaptation  of  His  truth  to  the  varied, 
the  peculiar  and  personal  trials  and  sorrows  of 


268       THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  WOED. 

His  Church,  is  one  of  the  strongest  proofs  of  its 
divinity.  Take  to  the  Word  of  God  what  sorrow 
you  may, — go  with  what  mental  beclouding,  with 
what  spirit-sadness,  with  what  heart-grief — be 
its  character,  its  complexion,  its  depth  unsur- 
passed in  the  history  of  human  sorrow, — there  is 
consolation  and  supj^ort  in  the  Word  of  God  for 
your  mind.  There  is  in  these  sacred  pages  a  voice 
of  sympathy  and  soothing  chiming  with  your  grief; 
and  thus  "  by  the  comfort  of  the  Scriptures  you 
have  hope''  that  God  will  not  leave  you  in  trouble, 
but  will  sustain  you  in  it,  will  bring  you  out  of,  and 
sanctify  you  by  it,  to  the  endless  glory  and  praise 
of  His  great  and  precious  name.  0  ye  sons 
of  God  whose  faith  has  been  strengthened  by 
the  histories  of  the  Old  Testament  saints — whose 
minds  have  been  instructed  by  the  dealings  of 
God  with  His  Church  in  the  wilderness — whose 
hearts  have  been  comforted  by  the  rich  experi- 
ence of  David  in  the  Psalms — whose  views  of 
God's  kingdom  prophets  have  enlarged — whose 
knowledge  of  Christ's  history  evangelists  have 
deepened — whose  souls  apostles  have  established 
in  the  faith,  we  cite  you  as  witnesses  to  the 
divinity  and  preciousness  of  God'.'j  Word.  "  Ye 
are  my  witnesses,  saith  the  Lord."     Testify  to  an 


THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  WOED.        269 

infiJel  world  what  the  Bible  is,  and  to  the  saints 
what  you  have  experienced  it  to  be.  Tell  how  its 
revealed  ti'uths  have  established  you,  how  its 
illustrious  examples  of  piety,  faith,  and  love  have 
animated  you,  how  its  exceeding  great  and  pre- 
cious promises  have  comforted  you,  and  hov/  the 
glorious  hope  of  heaven  which  the  gospel  unvails 
has  inspired  you  to  run  with  patience  the  race 
set  before  you,  looking  unto  Jesus.  Tell  how 
this  precious  Word  of  God  has  made  clear  many 
a  perplexity,  has  illumined  many  a  dark  road, 
has  cheered  many  a  lonesome  way,  has  soothed 
many  a  deep  sorrow,  has  guided  and  upheld  many 
a  faltering  step,  and  has  crowned  with  victory 
many  a  feat  of  arms  in  the  great  battle  WYiii 
Satan,  the  world,  and  sin.  May  we  not  say  of 
the  Bible,  as  David  said  of  Saul's  sword,  ''  There 
is  none  like  it.''  Christian  mourner,  let  me  once 
more  direct  your  eye — too  dimmed  perhaps  by 
tears  to  behold  the  precious  truth — to  this  divine 
source  of  true,  unfailing  comJort.  God's  Word 
is  the  book  of  the  afflicted.  Written  to  unfold 
the  wondrous  history  of  the  "Man  of  Sorrovvs,'"' 
it  would  seem  to  have  been  equally  v/ritten  for 
you,  0  child  of  grief!  God  speaks  to  your  sad 
aijd  sorrowing  heart   from    every  page  of   this 


270       THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  WOED. 

sacred  volume,  witli  words  of  comfort,  loving, 
gentle,  and  persuasive  as  a  mother's.  "  As  one 
whom  his  mother  comforteth,  so  will  I  comfort 
you."  The  Bible  is  the  opening  of  the  heart 
of  God.  It  is  God's  heart  unvailed,  each  throb 
inviting  the  mourner  in  Zion — the  poor  in  spi- 
rit,— the  widow, — the  fatherless, — the  bereaved, 
— the  persecuted, —  the  sufferer,  — yea,  every 
form  and  child  of  affliction  and  grief — to  the 
asylum  and  sympathy,  the  protection  and  sooth- 
ing of  His  heart.  Oh,  thank  God  for  the  com- 
fort and  consolation  of  the  Scripture !  Open  it 
with  what  sorrow  and  burden  and  perplexity  you 
may, — be  it  the  guilt  of  sin,  the  pressure  of  trial,  or 
the  corrodings  of  sorrow, — it  speaks  to  the  heart 
such  words  of  comfort  as  God  only  could  speak. 
Have  you  ever  borne  your  grief  to  God's  Word, — - 
especially  to  the  experimental  Psalms  of  David, — - 
and  not  felt  that  it  was  written  for  that  particu- 
lar sorrow?  You  liave  found  your  grief  more 
accurately  portrayed,  your  state  of  mind  more 
truly  described,  and  your  case  more  exactly  and 
fully  met,  probably  in  a  single  history,  chapter, 
or  verse,  than  in  all  the  human  treatises  that  the 
pen  of  man  ever  wrote.  What  a  proof  that  the 
Bible  is  the  Word  of  God'     We  verily  believe 


THE  PlIECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD  S  WOED.        271 

tliat  no  Cliristlan  •  is  thoroughly  versed  in  the 
e\idences  of  the  truth  of  the  Bible,  or  is  in  a 
right  position  to  understand  its  divine  contents, 
until  he  is  afEicted.  Luther  remarks  that  he 
never  understood  the  Psalms  until  Grod  afflicted 
him.  Fly  to  the  Word  of  God,  then,  in  every 
sorrow.  You  will  know  more  of  the  mind  and 
heart  of  God  than  you,  perhaps,  ever  learned  in 
all  the  schools  before.  We  must  be  experimental 
Christians,  if  Christians  at  all.  A  bare  notion- 
alist, a  mere  theorist,  an  empty  professor  of 
religion,  is  a  fearful  deception.  Study  to  know 
God's  Word  from  a  heartfelt  experience  of  its 
quickening,  sanctif^dng,-  comforting  power.  Sit 
not  at  the  feet  of  men,  but  at  the  feet  of  Jesus. 
His  Word  can  alone  instruct  you  in  these  sacred 
and  precious  truths.  You  must  learn  in  Christ's 
school,  and  be  taught  Ijy  the  Holy  Spirit.  And 
if  you  are  truly  converted,  spiritually  regenerated, 
a  real  believer  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  think  not  that 
some  strange  thing  has  happened  to  you  when 
.the  Lord  causes  you  to  pass  under  the  rod  of 
discipline,  brings  you  into  trial,  and  makes  you  to 
partake  of  what  may  seem  to  you  a  soul-diet  any- 
thing but  healthful  and  nutritious, — "  the  bread 
of  adversity,  and  the  water  of  affliction."  (Isa.  xxx. 


272       THE  PEEOIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  WORD. 

20.)  But  affliclion  is  one  of  the  Lord's  moulds 
for  shaping  you  into  an  experimental  Christian. 
And  to  be  an  experimental  Christian  His  Wor(i 
must  be  inwrought  into  our  soul.  What  can  we 
know  of  the  promises,  the  succourings,  the  sym- 
pathy of  God's  Word, — its  perfect  adaptation  to 
the  crushed  and  sorrowful  condition  of  our 
humanity, — but  for  trial  ?  Thus,  more  than  one- 
half  of  the  Bible  is  a  "  garden  inclosed,  a  spring 
shut  up,  a  fountain  sealed,"  until  the  Lord  lays 
sorrow  upon  our  hearts,  and  brings  us  into  cir- 
cumstances of  adversity.  Then  this  garden  un- 
vails  its  beauty,  and  this  spring  pours  forth  its 
refreshment,  and  this  fountain  overflows  with  its 
rich  and  varied  supply.  Oh,  v/ith  what  power, 
depth,  and  sweetness  does  the  Word  of  God 
unfold  to  us  then!  It  is  as  though  a  new  book 
had  been  composed, — another  constellation  iii 
the  spiritual  hemisphere  had  burst  upon  the 
telescope  of  faith, — another  Arcadia  had  floated 
into  view,— a  new  world  had  been  discovered! 
"  Blessed  is  the  man  whom  Thou  chastenest,  0 
Lord,  and  teachest  him  out  of  Thy  law."  "  Unless 
Thy  law  had  been  my  delight,  I  should  then  have 
perished  in  my  affiictlon."  Draw,  then,  0  child 
of  sorrow,  your  consolation  from  God's  Word. 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  WOED.        273 

Put  it  not  away  as  if  it  were  for  others,  and  not 
for  you.  There  is  not  a  promise  in  the  Bible,  of 
pardon,  of  grace,  of  help,  of  sympathy,  but  it  is 
yours,  because  you  are  Christ's,  "  in  ^yhom  are  all 
the  i^romises  of  God,  and  in  Him  are  Yea  and 
Amen  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father/'  Oh,  clasp 
this  precious  Word  of  comfort  to  your  sorrowful 
heart,  and  exclaim,  "It  is  mine!  The  Jesus  of 
whom  it  speaks  is  mine, — the  salvation  it  reveals 
is  mine, — the  promises  it  contains  are  mine, — • 
the  heaven  it  nnvails  is  mine, — and  ad  the  con- 
solation, comfort,  and  sj^inpathy  which  wells  up 
from  these  hidden  springs,  is — mine." 

"  Laden  with  guilt,  and  full  of  fears, 
I  fly  to  Thee,  my  Lord, 
And  not  a  glimpse  of  hope  appears 
But  in  Thy  written  Word. 

"  The  volume  of  my  Father's  grace 
Does  all  my  grief  assuage; 
There  I  behold  my  Saviour's  face 
Almost  in  every  page. 

"  I'll  read  the  histories  of  Thy  love. 
And  keep  Thy  laws  in  sight, 
"While  through  Thy  promises  I  rove 
With  ever  fresh  delight. 

**  'Tis  a  broad  land  of  wealth  unknown. 
Where  springs  of  life  arise, 
Seeds  of  immortal  bliss  are  sown. 
And  hidden  glory  lies. 

S 


274       THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  WORD* 

"  The  best  relief  tliat  mourners  have, 
It  makes  our  sorrow  bless'd : 
Our  fairest  hope  beyond  the  grave, 
And  our  eternal  rest." 


The  Word  of  God  is  equally  valuable  and 
precious  to  the  believer,  because  of  its  quickening 
'power.  There  is  a  divine  vitality  in  the  Word, 
which,  like  Ezekiel's  vision  of  the  waters,  conveys 
life  wherever  it  comes  in  "  the  power  and  demon- 
stration of  the  Spirit/'  As  the  instrument  of 
regeneration  and  of  sanctifi cation,  the  Bible  is 
beyond  all  price.  The  statements  touching  these 
two  j)oints  are  many  and  conclusive.  We  quote 
but  a  few : — "  The  law  of  the  Lord  is  perfect, 
converting  the  soul,  making  wise  the  simple, 
rejoicing  the  heart,  enlightening  the  eyes/'  (Ps. 
xix.  7,  8.)  See  how  David  extols  its  quiclvcning 
power  : — "  This  is  my  comfort  in  my  affliction  : 
for  Thy  word  hath  quickened  me."  "I  will  never 
forget  Thy  precepts :  for  with  them  Thou  hast 
quickened  me."  As  the  instrument  of  the  new 
birth,  thus  does  the  Holy  Ghost  speak  of  it : — 
"Being  horn  again,  not  of  corruptible  seed,  but 
of  incorruptible,  by  the  Word  of  God,  which  liveth 
and  abideth  for  ever."  (1  Peter  i  23.)  "The 
Word  of  God  is  quick,  and  powerful,  and  sharper 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  WORD.        275 

than  any  two-edged  sword,  piercing  even  to  the 
dividing  asunder  of  soul  and  spirit,  and  of  the 
joints  and  marrow,  and  is  a  discerner  of  the 
thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart."  (Heb.  iv.  12.) 
And  alluding  to  it  equally  as  the  appointed 
instrument  of  holiness,  our  Lord  prays  to  His 
'F'dXhQY,  "  Sanctify  them  through  Thy  truth." 
And  to  the  disciples  He  employs  similar  language : 
— "  Now  ye  are  clean  through  the  word  which  I 
have  spoken  unto  you."  Employing  the  same 
argument,  the  apostle  thus  exhorts  the  saints: — 
"  Seeing  ye  have  purified  your  souls  in  obeying 
the  truth  through  the  Spirit  unto  unfeigned  love 
of  the  brethren,  see  that  ye  love  one  another  with 
a  pure  heart  fervently."  Clearly,  then,  is  God's 
"Word  an  instrument  of  sjDiritual  life  and  of 
gospel  holiness,  and  as  such  commends  itself  to 
the  deepest  reverence,  the  warmest  love,  and  the 
most  dihgent  study  of  the  believer.  Suffer, 
beloved  reader,  a  few  words  of  exhortation  bear- 
ing upon  this  subject. 

Study  the  Scriptures  of  truth  with  a  heart  in 
prayerful  uplifting  for  the  accompanying  power, 
light,  and  anointing  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The 
\yord  is  but  a  dead  letter,  unattended  by  the 
Spirit.     The  Word  of  God  is  a  "sword,"  but  the 


276        THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  TfORD. 

sword  is  effectual  only  as  it  is  wielded  by  the  power 
of  the  Spirit.  "The  sword  of  the  Spirit,  which 
is  the  Word  of  God."  Expect,  then,  this  Word 
to  be  powerful  in  your  own  souls,  as  in  the  souls 
of  those  upon  whom  you  bring  it  to  bear,  only 
as  it  is  clothed  with  the  divine  and  irresistible 
might  and  energy  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  .  Then  it 
will  quicken,  enlighten,  and  convince  ;  then  it 
will  convert,  comfort,  and  sanctify.  Ever  remem- 
ber that  the  Divine  Author  of  the  Bible  is  at  your 
side — invisible  and  noiseless — when  you  sit  down 
to  read  it.  Graciously  and  benignantly  He  is 
bending  over  you,  prepared  to  explain  what  is 
difficult,  to  harmonise  what  is  contradictory,  and 
to  shed  a  flood  of  light  upon  each  page,  causing 
Heaven's  glory  to  dart  into  your. soul  from  the 
diamond  spark  of  a  single  passage  !  Such,  be- 
loved, are  the  effects  of  the  gospel,  when  clothed 
with  the  authority  and  power  of  God  the  Holy 
Ghost.  In  the  quaint  but  terse  language  of  an  old 
writer,  be  exhorted  "to  attend  upon  the  Word 
v/ith  an  eye  to  God.  Look  not  for  the  new  birth 
only  from  the  Word.  It  was  the  folly  of  the  Jews 
to  think  to  find  life  in  the  Scriptures  without 
Christ;  life  in  the  letter  without  the  Original  of 
life.  (John  v.  19,  40.)    '  Except  the  Lord  build  the 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OP  GOD'S  WOED.        277 

house  (tliat  is,  the  temple),  they  labour  in  vain  that 
build  it/  AVithout  God,  all  endeavours  to  build 
a  spiritual  temple,  are  like  the  strivings  to  wash 
a  blackamoor  white.  No  believing  in  the  Word, 
though  preached  a  thousand  times,  without  God's 
revealing  arm.  (Isaiah  liii.  ].)  It  is  not  the  file 
that  makes  the  watch,  but  the  artist  by  it.  No 
instrument  can  act  without  the  virtue  of  some 
superior  agent.  It  is  the  altar  that  sanctifies  the 
gold,  and  Christ  that  sanctifies  the  ordinance. 
Paul  may  plant  by  his  doctrine  and  miracles, 
Apollos  may  water  by  his  affectionate  eloquence, 
but  God  alone  can  give  the  increase  by  His 
almighty  breath.  Man  sows  the  seed,  but  God 
only  can  make  it  fructify.  ....  Then  have 
your  eyes  fixed  upon  God.  It  is  the  AVord  of 
His  lips,  not  of  man's,  whereby  any  are  snatched 
out  of  the  paths  of  the  destroyer,  as  well  as  kept 
from  them.  Man's  teachings  direct  us  to  Christ ; 
God's  teachings  bring  us  to  Christ.  Man  brings 
the  gospel  at  most  to  the  heart ;  the  Spirit  only 
brings  the  gospel  into  the-  heart.  Man  puts  the 
key 'to  the  lock  ;  God  only  turns  it,  and  opens  the 
heart  by  it.  Tis  God  only  can  knock  off  the 
fetters  of  sj^iritual  death,  and  open  the  gates  that 
the  King  of  Glory  may  enter  with  spiritual  life. 


278       THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  WOED. 

If  .'iny,  therefore,  will  regard  the  Word  more  than 
as  an  instrument,  or  a  partner  with  God  in  His 
operations,  He  may  justly  leave  you  to  the  weak- 
ness of  this,  and  deny  the  influx  of  H!is  own 
strength," 

Cultivate  a  profound  reverence  for  Gods 
Word.  Nothing  is  more  grievous  to  the  Holy 
Spirit  than  a  trifling  with  revelation.  The  words 
of  Scripture  are  divinely  inspired.  "  Holy  men 
of  God  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy 
Ghost."  "Which  things  also  we  speak,  not  in 
the  words  which  man's  wisdom  teacheth,  but 
which  the  Holy  Ghost  teacheth."  Sfand  in  awe 
of  this  Holy  Book !  Beware  of  referring  to  it 
doubtfully,  or  of  quoting  it  with  levity.  To 
adopt  the  words  of  Scripture  irreverently, — to 
speak  of  any  of  its  parts  with  suspicion, — or 
to  employ  its  phraseology  flippantly,  is  to  cast 
discredit  upon  inspiration,  to  press  it  into  the 
service  of  the  flesh,  and  to  make  the  Word  of 
God  the  jest-book  of  the  profane.  This  is  awful 
trifling  with  the  thouglits  and  words  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  God  says,  "I  v/ill  look  to  him  .  .  .  . 
that  tremUeth  at  my  Wo7^d."  This  was  David's 
holy  reverence — "My  heart  standeth  {71  awe  of 
Thy  Word."     And  this  his  prayer—"  Order  my 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OP  GOD'S  WOED.        279 

steps  in  Thy  Word,  and  let  not  any  iniquity  have 
dominion  over  me/' 

This  profound  conviction  of  the  divinity  and 
authority  of  God's  Word  will  constrain  you  to 
bring  the  state  of  your  soul,  your  doctrinal  sen- 
timents, and  your  daily  life,  to  its  unerring  test. 
The  only  divine  and  sure  standard  is  the  Word. 
"  To  the  law  and  to  the  testimony,"  should  be  our 
constant  rule.  Kegard,  in  all  matters  of  faith  and 
practice,  the  Word  of  God  as  authoritative  in  its 
teaching,  paramount  in  its  voice,  and  final  in  its 
decision.  Whatever  doctrine  or  practice  squares 
not  with  this  standard,  that  will  not  stand  the 
searching  test  of  this  divine  touchstone,  reject 
as  unworthy  your  jpelief  and  adoption.  Let  this  be 
your  daily  practical  acknowledgment,  "  Thy  Word 
is  a  lamp  unto  my  feet,  and  a  light  unto  my  path/' 
Taking  into  your  hands  this  lamp,  and  guiding 
your  steps  by  this  light,  your  feet  will  never  slide. 
Cling  to  the  Word  of  God  the  more  firmly,  as 
others  attempt  to  sap  the  foundations  of  its  divi- 
nity. Be  "  valiant  for  the  truth  on  the  earth,''  and 
"contend  earnestly  for  the  faith  once  delivered 
to  the  saints."  "  Let  the  Word  of  Christ  dwell 
richly  in  you  in  all  wisdom,"  hiding  it  in  youi 
heart,  that  you  sin  not  against  Him.     Eead  il 


280        THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  WORD. 

with  prayer  for  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
comparing  scripture  with  scripture,  spiritual 
things  with  spiritual.  Search  it  to  know  more 
of  Christ,  more  of  His  atoning  work,  more  of  His 
mediatorial  suitability  to  meet  your  every  state  of 
mind  and  heart.  Study  it  to  know  the  will  of  God, 
the  love  of  your  heavenly  Father.  Take  every 
doubt,  perplexity,  and.  sorrow  to  the  Word,  of  God. 
And  before  you  unfold  its  sacred  leaves,  lift  your 
heart  in  prayer  to  the  Eternal  Spirit  to  guide  your 
reading,  to  open  your  understanding,  and  to  unvail 
your  eye  to  this  divine  well-spring  of  life.  This 
is  the  only  rule  we  suggest  for  the  spiritual  and 
practical  reading  of  God  s  Word.  Human  helps 
may  aid  you  in  the  study  of  the  sacred  literature 
of  the  Bible ;  but  to  read  it  with  a  view  to  the 
feeding  and  nourishing  of  the  divine  life  in  your 
soul, — that  you  may  grow  in  knowledge,  faith,  and 
holiness, — that  you  may  be  instructed,  comforted, 
and  armed  for  the  holy  war, — you  need  but  rely 
upon  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  pro- 
mised to  guide  you  into  all  the  truth  as  it  is  in 
Jesus.  Beware  of  studying  the  Bible  as  a  lover  of 
history,  of  science,  of  poetry.  Study  it  as  a  sinner, 
anxious  to  know  how  you  may  be  saved.  Eead 
it  to  ascertain  how  God  can  pardon,  justify,  and 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  WOED.        281 

take  you  to  lieaven  when  you  die.  Lay  aside 
your  cavilling,  debating,  and  speculating,  and 
approach  the  Bible  as  a  little  child,  as  a  sincere 
inquirer,  as  a  humble  learner,  desirous  of  know- 
ing the  Scriptures,  that  are  able  to  make  you  wise 
unto  eternal  life.  In  a  research  so  momentous, 
lay  aside  all  other  books,  and  be  the  student  of 
this  one — the  Book  of  God.  Salvation  is  its 
one,  its  grand  and  absorbing  theme — and  this  is 
all  you  need  to  know  as  a  sinner  bound  for  the 
judgment-seat  of  Christ.  A  notional,  speculative 
reception  of  the  Bible  prepares  an  uneasy  pillow 
for  a  dying  hour ;  and  it  is  marvellous  and  solemn 
to  reflect  hov/  every  subject,  every  theme,  every 
question  growing  out  of  the  history,  philology, 
or  destiny  of  God's  Word,  gives  place  in  that 
awful  moment  to  the  one  momentous,  sublime 
salvation  therein  revealed,  by  which  the  soul  may 
escape  from  hell  and  soar  to  heaven.  Who  then 
desires  to  listen  to  learned  disquisitions  upon 
the  Kterature,  the  eloquence,  the  poetry,  or  the 
sublimity  of  the  Bible  ?  Who,  when  nature  is 
dissolving,  earth  is  receding,  eternity  is  opening, 
is  in  a  condition  to  weigh,  examine,  and  sift 
the  evidences  of  the  divinity  of  the  Scriptures? 
The  earnest,  imploring  language  of  such  a  one, 


282        THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  WORD. 

alive  to  a  conviction  of  sin  and  danger,  is,  "  Is 
there  pardon,  is  tliere  salvation,  is  there  hope 
for  such  a  sinner  as  I  am  ?  Does  the  Word  of 
God  tell  me  how  I  may  be  saved  ?  Read  to  me  of 
Christ.  Tell  me  of  the  Saviour.  Point  me  to  the 
Lamb  of  God.  Direct  my  eye  to  the  cross,  and 
let  me  behold  Him  whose  blood  cleaiiseth  from 
all  sin.  Read  to  me,  speak  to  me,  tell  me  only  of 
Jesus."  Precious  Book,  that  fully  meets  a  crisis 
of  our  being,  and  an  awakened,  alarmed  state  of 
mind,  so  tremendously  solemn  as  this ! 

We  close  this  chapter  with  an  earnest  appeal 
to  your  judgment,  conscience,  and  heart  in  favour 
of  the  Word  of  God.  Whatever  you  neglect, 
neglect  not  the  Bible.  If  a  professed  believer, 
bev»'are  how  you  blend  in  your  reading  the  chaff 
of  human  fiction  and  story  with  the  wheat  of 
God's  Word.  It  is  utterly  impossible,  reason  as 
you  may,  that  you  can  cultivate  a  spiritual  and 
devout  taste  and  desire  for  the  truth  of  God  and 
the  fiction  of  man.  The  Bible  and  the  novel  can 
never  stand  side  by  side.  As  a  Christian,  guard 
against  the  light,  frivolous,  frothy  literature  of 
the  day.  It  will  lessen  your  conviction  of  what 
is  true,  it  will  depreciate  the  value  of  what  is 
divine,  it  wiU  impair  your  taste  for  what  is  spiri 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OP  GOD'S  WOED.        283 

tual,  and  it  will  bring  poverty,  barrenness,  and 
death  iii.to  your  soul  "  God  speaks  to  you  from 
every  paragraph  and  sentence  of  this  Holy  Book. 
It  is  His  voice  that  we  hear,  His  signature  that 
we  behold,  His  ineffable  glory,  which,  the  more 
it  is  viewed  in  this  bright  mirror,  may  the  more 
powerfully  command  our  wonder  and  praise. 
When  we  approach  these  divine  oracles,  and  hear 
the  voice  of  God' sometimes  speaking  out  of  the 
midst  of  the  fire,  but  more  often  from  the  blood 
of  sprinkling  which  speaketh  better  things  than 
the  blood  of  Abel,  we  may  well  bend  our  knee, 
and  take  the  shoes  from  off  our  feet,  for  the 
ground  on  which  we  stand  is  holy.  Oh  that  power 
might  come  down  upon  us  from  the  Spirit  of 
truth  and  grace,  and  beams  from  the  Sun  of 
righteousness  break  in  upon  our  minds  as  we 
contemplate  the  intrinsic  glories  of  the  Bible ! 
Let  the  truth  and  weight  of  these  revelations 
sink  deep  into  your  ears.  As  men  of  this  v>*oild 
merely, — as  creatures  of  time, — more  especially  as 
the  proprietors  of  immortality,  you  have  a  thou- 
sand-fold deeper  interest  in  the  Bible  than  in 
any  other,  or  all  other  books.  It  is  just  as  im- 
portant that  you  who  have  the  opportunity  should 
become  acquainted  with  the  Scriptures,  and  be- 


284)       THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  WOED. 

lieve,  and  love,  and  obey  them,  as  it  is  that  yea 
should  be  saved.  This  Book  offers  to  you  that 
which  most  you  want, — that  which  is  infinitely 
more  to  you  than  all  otlier  things, — glory,  honour, 
immortality,  and  eternal  life.  We  cannot  but 
look  upon  the  prevailing  indifference  with  which 
the  Word  of  God  is  regarded,  as  one  of  the  evils 
over  Vv^hich  we  are  loudly  called  to  mourn.  You 
send  the  Bible  to  the  ignorant 'and  destitute, — 
you  carry  it  to  every  cottage  and  waft  it  to  every 
clime, — and  thanks  to  God  that  you  do  so ;  but 
to  what  extent  is  it  studied  in  your  churches, 
read  in  your  families,  taught  to  your  children? 
There  is  no  surer  evidence  of  living  without  God 
in  the  world  than  living  without  intimate  com- 
munion with  the  Bible.  Who  that  does  not 
mean  to  remain  in  impenetrable  obduracy, — who 
that  does  not  form  the  deliberate  resolve  to  close 
every  avenue  to  the  divine  influence,  that  is  not 
prepared  to  plunge  the  dagger  of  the  second  death 
into  his  own  bosom, — can  live  in  the  neglect 
of  these  Scriptures  of  God  1  And  if  you  believe 
them,  and  understand  them,  will  you  refuse  them 
the  submission  of  your  heart  and  your  everlasting 
obedience?  Do  you  accredit  the  stupendous 
truths  contained  in  this  volume,  and  shall  they 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  WORD.        285 

awaken  no  deep  interest,  and  urge  you  to  no 
solemn  preparation  for  yo'iir  last  account  ?  There 
is  not  one  among  them  that  will  not  prove  a 
savour  of  life  unto  life,  or  of  death  unto  death/'* 
What  can  we  add  more  to  this  searching,  solemn 
appeal  to  you  who  are  living  in  a  wilful  neglect  of 
that  Book  which  tells  you  of  life  in  this  world,  and 
out  of  which  you  will  be  judged  in  the  world  which 
is  to  come  ?  Disbelieve,  or  neglect  the  Word  of 
God,  and  you  reject  the  only  chart  to  eternity. 

It  may  not  be  out  of  place,  in  a  chapter  de- 
voted to  the  preciousness  of  God's  Word,  and  may 
form  a  suitable  close,  to  submit  to  the  serious 
attention  of  the  reader  a  few  observations  bearing 
upon  the  character  of  the  received  English  version 
of  the  Bible ;  and  to  enter  our  solemn  caveat 
against  a  proposition  which  has  obtained,  having 
for  its  object  the  disturbance  and  displacement  of 
the  present  translation,  by  the  substitution  of  an 
emxCnded  or  new  translation  of  the  Sacred  Scrip- 
tures. Our  views  and  feelings  upon  this  subject 
are  as  decided  and  strong  as  they  are  devoutly  and 
maturely  considered.  We  cannot  but  look  upon 
8uch  a  propositi  ■)n  as  not  only  uncalled  for  by 
*  Spring. 


286       THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD'S  WORD. 

the  unanimous  voice  of  the  Christian  Church,  and 
not  required  by  the  events  of  her  history  or  the 
state  of  the  world,  but  as  likel}  to  prove  most 
disastrous  to  the  interests  of  pure,  evangelical 
religion.  That  the  present  version  of  the  Bible, 
as  a  human  production,  is  perfect,  we  affirm  not. 
There  are  passages  the  meaning  of  which  other 
renderings  might  more  clearly  elucidate — words 
that  are  obsolete — expressions  that  are  obscure — • 
phrases  that  may  chime  somewhat  harshly  upon 
a  refined  ear  ;  be  it  so — the  Bible,  as  a  translation, 
is  the  work  of  man !  and  what  work  of  man  ever 
issued  from  his  hands  complete?  Any  version 
of  the  Scriptures  offered  to  us  as  a  substitute 
for  the  present,  must  not  only  necessarily  be  an 
imperfect  production,  but  would,  doubtless,  from 
the  circumstances  in  which  it  would  be  pre- 
j^ared,  contain  renderings  yet  more  erroneous, 
phrases  yet  more  objectionable,  defects  and  ble- 
mishes yet  more  palpable  and  glaring  than  the  one 
which  we  now  possess.  We  need  but  refer,  in 
proof  of  this,  to  the  specimens  already  presented. 
While  thus  we  candidly  concede  the  imperfections 
of  the  existing  version,  we  as  honestly  and  strongly 
claim  for  it  a  degree  of  fidelity  of  rendering — of 
clearness  in  evolving  the  mind  of  the  Spirit — and 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  WORD.       287 

of  accuracy,  beauty,  and  excellence  as  a  transla- 
tion, which  no  man,  and  which  no  body  of  men, 
the  most  erudite  and  pious  in  the  present  age, 
advanced  and  intelligent  as  it  is,  could  equal, 
much  less  surpass.  The  translators  of  the  English 
Bible  were  among  the  most  learned  and  holy  men 
the  world  ever  saw.  More  ripe  scholars  and  pro- 
found theologians  the  Church  of  God  never  pro- 
duced. Of  one  of  them,  William  Bedwell,  the 
learned  Lightfoot  remarks,  "  Industrious,  and 
thrice  learned,  to  whom  I  would  rather  be  a 
scholar,  than  take  on  me  to  teach  others."  Of 
another,  Dr  John  Rainolds,  the  man  who  sug- 
gested to  the  King  the  idea  of  the  present  trans- 
lation, Bishop  Hall  remarks,  "  The  memory  and 
reading  of  that  man  were  near  to  a  miracle ; 
and  all  Europe  at  the  time  could  not  have  pro- 
duced three  men  superior  to  Rainolds,  Jewel,  and 
Ussher."  They  would  all  of  them,  as  philologists 
and  divines,  be  giants  in  any  age.  If  James  I. 
were  in  some  respects  a  weak  man,  yet,  as  the 
pupil  of  George  Buchanan,  he  was  a  ripe  scholar, 
and  possessed  of  no  mean  attainments  in  divinity. 
He  had  the  intellectual  sagacity,  not  to  say  the 
spiritual  discernment,  to  choose  the  men  who  were 
in  all  respects,  both  as  to  learning  and  piety,  equal 


288       THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  WOED. 

to  the  undertaking.  Their  advantages  for  the  ac- 
complishment of  the  work  were  great.  With  access 
at  the  time  to  the  most  ancient  manuscripts,— 
with  the  versions,  ready  at  their  hands,  of  Tindal, 
Coverdale,  and  Matthew,  of  Cranmer,  Geneva,  and 
the  Bishops'  Bible, — and  with  a  revived  study  of 
the  Greek  language,  at  that  time  culminating  to 
its  highest  point,  it  would  seem  as  if  the  God  of 
the  Bible,  in  His  wonder-working  providence, 
had  provided  an  especial  and  befitting  scaffolding 
for  the  uprearing  of  this  glorious  and  imperish- 
able structure  of  learning,  piety,  and  truth — the 
good  old  English  Bible.  To  quote  the  words 
of  an  able  writer — 

"The  art  of  translation  cannot  in  its  whole 
history  boast  a  greater  miracle  than  the  English 
Bible.  No  less  happy  and  less  skilful  feat  of 
religious  scholarship  could  have  succeeded  in 
winding  one  book  so  thoroughly  round  the  hearts 
of  Englishmen,  domesticating  its  characters  and 
scenes  in  the  imagination,  and  imparting  to 
everything  in  it  a  genius  loci,  an  old  welcome, 
familiar  air,  as  if  it  belonged,  upon  the  Platonic 
theory,  to  some  distant  horizon  of  the  reader's 
own  recollection,  some  acquaintance  with  a  for- 
mer world.  The  sacred  homeliness  of  the  language 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OJ^  GOD's  WOED.       289 

gives  to  all  the  conversations  and  all  the  drama- 
tic life  and  action  of  the  inspired  volume  the 
authenticity  and  characteristic  tone  of  a  true 
orioinal.  A  fracrrance  from  an  old  world  haunts 
lis,  the  genuine  fresh  breeze,  which  has  crossed 
over  an  ocean  of  time  to  visit  us  on  this  shore  of 
modern  life  and  society,  and  inspire  a  belief  in 
and  a  communion  with  the  past.  Everything 
that  carries  us  back  to  the  sacred  original  of 
man,  all  the  images  of  primitive  life  that  still 
remain  around  us,  and  remind  us  of  the  first 
rudiments  of  our  social  state,  the  parental  and 
filial  relations,  husband  and  wife,  master  and 
servant,  the  household,  even  spreading  corn-fields 
and  patriarchal  furrows,  the  very  instruments  of 
agriculture,' — everything  that  appeals  to  nature 
or  to  the  past,  has  something  in  it  akin  to  the 
language  of  our  translated  Bible/'  To  disturb, 
then,  this  excellent  version, — the  sword  which 
fought  so  well  and  successfully  the  battle  of  the 
Keformation,  and  which  again  and  again  has 
confounded  atheism,  infidelity,  and  Romanism, 
— a  version  which  all  sections  of  the  Chris- 
tian Church  consent  to  receive,  and  which,  by  a 
thousand  associations  and  memories  the  most 
hallowed,  precious,  and  undying,  is  endeared  to 


290        THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  WORD. 

our  hearts,  our  liomes,  and  our  sanctuaries,  would 
seem  to  be  as  impolitic  as  impious.  Who  would 
think  of  altering  the  text  of  Homer  or  of  Shak- 
speare,  without  a  serious  violation  of  good  taste, 
and  committing  a  species  of  sacrilege  and  wrong 
against  which  a  nation  would  rise.  With  re- 
verence and  awe,  infinitely  more  profound,  must 
we  approach  the  Bible.  While  it  challenges  the 
most  searching  investigation,  and  demands  the 
most  implicit  belief,  it  forbids  the  touch  of  a 
reckless  innovation.  The  general  fidelity  of  the 
work  as  a  translation, — its  "  pure  well  of  English 
undefiled," — its  Anglo-Saxon  terseness, — the  crys- 
tal clearness,  distinctness,  and  beauty  with  which 
the  fundamental  verities  of  our  faith — the  great 
essential  doctrines  of  the  gospel— are  presented  to 
the  mind  of  the  most  simple  and  unlearned,  are  so 
many  demonstrations  in  its  favour,  clustering  like 
sentinels  around  the  most  magnificent  and  stupen- 
dous monument  of  our  language  which  the  v/orld 
possesses.  We  have  remarked,  that  to  supplant 
this  ancient  and  endeared  translation  by  a  modern 
and  strange  one,  would  be  hazardous.  Much 
would  be  risked,  little  would  be  gained.  A  door 
would  at  once  be  opened,  through  which  would 
rush  a  tide  of  innovation  and  error,  sweeping  away 


TEE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  WORD.        291 

the  an(;ient  and  sacred  landmarks  of  learning,  and 
truth,  and  godliness.  The  Church  of  God,  stand- 
ing before  her  foes  with  the  humiliating  acknow- 
ledgment that  for  ages  she  had  been  battling  with 
a  corrupt  and  frail  instrument, — confronting  error 
with  error,  wielding  a  weapon  of  spurious  and  un- 
certain temper, — ^would  be  sharn  of  her  strength, 
and  tarnished  of  her  glory.  The  enemies  of  the 
Bible,  ever  watching  for  our  halting,  would  exult 
at  the  confession,  and  employ  their  triumph  in  en- 
grafting upon  its  holy  pages  their  preconceived 
opinions  and  favourite  heresies ;  and  thus  playing 
into  the  hands  of  the  infidel  and  the  Romanist, 
the  pantheist  and  the  materialist,  we  should  be 
found  fraternising  with  the  Hegels,  the  Strausses, 
the  Newmans,  the  Maurices  of  our  day.  For 
these  reasons,  and  others  as  weighty,  we  solemnly 
and  earnestly  protest  against  a  new  or  revised 
version  of  the  English  Bible,  preferring  it,  with 
all  its  faults,  as  it  is.  Possessing  an  edition, 
containino;  the  marmnal  readiness  on  the  text, 
and  with  the  aids  afforded  by  such  works  of  re^ 
ference  as  are  constantly  issuing  from  the  press 
— philological  and  exegetical — the  spiritual  and 
unlettered  student  of  the  Word  of  God  needs  no 
better, — and  no  better  could  be  constructed, — than 


292       THE  PEECIOUSKESS  OF  GOD's  WOED. 

the  good  old  English  Bible  of  our  hearts,  our 
memories,  and  our  homes,  with  which  w^e  can 
part  but  with  life  itself.     Esto  j^erpetua  I 

"  Hail,  sacred  Volume  of  eternal  truth  ! 
Thou  staff  of  age  !  thou  gviide  of  wandering  youth  ! 

■  Thou  art  the  race  which  all  that  run  shall  win — 
Thou  the  sole  shield  against  the  darts  of  sin  : 
Thou  givest  the  weary  rest,  the  poor  man  wealth. 
Strength  to  the  weak,  and  to  the  lazar  health. 
Send  me,  my  King,  my  Saviour,  and  my  God, 
Through  all  these  paths  Thy  sainted  servants  trod; 
Lead  me  Thy  twofold  nature  to  explore. 
Copy  the  human,  the  Divine  adore  ; 
To  mark  through  Hfe  the  profit  and  the  loss. 
And  trace  Thee  from  the  manger  to  the  cross. 
Give  me  to  know  the  medium  of  the  wise. 
When  to  embrace  the  world,  and  when  despise — 
To  wait  with  patience,  to  abound  with  fear, 
And  walk  between  presumption  and  despair. 
Then  shall  Thy  blood  wash  out  the  stain  of  guilt. 
And  not  in  vain,  for  me,  Thy  blood  be  spilt."  ♦ 

We  would  venture  upon  one  or  two  words  of 
needed  and  solemn  caution.  There  exists  in  the 
present  day  a  marvellous  fondness'  for  question- 
ing the  divine  authenticity  cf  certain  parts  of 
the  Bible.  Individuals  professing  a  love  to,  and 
reverence  for,  God's  Word,  think  it  not  wrong 
freely  to  canvass  the  claims  of  particular  books, 
chapters,  or  verses  to  our  full  and  unhesitating 

♦  Lines  composed  between  one  and  two  ceutaries  ago. 


THE  fr.ECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  WORD.       293 

belief,  in  the  presence  of  their  families  and  house- 
holds. This  evil  is  a  serious  and  great  one.  Such 
persons  are  not,  probably,  aware  how  far  they 
are  encouraging  in  others  that  natural  enmity 
of  the  human  heart  to  godhness,  which  would 
gladly  avail  itself  of  the  pretext  of  an  alleged 
particular  interpolation,  in  order  to  a  general 
disbelief  and  rejection  of  the  whole  Bible. 
Breathe  not  a  sentence  in  the  presence'  of  the 
unconverted  calculated  to  shake  their  confidence 
in,  or  lower  their  reverence  for,  the  Word  of  the 
living  God.  God  ■will  not  hold  him  guiltless  who 
thus  casts  doubt  and  discredit  upon  the  volume 
which  is  a  revelation  of  His  mind  aiid  mil,  and 
which,  when  heaven  and  earth  shall  have  passed 
away,  will  exist  a  glorious  and  eternal  memorial 
of  His  love,  grace,  and  truth.  To  this  remark, 
permit  us  to  add  another.  You  may  safely 
question  your  soundness  in  the  faith,  if  your 
principles,  your  creed,  or  your  life,  will  not  allow 
of  a  full  reception  of  every  part  of  the  Word  of 
God,  whether  relating  to  doctrine,  privilege,  or 
duty.  If  the  natural  tendencies  of  your  system 
be  to  create  a  distrust  or  shyness  of  any  j^art  of 
the  Bible,  you  may  be  sure  that  either  your  creed 
"or  your  life  is  in  the  wrong.     We  must  beware 


294       THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  VfOKB. 

of  the  unsafe  and  often  false  tests  of  ImmaTi 
standards,  and  feel  that  we  are  walking  in 
the  "  old  paths "  of  truth  and  righteousness, 
trodden  by  patriarchs  and  prophets,  by  apostles, 
evangelists,  and  martyrs,  only  as  we  have  for 
our  guide  and  warrant  a  "  Thus  saith  the 
Lord." 

Believer  in  Jesus  1  endeavour  to  experience  more 
and  more  the  preciousness  of  the  Word  of  the 
Lord.  It  was  precious  in  the  days  of  Eli — days 
of  evil  and  of  affliction,  days  of  judgment  and  of 
death.  Surely  these  are  days  in  which  the  Word 
of  the  Lord  should  be  especially  precious  to  our 
souls!  Bind  it  closer  and  firmer  to  your  hearts. 
Let  it  dwell  riddy  in  you  in  all  wisdom.  Believe 
in  it  firmly,  receive  it  fully,  study  it  j^rayerfully, 
quote  it  reverently,  follow  it  implicitly,  defend 
it  valiantly,  disseminate  it  widely  ;  and  in  a  little 
while,  guided  by  its  counsels  and  sanctified  by 
its  truths,  it  will  conduct  you  to  those  realms  of 
glory  where,  in  full  splendour,  you  will  behold 
the  Saviour  whose  salvation  it  revealed,  whose 
beauty  it  unvailed,  and  of  whose  love  it  spake 
to  you  while  upon  earth,  —  purpling  many  a 
cloudy  ])icture,  gleaming  brightness  upon  many 
a  dreary  path,  soothing  and  cheering  many  a  sad 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  GOD's  WORD.        295 

and  lonely  stage  of  your  earthly  pilgrimage, — » 
"  and  so  shall  you  be  ever  with  the  Lord/"* 

"  I  love  the  sacred  Book  of  God ; 
No  other  can  its  place  supply : 
It  points  me  to  the  saints'  abode. 
It  gives  me  wings,  and  bids  me  fly, 

*'  Sweet  Book  !  in  thee  my  eyes  discern 
The  image  of  my  absent  Lord : 
From  thine  instructive  page  I  learn 
The  joys  His  presence  will  afford, 

**  Then  shall  I  need  thy  light  no  more. 
For  nothing  shall  be  then  conceal'dj 
When  I  have  reach'd  the  heavenly  shore. 
The  Lord  himself  will  stand  reveal'd. 

**  When  'midst  the  throng  celestial  placed. 
The  bright  Original  I  see. 
From  which  thy  sacred  page  was  traced. 
Sweet  Book !  I  've  no  more  need  of  the@  I 

*  But  while  I  'm  here,  thou  shalt  supply 
His  place,  and  tell  me  of  His  love ; 
I  *11  read  with  faith's  discerning  eye. 
And  thus  partake  of  joys  above."  * 

•Kelly. 


f,  in  the 


CHAPTER  X. 

THE  PKECIOUSNESS  OF  PRAYER. 

**  Golden  vials,  full  of  odours,  which  are  the  prayers  of 
saints." — Rev.  v.  8. 

If  there  be  an  argument  which  establishes  be- 
yond all  dispute  the  doctrine  of  the  fall,  and  the 
necessity  of  a  restored  and  regenerated  nature,  it 
is  the  fact,  that  from  it  nothing  that  is  holy, 
spiritual,  or  good  emanates.  The  moral  soil  is 
so  utterly  degenerate,  that  even  the  flowers  which 
adorn  it  —the  natural  virtues  still  clino-inor  to  our 
humanity — are,  in  the  sight  of  a  holy  God,  but 
as  noxious  weeds,  destined  finally  and  uttei-ly  to 
perish.  Such  was  the  complete  wreck,  such  the 
entire  paralysis  of  our  nature.  "  In  my  flesh," 
says  the  apostle,  "  dwelleth  no  good  thing."  If, 
then,  in  the  midst  of  this  utter  and  universal  cor- 
ruption, there  should  be  found  springing  any  bud, 
or  blossom,  or  fruit  of  real  holiness — anything 
truly  =^^^^^^^'    spiritual,   heavenly — it  must  be 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  PEAYER.  297 

tlie  product  of  a  divine  principle,  of  a  new  nature 
implanted  witliiii  us  by  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  A 
striking  proof  and  illustration  of  this  is  preser.  ted 
in  the  subject  of  this  chapter.  There  exists  not  a 
more  undoubted  evidence  of  a  renewed  nature  than 
— Peayer.  The  absence  of  it  is  the  unniistake- 
able  evidence  of — death  ;  its  existence  a  palpable 
and  positive  evidence  of — life.  Prayer  is  the 
most  vital,  spiritual,  and  pure  emanation  of.  the 
indwelling  of  the  Spirit  in  the  soul.  If,  in  a  case 
of  suspended  animation,  we  marked  the  slightest 
symptom  of  life — the  gentlest  heaving  of  the 
heart — the  faintest  moisture  breathed  upon  the 
surface  of  a  mirror — we  should  certahily  hail  it 
as  proof  of  the  existence  of  the  vital  piiiiciple. 
We  should  not  ask  for  strong  spasmodic  action, 
and  postpone  all  efforts  to  rouse  the  dormant 
pulse,  before  we  pronounced  the  individual  alive. 
We  should  be  satisfied  that  the  spark  still  glowed, 
and  this  would  reassure  our  hope,  and  aniini.  e 
our  labour.  Prayer  is  the  spiritual  life  of  the 
renewed  soul.  There  may  be  the  absence  of 
profound  religious  knowledge,  great  depth  of 
Christian  experience,  fiery  zeal  and  gigantic  energy 
— nevertheless,  if  of  one  thus  apparently  dor- 
mant it  is  sa.id,  "Behold  he  prayeth  V — if,  in  the 


298      THE  PRECIOUSXESS  OF  PRAYER. 

secret  walk,  all  deeply  vailed  from  human  ey^ 
there  is  fellowship  with  God,  comnuinion  with  the 
Invisible, — there  is  life — life  divine,  life  spiri- 
tual, life  eternal.  To  change  the  figure — here  is 
a  plant  of  lighteousness  growing  in  a  corrupt  soil, 
here  is  a  flower  of  holiness  bloominoj  and  exhalins: 
amidst  sin,  corrujDtion,  and  death !  Surely  this 
cannot  be  indigenous  to  our  fallen  humanity,  but 
must  be  a  seedling,  a  germ,  a  graft  from  the  para- 
dise of  God.  Among  the  most  precious  things  of 
God  is  this — the  principle  and  spirit,  the  pov/er 
and  sweetness  of — Prayer. 

We  select  the  idea  from  a  scene  in  the  Apoca- 
lyptic drama  which  passed  before  the  eye  of  John. 
In  this  vision,  among  other  sublime  revelations, 
he  beheld  "  four  beasts  and  four  and  twenty 
elders  fall  down  before  the  Lamb,  having  every 
one  of  them  harps,  and  golden  vials  full  of 
odours,  which  are  the  prayers  of  saints."  That 
tl.ese  elders  belonged  not  to  any  order  of  angelie 
intelligence,  is  conclusive  from  the  subsequent 
verse,  in  which  they  are  represented  as  acknow- 
ledging themselves  to  be  "  redeemed  to  God  by 
the  blood  of  the  Lamb."  It  is  clear,  then,  that 
they  formed  a  part  of  the  Church  redeemed 
from  amongst  men.     The  whole  vision  is  designed 


THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  PRAYER.     299 

to  present  the  fact,  that  the  Church  of  God  is  a 
'praying  Chuixh ;  and  that  the  priiyers  of  the 
Lord's  peo2:)le  a^end  before  Jehovah  as  precious 
incense,  holy,  fragrant,  and  acceptable,  through 
the  infinite  and  atoning  merits  of  Jesus  Christ. 
The  PRECIOUSNESS  of  Prayer,  then,  is  our 
theme,  and  the  following  is  the  order  in  which 
we  propose  to  present  it : — The  sacred  incense, 
— the  "golden  vials,"  from  whence  the  incense 
ascends, — and  the  preciousness  and  acceptance 
of  the  incense  to  God.  "  Golden  vials  full  of 
odours,  which  are  the  prayers  of  saints/' 

But  observe,  in  the  outset,  whose  prayers  are 
these  : — "  The  prayers  of  saints."  "  Odours  (or 
incense),  which  are  the  prayers  of  saints/'  What 
saints?  Not  the  glorified  saints.  The  saints 
in  heaven  have  done  with  prayer.  The  service 
and  the  employment,  which  before  was  to  them 
the  most  precious  and  hallowed,  has  now  ceased 
for  ever.  That  which  is  perfect  is  come,  and 
that  which  was  but  in  part  is  done  away.  Prayer 
and  supplication,  which  on  earth  was  the  source 
of  their  sweetest  solace  and  their  richest  comfort 
— the  vital  atmosphere  in  which  they  lived — is 
exchanged  for  praise.  Adoration,  thanksgiving, 
and  worship  fill  every  soul, .  attune  every  heart, 


300     THE  PEECIOrSNESS  OF  PEAYER. 

and  employ  every  tongue,  in  tliis  Avorld  of  bless- 
edness. Beloved,  there  is  no  prayer  in  heaven, 
save  that  of  the  Great  Interceding  High  Priest. 
It  is  a  remarkable  fact — and  it  stands  in  direct 
refutation  of  the  dogma  held  by  tbe  idolatrous 
communion  of  Eome — that  there  is  recorded  in 
the  Bible  but  a  single  appeal  from  creatures 
on  earth  to  the  saints  in  heaven — but  one  in- 
stance of  supplication  addressed  to  the  glorified 
spirits — and  tliat  was  denied  1  We  refer  to  the 
appeal  of  Dives  to  Abraham.  Thus  the  Romisli 
idea  of  the  invocation  of  saints  is  directly  op- 
posed to  the  Word  of  God.  There  is  but  one  re- 
cognised Intercessor  in  heaven,  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  who  "  by  His  own  blood  entered  once  into 
the  holy  place,"  and  "  ever  liveth  to  make  inter- 
cession for  us."  With  such  a  Mediator  before 
the  throne,  whom  the  Father  heareth  alway,  why 
invoke  the  aid,  the  sympathy,  the  prayers  of  crea- 
tures— angel  or  saint  ?  The  Great  High  Priest  is 
in  heaven — will  not  that  suffice  ?  With  Him  the 
Father  is  well  pleased — is  not  this  enough  ?  His 
intercession  never  fails — v/hat  more  can  you  de- 
sire ?  Begirt  with  His  ephod,  and  wearing  His 
breast-plate,  He  bears  the  burdens  and  partici- 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  PRAYER.     301 

pates  tlie  sorrows  of  His  Church  below.  By  no 
avenue  but  His  bleeding  heart  can  they  enter, — up 
no  ladder  but  His  cross  can  they  ascend, — and 
with  no  name  may  they  entwine  their  supplica- 
tions but  the  one  name  which  transcends  every 
name,  the  name  of — Jesus.  Who  can  fully  unfold 
the  blessedness  of  this  truth  to  the  saints  of  God  ? 
•Do  we  not,  beloved,  rob  our  souls  of  the  peculiar 
blessing — the  succour,  the  comfort,  the  grace — 
bound  np  in  the  intercessory  work  of  our  Im- 
manuel  v/ithin  the  vail?  What  can  be  more 
encouraging  and  animating  than  to  know  that 
Christ  remembers  us,  prays  for  us,  and  upholds 
us  in  heaven? — that  he  thinks  of  us  with  a 
Friend's  affection,  compassionates  us  with  a  Bro- 
ther's sympathy,  prays  for  and  succours  us  with 
a  Saviour's  meritorious  intercession?  See  you 
Him  not,  by  faith^,  standing  before  the  golden 
altar  in  glory,  presenting  the  sacred  incense  of 
His  merits,  the  temple  all  filled  with  its  perfume  ? 
Think  not  that  the  Church  below  hath  no  tokens, 
unmistakeable  and  precious,  of  her  Great  High 
Priest's  intercession  within  the  vail  of  glory.  Has 
the  type  of  this  truth  no  significance  ?  A  part  of 
Aaron's  vestment  was  "a  golden  6e^^  upon  the 


802  THE  PRECIOUSNESS  Oli^  PPvAYEK. 

liem  of  the  robe  round  about."  And  tlie  Divine 
instruction  was,  "  It  shall  be  upon  Aaron  to 
minister ;  and  his  sound  shall  he  heard  when  he 
goeth  in  unto  the  holy  place  before  the  Lord." 
(Exod.  xxviii.  84?,  85.)  How  expressive  and  how 
sweet  must  that  sound  have  been  to  the  waiting 
conorreoation  without !  It  was  to  them  an  evi- 
dence  and  a  token  that  the  priest  was  within  the 
vail,  niinisterino^  before  the  altar,  bearino-  them 
upon  his  breast-plate,  presenting  their  sacrifices, 
and  securing  by  his  intercession  their  acceptance 
and  God's  response.  Beloved,  our  Great  High 
Priest  has  passed  within  the  vail,  and  appears  in 
the  presence  of  God  for  us.  Hear  you  not  the 
]nusic  of  His  bells  ?  How  entrancing  their  me- 
lody !  How  precious  their  significance !  Every 
covenant  blessing  sent  down  from  God — every 
gracious  answer  to  prayer  returned — every  pure 
beam  of  love  darting  into  your  soul — every  spring 
of  joy,  and  jDeace,  and  hope  welling  up  in  your 
heart  —  every  burden  sustained  —  every  grief 
soothed — every  temptation  broken,  is  the  chim- 
ing of  these  bells  upon  the  robe  of  Jesus  as  He 
ministers  before  the  throne  of  God  in  glory. 
How  sweet,  how  precious,  how  soothing  their 
melody !     Child  of  God  !^ 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  PRAYER.     803 

"  Lift  up  your  eyes  to  th'  heavenly  seat. 
Where  your  Redeemer  stays ; 
Kind  Intercessor  !  there  He  sits, 
And  loves,  and  pleads,  and  prays. 

"  Petitions  now  and  praise  may  rise. 
And  saints  their  offering  bring; 
The  Priest,  with  His  own  sacrifice. 
Presents  them  to  the  King. 

**  Jesus  alone  shall  bear  my  cries 
Up  to  His  Father's  throne ; 
He,  dearest  Lord  !  perfumes  my  sighs. 
And  sweetens  every  groan." 

"The  prayers  of   saints."     If  prayer  be  the 

breathing  of  the  indwelling  Spirit  in  the  soul — ■ 
if  the  expression  of  deeply-felt  want  —  if  the 
language  of  a  child — and  if  the  incense  of  the 
heart  wafted  to  heaven  through  faith  in  Christ, 
then  the  saints  of  God  are  the  only  individuals 
who  offer  true  prayer.  Prayer  is  too  holy  and 
spiritual  an  exercise  for  any  but  the  holy  ones. 
None  prostrate  themselves  at  the  mercy-seat  but 
the  poor  m  spirit — the  self-abhorring — Christ- 
desiring  !  To  them  this  spot  is  the  dearest  in  the 
imiverse.  Here  is  attraction  which,  find  them 
where  it  may,  irresistibly  draws  and  indissolubly 
binds  them.  All  may  ba  gloom  beyond— all  is 
sunshine    here.       Thii    Sfiint   in    o^udience    with 


804      THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  PEAYEE. 

Jehovah  is  the  most  morally  sublime  spectacle 
in  the  imiverse.  Angelic  spirits  must  look  down 
upon  it  with  an  emotion  of  blended  awe  and 
delight.  Such  is  the  privilege  of  a — Saint.  Let 
the  world  deride  the  name,  and  trample  in  the 
dust  him  who  wears  it,  yet  is  it  the  most 
honoured  and  sacred  appellation  God  ever  con- 
ferred upon  mortal.  "Called  to  be  saints" — 
what  a  high  calling,  beloved,  is  this !  Made 
lower  than  angels  by  sin,  we  are  made  higher 
than  angels  by  grace.  Eedemption  has  exalted 
our  humanity  above  every  other  nature  but  the 
Divine.  To  be  clothed  upon  with  the  "  righteous- 
ness of  God,"  is  to  occupy  a  position  of  dignity 
and  glory  to  which  no  other  creature  can  aspire. 
Angels  stand  in  the  aphelion,  saints  in  the 
centre,  of  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness.  Lord !  let 
the  infidel  deny  the  character,  and  the  worldling 
scorn  the  name,  number  me  among  thy  saints 
everlasting,  upon  whom  is  conferred  the  privi- 
lege of  fellowship  and  nearness  with  Thee  here, 
and  glory,  'honour,  and  immortality  with  Thee 
hereafter ! 

But  what  is  the  incense  ? — "  the  prayers  of 
saints."  The  emblem  is  exquisitely  beautiful  and 
expressive.     It  is  one  of  the  highest  conceptions 


THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  PEAYEE'.  S05 

of  poetry,  in  one  of  its  most  sacred  forms.  Prayer 
is  holy  incense.  The  margin  of  the  passage  so 
renders  it,  and  David  so  employs  the  expression 
in  connexion  with  prayer:  "Let  my  prayer  come 
before  Thee  as  incense,  and  the  lifting  up  of  my 
hands  as  the  evening  sacrifice."  We  have  but 
glanced  at  the  truth  that  the  saints  of  God  are  a 
praying  people — that  intercourse  with  the  Triune 
Jehovah  is  an  essential  characteristic.  The 
thought  is  so  important,  we  propose  in  a  few 
pages  to  amplify  it.  We  have  said  that  de- 
votion is  a  symptom  of  life,  an  evidence  of  true 
piety,  a  characteristic  of  a  saint  of  God.  This 
remark  holds  good  in  its  universal  applica- 
tion. True  prayer  is  that  one  vital  principle 
that  animates,  energises,  and  sanctifies  the  uni- 
versal family  of  God.  Whatever  their  differences 
of  ecclesiastical  polity,  discipline,  or  worship — 
whatever  their  varied  gifts,  attainments,  or  posi- 
tion in  society,  prayer  is  the  moral  atmosphere 
of  the  one  Church  of  God.  "  Moses  and  Aaron 
among  His  priests,  and  Samuel  among  them  that 
call  upon  His  name;  they  called  upon  the  Lord, 
and  He  answered  them."  No  man  is  a  saint  of 
God  who  is  not  a  praying  man;  and  a  praying 
man,  find  him  where  you  may,  is  a  saint  of  God, 


S06     THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  PEAYER. 

He  may  jDrefer  the  place  and  the  mode  of  prayei 
which  his  conscience  best  approves  ;  and  whethe: 
that  place  be  a  cathedral  or  a  barn,  and  the  modi 
be  liturgical  or  free,  is  of  no  essential  moment. 
If,  penetrating  within  the  inner  and  hidden 
shrine,  he  waves  before  its  altar  the  censer  of  a 
truly  contrite,  believing,  adoring  heart,  draw- 
ing near  to  God  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  and 
holding  fellowship  with  the  Invisible,  that  man 
is  a  man  of  prayer,  is  a  recognised  saint  of  the 
Most  High,  and  as  such  we  should  recognise 
and  commune  with  him  as  a  Christian  brother 
beloved. 

But  not  only  is  prayer  essential  to  the  cha- 
racter of  a  saint  of  God,  his  whole  history  implies 
that  he  is  a  man  of  prayer.  Your  Christian  life, 
beloved  reader,  necessitates  this  walking  with  God 
in  all  its  minute  detail.  If  it  be  a  divine  precept, 
as  it  is  a  precious  privilege,  to  "  acknowledge  the 
Lord  in  all  our  ways,"  then  this  habit  of  recognis- 
ing the  being  and  government  of  God,  His  love 
and  care  for  us,  His  providential  guidance  of  our 
every  step,  must  keep  us  in  constant  and  close 
contact  with  our  Father  and  Friend.  And  when 
to  this  v/e  add  the  more  spiritual  part  of  our 
history, — the  Christian  conflict  we  wage,  tlie  con- 


THE  PKECIOUSNESS  OP  PRAYEE.  SO? 

stant  discoveries  of  sin  we  make,  the  seductions  by 
which  we  are  assailed,  the  daily  trials,  sorrows, 
and  disappointments  to  which  we  are  subjected, — • 
surely  Peayer  must  be  the  living,  enshrouding 
atmosphere  of  a  saint  of  God.  Not  one  moment 
could  we  live  without  it.  Prayer — either  breathed 
from  the  believer's  heart  on  earth,  or  from  the 
lips  of  the  Great  Intercessor  in  heaven — sustains 
each  moment  the  life  of  God  in  the  soul  of  man. 
Ah,  beloved!  whither  could  you  go  with  those 
burdens,  those  wants,  those  chafings,  those  back- 
slidings,  those  shortcomings,  those  sorrows,  which 
compose  so  large  a  part  of  daily  life,  but  to  the 
throne  of  grace  ?  Where  could  you  resort  for 
mercy,  for  strength,  for  fortitude,  for  patience,  for 
comfert  and  soothing,  but  where  the  God  of  love 
and  power  meets  you  and  talks  with  you  through 
Jesus,  as  man  communeth  with  his  friend  ?  It 
is  in  this  light  we  come  to  regard  prayer,  not 
merely  as  a  divine  command,  or  as  a  Christian 
duty,  but  as  the  holiest,  sweetest,  and  most  pre- 
cious privilege  God  has  vouchsafed  to  us  on 
earth.  Look  at  its  grandeur — a  mortal,  a  sin- 
ful mortal,  in  audience  with  the  God  of  heaven  ! 
And  when  vre  consider  that  mortal  in  the  light  of 
«,  child,  and  that  God  in  the  character  of  a  Father ^ 


308     THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  PEAYER. 

the  spectacle  becomes  one  of  imsurpassed  beauty 
and  tenderness.  But  look  at  its  preciousness. 
It  comprehends  all  the  minutiae  of  -our  daily  life. 
"  Casting  all  your  care  upon  Him."  "  Be  careful 
for  nothing ;  but  in  everything,  by  prayer  and 
supplication  with  thanksgiving,  let  your  requests 
be  made  known  unto  God."  What  a  tender,  lovina: 
rebuke  is  this  of  that  restraining  of  prayer,,  and 
limiting  of  God,  which  restricts  our  petitions  to 
the  major  conoerns  of  life,  while  it  leaves  unpro- 
vided for  the  minor  ones.  And  jQt,  beloved, 
God  is  as  deeply  interested  in  your  sinall  cares  as 
in  your  large  ones.  Those  comparatively  trivial 
events,  those  lesser  circumstances  of  your  history, 
are  often  those  which  you  feel  the  most  keenly, 
which  chafe  the  most  sorely,  and  upon  which  so 
much  that  is  important  and  momentous  in  your 
life  depends.  Learn,  then,  the  blessedness,  and 
appreciate  the  jDrivilege,  of  hallowing  with  23rayer 
the  minute  details  of  daily  life.  Infinite  as 
Jehovah  is,  He  stoops  to  our  little  trials,  little 
cares,  little  wants,  little  sorrows.  Nothing  is  too. 
small  for  God  that  concerns  you,  His  loved  child. 
Study  the  life  of  Jesus  when  on  earth.  Vras  there 
a  circumstance,  or  a  want,  or  a  temj^tation  in  the 
history  of  His  disciples  too  mean  or  uuimportrint 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  PRAYEE.  809 

lor  His  notice  ?  He  who,  by  similitude  so  signifi- 
cant and  impressive,  could  vindicate  and  cx[,lain 
the  particular' providence  of  God  in  the  affairs  of 
His  people,  assuring  them  that  the  very  hairs  of 
their  head  were  all  numbered,  was  not  likely  to 
pass  unnoticed  and  unmet  the  fasting  and  lan- 
guor of  His  disciples,  when  on  one  occasion  He 
said  unto  them,  *'  Come  ye  yourselves  apart  into 
a  desert  place,  and  rest  awhile."  He  who  created 
the  minute  things  of  nature,  alike  regards  the 
minute  things  in  providence,  and  despises  not 
the  "  day  of  small  things"  in  grace.  God  made 
the  atoms  that  form  the  pyramids,  the  mote  that 
dances  in  the  sunbeam,  the  insect  that  svvims  in 
the  ocean  drop.  Think  you,  then,  that  He  can 
be  indifferent  to,  or  regard  as  beneath  His  notice, 
the  smallest  care,  the  most  delicate  sorrow,  the 
meanest  want,  the  lowest  interest,  that  relates  to 
you  ?  Impossible  !  Learn,  then,  to  entwine  with 
your  petitions  the  small  cares,  the  trifling  sor- 
rows, the  little  wants  of  daily  life.  Whatever 
affects  you — be  it  a  changed  look,  an  altered 
tone,  an  unkind  word,  a  slight,  a  wrong,  a  wound," 
a  demand  you  cannot  meet,  a  charge  you  cannot 
notice,  a  sorrow  you  cannot  disclose  —  turn  it 
into  prayer, .and  send  it  up  to  God.     Disclo- 


SI  0  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  PRAYER. 

surcs  joii  may  not  make  to  man  yon  cnn  make 
to  the  Lord.  Man  may  be  too  little  for  your 
great  matters,  God  is  not  too  gteat  for  your 
small  ones.  Only  give  yourself  to  prayer,  what- 
ever be  the  occasion  that  calls  for  it.  Send  up 
your  heart  nnto  God  just  as  it  is.  Send  up  a 
v/hole  heart,  and  He  will  return  it  a  broken  heart. 
Send  up  a  broken  heart,  and  He  will  return  it  a 
healed  heart.  Send  up  a  cold  heart,  and  He  will 
return  it  a  loving  heart.  Send  up  an  empty 
heart,  and  He  will  return  it  a  full  heart.  Send 
up  a  praying  heart,  and  He  will  return  it  a 
praising  heart.  Only  send  up  your  heart  to 
heaven,  whatever  its  frame  or  condition,  its 
desires  or  wants,  and  your  Heavenly  Father's 
loving,  gracious  heart  will  descend  and  meet  it 
when  its  pinions  have  scarce  left  the  earth  to 
sweep  in  faith  and  prayer  the  skies.  "  Trust  in 
Him  at  all  times.  Ye  people,  pour  out  your 
heart  before  Him.  God  is  a  refuge  for  us." 
"  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  that  before  they  call, 
I  will  answer :  and  while  they  are  yet  speaking,  I 
will  hear."    Wonderful  encouragement  to  prayer  ! 

Having  thus  spoken  of  the  sacred  incense,  it  is 
meet  that  we  now  advert  to  the  censer.     You  will 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  PRAYEE.  811 

observe  tliese  "  odours"  are  described  as  ascending 
from  "golden  vials."  "Golden  vials  (or  bowls) 
full  of  odours,  wliicli  are  the  prayers  of  saints." 
These  "golden  vials,"  or  bowls — as  some  critics 
more  literally  render  the  word  <f>ia\,7] — are  the 
censers  of  the  saints.  It  is,  then,  an  interesting 
and  imj)ortant  question,  "What  are  the  censers 
which  the  saints  of  God  wave  before  the  altar? 
In  other  words,  to  speak  less  figuratively,  From 
whence  does  true  prayer  spring  ?  It  is  not, 
beloved  reader,  every  man  who  bends  the  knee 
before  God  who  offers  prayer  from  a  golden 
censer.  There  is  no  religious  duty  so  little  under- 
stood, or  more  generally  abused,  as  prayer.  How 
much  passes  current  for  prayer  with  man,  which 
is  not  prayer  with  God !  It  is  like  mistaking  the 
artificial  convulsions  of  galvanism  for  the  actual 
breathing  of  life — the  contortions  of  nature  for 
the  actings  of  grace.  An  individual  may  offer 
to  God  "  strange  fire  "  from  an  earthly  censer. 
God  says,  "I  cannot  away  with  it.''  Beloved, 
true  incense  floats  from  a  golden  censer — what 
is  it? 

Shall  we  begin  with  the  censer  of  a  broken 
ind  contrite  heai't?  Here  is  a  censer  of  the 
purest  gold !     Take  not  man's  estimate  of  it— 


SI  2  THE  PEECIOUSXESS  OF  PRAYEK. 

he,  in  his  blindness,  is  constantly  mistaking  the 
spurious  for  the  true,  the  precious  for  the  vile. 
The  world  holds  liglitly  a  broken  heart  for  sin. 
But  take  God's  estimate, — "Thus  saith  the  high 
and  lofty  One  that  inhabiteth  eternity,  whose 
name  is  Holy;  I  dwell  in  the  high  and  holy 
place,  with  him  also  that  is  of  a  contrite  and 
humble  spirit."  A  broken  heart  for  sin  is 
God's  dwelling!  Again, — "To  this  man  will  I 
look,  even  to  him  that  is  poor  and  of  a  contrite 
spirit."  God  will  look  at  him — He  will  not 
look  at  a  proud,  self-sufficient,  self-justifying 
heart — for  "the  proud  He  knoweth  afar  off;" 
but  His  eye — His  eye  of  love,  His  eye  of  de- 
light, His  eye  of  approval — will  rest  uj)on  the 
humble,  broken,  and  contrite  heart.  Despised 
by  the  worldly,  scorned  by  the  proud,  over- 
looked often  by  the  saints,  yet  how  beautiful, 
how  costly,  how  precious  to  Christ  is  this  golden 
vial!  True,  it  is  a  contrite  heart, — true,  it  is 
an  empty  heart, — true,  it  is  a  self-abased  heart ; 
but  there  waves  not  a  censer  in  heaven,  save 
the  Great  High  Priest's,  more  beauteous,  more 
costly,  more  precious  than  it.  This  "golden 
vial "  is  of  heavenly  construction.  A  Divine 
Artificer  made  and  formed  it.     Gal  the  Holy 


THF  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  PEAYER.  313 

Gliost  alone  wrouglit  this  penitence,  inspired 
this  contrition,  awakened  this  conviction  of  sin. 
He  it  was  who  abased  that  pride,  laid  low  tliat 
loftiness,  stained  that  glory,  a.nd  smote  that 
stricken,  smitten  heart  in  the  dust.  His  the 
power  that  wakes  that  more  than  melody  from 
those  pale,  trembling  lips — "  God  be  merciful 
to  me  a  sinner!"  Melody!  Oh,  angels'  harps 
breathe  not  sweeter  music  than  this  !  And  God, 
when  He  hears  it,  looks  down  and  sees  on  earth 
no  spectacle  of  interest  or  grandeur  to  surpass  it 
■ — one  more  precious  to  His  heart.  Bruised  and 
broken  though  that  spirit  be,  clad  in  the  habili- 
ments of  woe  and  grief,  filled  with  self-loathing 
and  sin-abhorrence,  it  is  in  God's  eye  a  golden 
censer,  wafting  to  His  throne  earth's  sweetest, 
holiest,  richest  incense.  *'The  sacrifices  of  God- 
are  a  broken  spirit :  a  broken  and  a  contrite 
heart,  0  God,  Thou  wilt  not  despise." 

The  believing  heart  is  a  golden  censer,  from 
which  the  holy  incense  of  the  prayer  of  faith 
ascends  to  God.  A  heart  that  humhly  be- 
lieves in  the  Lord  Jesus, — that  accepts  without 
demur  or  hesitation,  and  as  His  free  gift,  His 
finished  salvation,  —  mat  rests  child-like  and 
wholly  u]-.oii  the  oiia  ofiering  by  v/hich  Jesus  hath 


J?14  THE  rHECIOUS:N^E^S  OF  PEA.YEE. 

perfected  for  ever  the  salvation  of  His  people, 
is  a  ''golden  vial."  All  real  prayer  is  the 
prayer  of  faith.  It  is  offered  in  faith  in  God's 
word — His  promise — and  in  what  He  is  Him- 
self as  God, — able  and  willing  to  answer  prayer. 
The  prayer  of  faith  is  but  taking  God  at  His 
word: — "If  ye  who  are  evil  know  how  to  give 
good  gifts  nnto  your  children,  how  much  more 
sliall  your  heavenly  Father  give  good  things 
(even  the  Holy  Spirit)  to  them  that  ask  Him  ? " 
Now,  the  prayer  of  faith  is  the  pleading  of  this 
promise  with  God,  thus  taking  Him  at  His 
word.  The  Lord  Jesus  here  places  a  blank 
card  in  the  hands  of  His  saints,  and  bids  them 
inscribe  upon  it  just  what  they  want.  It  is  a 
note  of  hand  which  He  bids  them  fill  up  to 
any  amount  or  character  of  blessing  they  re- 
quire, and  He  will  grant  it.  "Ask  what  you 
will."  Beloved  reader,  the  Lord  gives  you  this 
promise,  and  bids  you  send  it  up  to  Him  for 
fulfilment  with  the  prayer  of  faith,  trusting 
Him  to  make  it  good.  There  is  much  wisdom 
and  love  of  our  heavenly  Father  displayed  in 
giving  us  this  general  promise  that  we  might 
give  it  a  particular  application.  Faith  in  God's 
promise  is  not  so  much  a  belief  that  a  particu- 


THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  PEAYER.     815 

lar  request  will  be  granted — for  that  request  is 
not  named  in  the  promise.  But  the  stipulation 
is  to  grant  any  good  asked,  anything  supplicated, 
any  petition  preferred,  if  only  asked  in  faith — 
faith  in  God's  faithfulness  and  power  to  make 
good  His  word,  and  to  obtain  the  blessing 
asked.  It  is  a  general  promise  connected  with 
a  particular  application.  The  Lord  Jesus  says, 
"If  ye  shall  seek  anything  in  my  name,  it  shall 
be  granted  you."  Therefore  do  not  hang  back 
and  say,  "  My  particular  need  is  not  mentioned 
in  the  promise ;  my  especial  case  is  not  provided 
for  in  the  Word."  It  is,  beloved,  if  you  will 
but  take  hold  of  the  general  promise  of  God, 
and  plead  it  with  the  prayer  of  faith.  No  par- 
ticular temporal  good  may  be  mentioned, — no 
especial  spiritual  blessing  may  be  promised, — ■ 
no  single  case  may  be  specified ;  but  if  the 
censer  of  a  believing  heart  waft  the  incense  of 
the  prayer  of  faith  to  God,  God  will  grant  that 
particular  temporal  good,  or  bestow  that  especial 
spiritual  blessing,  or  meet  that  peculiar  and 
urgent  case.  It  was  thus  that  Jacob  prayed. 
"  Thou  saidst,  I  will  surely  do  thee  good."  Wliat 
good  ?  Any  good,  all  good !  There  was  the 
pleading  by  faith  of  God's  general  promise  in  a 


ol6     THE  PEECIOUSKESS  OF  PSAYER. 

particular  case  of  urgency.  And  vrlien  he  met 
the  .Angel  of  the  Covenant  at  Peniei,  he  ex- 
claimed, "  I  will  not  let  Thee  go  except  Thou  bless 
me.  .  .  And  He  blessed  him  there."  The  prayer 
of  the  Syrophenician  woman  was  the  prayer  of 
faith.  "  Call  me  a  dog,  tread  me  down  beneath 
Thy  feet — only  grant  me  my  request,  and  come 
and  heal  my  child."  Her  faith  had  a  general 
apprehension  of  Christ's  power  to  eject  the 
demon  from  her  daughter,  and  then  she  flung 
her  particular  sorrow  upon  that  heart  that  never 
was  known  to  reject  a  plea,  or  cast  a  sorrow 
back  again.  Such  is  the  power  which  the 
prayer  of  faith  has  with  God !  It  is  irresistible. 
No  unworthiness,  no  sinfulness,  no  backsliding, 
no  unfaithfulness,  no  depth  of  want,  or  peculi- 
arity of  case  shall  prevail  with  God  to  turn  a 
deaf  ear  to  the  cry  of  faith.  Faith  in  His' 
word  of  promise,  in  His  illimitable  j)ower,  in 
Jlis  boundless  resources,  in  His  beloved  Son,  is 
so  honouring  to  His  nature  and  glorifying  to 
His  name,  that  the  faintest  incense  which  the 
censer  of  a  lowly,  believing  heart  ever  sent 
up  to  heaven,  reaches  the  Majesty  on  high,  and 
brings  back  the  blessing  in  a  gracious  and  lov- 
ing response — more   than  we  either   asked   or 


THE  PEEOIOUSNESS  OF  PRAYER.  317 

thought  of.  We  have  to  do  not  only  with  a 
prayer-answering,  but  also  with  a  jDrayer-exceecl- 
ing  God — a  God  who  always  bestows  more  than 
we  siij^plicated,  because  He  delights  to  give,  not 
according  to  our  stinted  desires,  and  measured 
requests,  but  according  to  the  infinite  merits  of 
His  beloved  Son  and  His  own  wondrous  love 
and  power.  Ask  this  faith  of  prayer  at  the 
hands  of  Jesus.  He  is  not  only  its  Object  and 
its  Medium,  but  He  is  also  its  Author  and  its 
Giver.  Beseech  Him  to  infuse  this  precious 
faith  into  your  feeble,  stammering  petitions.  Im- 
plore Him  to  intensify  and  energise  your  faint 
and  faltering  supplications  with  this  divine 
heaven-descending  and  heaven-ascending  prin- 
ciple. "  Lord,  increase  my  faith  !  Let  me  ask  in 
faith,  nothing  doubting.  Nerve  my  poor,  falter- 
ing arm,  so  ready  to  hang  down ;  stay  my  flutter- 
ing heart  upon  Thee,  so  prone  to  swerve  ;  and 
help  my  soul  to  cast  itself  upon  Thy  precious 
promise  to  save  to  the  uttermost,  and  I  shall 
be  saved.  Lord,  I  believe;  help  Thou  mine 
unbelief."  Or,  is  your  faith  faltering  faith — • 
tempted  faith — tried  faith — sinking  faith?  Lis- 
ten to  the  words  of  Jesus,  once  addressed  to  a 
doubting  believer,  a]\d  m  w  addressed  to  you.    "  0 


818  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  PP.AYER. 

thou  of  little  faith,  wherefore  didst  thou  doubt?" 
"  Gracious  Saviour !  dost  Thou  acknowledge  my 
'  little  faith  ? '  Then  my  '  little  faith  '  shall  ac- 
knowdedge  Thee  !  I  will  come  to  Thee, — I  will 
confide  in  Thee, — I  will  look  to  Thee ;  come  what 
will,  sink  or  swim,  live  or  die,  saved  or  j^erish, 
I  will  cleave  and  cling,  dear  Lord,  to  Thee! 
Thou  art  and  Thou  shalt  be  my  All  in  all." 
Wave  this  censer  before  the  altar  of  sacrifice,  and 
your  prayer  of  faith  shall  be  accepted.  "  This 
is  the  confidence  that  we  have  in  Him,  that,  if 
we  ask  anything  according  to  His  will,  He 
heareth  us.  And  if  we  know  that  He  hear  us, 
whatsoever  we  ask,  we  know  that  we  have  the 
petitions  that  we  desired  of  Him."  (1  John  v.  14, 
15.)  The  prayer  of  faith  will  pardon  sin, — the 
prayer  of  faith  will  heal  the  sick, — the  j^rayer  of 
faith  will  open  heaven, — the  prayer  of  faith  will 
move  the  Arm  that  upholds  the  universe  !  Ask 
in  faith,  nothing  doubting,  and  you  shall  have 
the  j)etitions  you  desire  of  Him. 

A  Christ-loving  heart  is  also  a  "  golden  vial " 
full  of  precious  incense — the  incense  of  love. 
And  such  is  the  heart  of  all  who  are  renewed  by 
the  Spirit,  and  are  in  a  state  of  reconciliation 
and  peace  with  God.     There  may  be  fluctuation 


THE  PEECTOUSNESS  OF  PEAYER.  81 9 

in  this  holy  affection, — it  may  ebb  and  flow, — it 
may  be  tried,  tempted,  grieved, — yet  a  heart  in 
whicli^  glows  a  solitary,  glimmering  spark  of 
divine  love,  a  heart  which  can  say,  "  Lord,  Thou 
knowest  all  things.  Thou  knowest  that  I  love 
Thee,''  is  a  golden  censer,  wafting  its  grateful 
incense  to  God.  But  let  us  not  be  satisfied 
with  a  dubious  or  imperfect  love  to  God.  Let 
our  return  of  affection  be  worthy  the  Object 
that  inspires  it.  There  are  no  changes  in  the 
tide  of  Christ's  love  to  us — it  is  always  a  flow, 
never  an  ebb.  What  may  to  our  short  ken  ap- 
pear an  ebb,  is  in  reality  not  so.  It  is  not  that 
the  tide  of  God's  love  recedes  from  us,  it  is  that 
we  recede  from  the  tide  of  God's  love.  We  quit 
the  depths  of  this  infinite  and  never-receding 
ocean,  and  repair  to  the  shallows  of  creature 
good,  of  human  affection,  of  worldly  enjoy- 
ment ;  and  then,  chilled,  disappointed,  perchance 
wounded,  we  marvel  that  our  love  to  God  has 
so  soon  congealed,  ceasing  to  flow  in  its  wonted 
warm  and  undivided  current.  We  wonder  that 
the  Bible  has  not  the  same  interest,  the  means 
of  grace  the  same  attraction,  prayer  the  same 
sweetness,  and  the  ministry  of.  the  word  the 
same  power.    Alas  !  the  change  is  in  our  human- 


S20  THE  PEECIOUSIsESS  OF  PEAYER. 

ised  divine  affections,  in  our  lessened  spirituality, 
in  our  lessened  tone  of  heavenliness,  in  our 
truant  affections,  our  undecided  heart.  We 
have  allowed  the  idolatry  of  the  creature,  the 
love  of  the  world,  or  the  too  eager  pursuit  of  its 
calling,  or  the  too  earnest  desire  to  please  and 
stand  well  with  its  friends,  to  insinuate  itself 
into  our  heart,  and  steal  away  its  affections 
from  Christ  But  let  ns  retrace  our  steps, — the 
door  of  return  is  yet  open, — and  come  back  to 
Christ.  Repairing  afresh  the  altar  where  His 
sacrifice  was  offered,  let  us  from  its  holy  fire  re- 
plenish our  cold  censer  with  living  embers,  and 
once  more  send  up  the  holy,  precious,  fragrant 
incense  of  a  restored,  loving,  surrendered  heart 
to  God. 

Not  less  precious  to  the  Lord  is  the  censer  of 
a  praiseful  heart.  Alas  that  the  elements  of 
thanksgiving  and  praise  should  be  so  wanting 
in  our  religion!  Yet  so  it  is.  We  speak  of 
prayer- meetings,  but  seldom  of  praise-meet- 
ings, —  of  gatherings  for  humiliation,  confes- 
sion, and  supplication,  but  how  rarely  do  we 
assemble  to  give  thanks  to  God,  and  to  render 
to  Him  the  praise  due  unto  His  great  Name. 
When  the  pressure  is  upon  us,  we  are  eager  to 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  PEAYER.  321 

draw  in  tlie  Divine  goodness  by  prayer ;  when 
the  pressure  is  removed,  how  slow  to  breathe  out 
the  acknowledgment  by  praise  !  And  yet  for 
our  encouragement  God  has  said,  "  Whoso 
ofFereth  peaise  glorifieth  me."  Since  the  Lord's 
government  of  His  people  is  a  government  of 
love,  it  follows  that,  whatever  the  decision  of 
that  government  may  be,  it  is  in  love  He  deals 
with  them.  "  Whom  I  love,  I  rebuke  and  chas- 
ten." If  this  be  so,  there  is  nothing  in  the  deal- 
ings of  God  that  may  not  j)rQmpt  you  to  wave 
before  Him  the  golden  censer  of  a  thankful 
heart.  Oh,  precious  the  cloud  thus  ascending,  fill- 
ing heaven  with  its  odour  !  In  heaven  all  is  adora- 
tion,  thanksgiving,  and  praise.  And  when  we  offer 
'praise  to  God,  we  approach  in  our  worship  on 
earth  the  nearest  to  the  worship  of  the  glorified 
in  heaven.  Oh,  let  us,  then,  not  be  slov/  to  wave 
this  golden  censer,  and  offer  Him  the  precious 
incense  !  We  will  praise  Him  for  electing 
love — praise  Him  for  Jesus — praise  Him  for  a 
divine  righteousness — praise  Him  for  a  free- 
grace  salvation — ^praise  Him  for  a  full  pardon — • 
praise  Him  for  a  throne  of  grace — praise  Him 
for  the  Rock  that  towers  above  our  head,  shelter- 
ing us  with  its  shadoY/,  and  refreshing  us  with  its 


.322  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  PRAYER. 

streams — j^^'^^s^  Him  for  the  blessing  given,  for 
the  blessing  withheld — j^raise  Him  for  the  restor- 
ings,  for  the  uphoklings,  for  the  chastenings,  for 
the  rebukes,  for  the  wounds, — for  the  darkness  of 
sorrow,  for  the  brightness  of  joy, — for  the  retro- 
spect of  grief,  for  the  prospective  of  bliss, — yea, 
for  all  that  is  past,  that  is  present,  and  that  is  to 
come ; — foi  all,  all  flows  from  one  Divine  source 
• — the  everlasting  and  unchangeable  love  of  God 
in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord. 

One  point  of  deep  interest  yet  remains  to  be 
considered  —  the  precioiisness  of  the  incense : 
"golden  vials,  full  of  odours."  Be  the  incense 
that  is  ofi'ered  to  God  through  Christ  what  it 
may — prayer — confession  of  sin — supplication — 
praise,  yet  ascending  from  the  heart,  oh,  how  full 
of  sacred  odour  is  the  vessel !  It  may  be  a  sin- 
ful, and  yet  a  contrite  heart, — a  w^andering,  and 
yet  a  sincere  heart, — a  changeful,  and  yet  a  loving 
heart;  still,  in  God's  eye,  it  is  a  ''golden  vial,", 
and  the  Lord  smelleth  a  sweet  savour  in  the  in- 
cense wafted  from  it  to  His  throne. 

Prayer  must  be  precious  incense  to  God,  be- 
cause, in  the  first  place,  it  is  the  fruit  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  in  the  soul.  All  true  prayer — be  it 
but  a  desire,  a  groan,  a  tear,  a  sigh — ^is  the  in- 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  PEAYER.     323 

spiration  of  the  Spirit.  "  The  Spirit  also  helpeth 
our  infirmities :  for  we  know  not  what  we  should 
pray  for  as  we  ought :  but  the  Spirit  maketh 
intercession  for  us  with  groanings  which  cannot 
be  uttered."  It  is  this  truth  that  stamps  a  value 
upon  the  weakest  prayer  the  saints  of  God  ever 
breathed,  and  which  imparts  to  that  weak  prayer 
a  richer  fragrance  to  God  than  earth's  choicest 
perfume.  We  but  faintly  conceive  the  costliness 
and  beauty  of  the  lowest  work  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  in  the  soul.  It  is  nothing  less  than  the 
begetting  of  the  Divine  nature  in  man :  the  erec- 
tion and  upbuilding  of  a  structure  of  righteousi 
ness  that  shall  outlive  all  material  grandeur,  and 
be  radiant  with  the  glory  and  resound  with  the 
praises  of  Jehovah  to  aU  eternity.  That  must 
be  the  power  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost  that  can 
extract  incense  so  sweet,  so  fragrant,  so  precious, 
from  hearts  so  sinful,  so  vile,  so  worthless  as 
ours  !  Such  are  the  prayers  breathing  from 
your  heart,  dear  reader.  They  may  be  mixed 
v/ith  much  of  the  earthliness  of  the  channel 
through  which  they  flow, — you  may  complain  of 
coldness,  formality,  wandering  thoughts,  the  in- 
trusion of  things  foreign  to  your  feelings,  desires, 
and  enjoyments, — ^yet,  pouring  out  your  heart  to 


824  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  PEAYER. 

God  in  the  most  retired,  lonely,  feeble  way,  yonr 
Father  in  heaven  recognises  it  as  the  voice  of  a 
child,  and  "  accepts  you  with  your  sweet  savour/' 
Oh,  see,  then,  that  the  prayer  that  breathes  from 
your  lips,  whether  from  the  pulpit  or  the  closet, 
v.'hether  in  public  or  in  private,  be  the  breathing 
of  the  Holy  Ghost !  Seek  to  be  filled  witb  the 
Spirit.  Rest  not  short  of  His  vital  power,  and 
sanctifying  influence,  and  fragrant  anointing  in 
your  soul.  Then,  althougli  your  prayers  may  be 
mixed  with  tears,  and  groans,  and  confessions, — • 
though  with  a  stammering  tongue  and  quivering 
lif)  you  address  the  Majesty  of  heaven  and 
earth,  God  will  descry  the  voice  of  His  Spirit 
in  your  prayers,  and  will  speedily  and  graciously 
respond. 

But  that  which  imparts  the  richest  fragrance 
to  the  prayers  of  the  saints  is  th^  atoning  merit 
of  Christ's  obedience  and  death,  through  the 
medium  of  whose  mediatorship  they  are  offered, 
and  on  the  ground  of  whose  merits  they  are  ac- 
cepted. The  apostle  beautifully  propounds  this 
truth  : — "  Christ  also  hath  loved  us,  and  hath 
given  Himself  for  us  an  offering  and  a  sacrifice 
to  God  for  a  siveet-smelling  savour^  This  sacri- 
fice it  is — divine  in  its  dignit}^,  expiatory  in  its 


.IHE  PEECIOL^SNESS^OF  PllAYER.  o2o 

cliciracter,  complete  in  its  offering,  and  accepted 
by  God  —  that  invests  witli  a  cloud  of  divine 
incense,  most  fragrant  and  precious,  every  broken 
petition,  every  penitential  confession,  every  believ- 
ing supplication  wafted  to  God  from  tlie  heart 
of  a  saint  on  earth.  The  sacrifice  of  Christ  on 
earth  opened  a  door  by  which  the  believer  ap- 
proaches God  in  heaven.  The  intercession  of 
Christ,  which  is  the  presentation  of  His  merits 
before  the  golden  altar,  secures  the  acceptance 
of  his  petitions  in  glory.  We  marvel  not  now 
that  these  "  golden  vials  "  should  be  '^  filled  with 
odours,  which  are  the  prayers  of  saints."  The 
Holy  Ghost  fills  the  censer,  and  then  Jesus  the 
obedient  One,  Jesus  the  crucified  One,  Jesus  the 
risen  One,  Jesus  the  ascended,  glorified,  inter-, 
ceding  One,  throws  the  divine  fragrance  of  His 
offering  around  the  prayers  of  His  people,  and 
thus  they  find  favour  with  God.  What  an  encour- 
agement is  this  to  draw  near  to  God  in  prayer ! 
Who  that  approaches,  though  with  taint,  and  fear, 
and  imperfection  in  his  petitions,  yet  with  •sin- 
cerity, penitence,  and  faith,  shall  fail  of  finding 
acceptance  both  of  his  person  and  his  ofTering, 
seeing  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  imparts  His 
merits,  employs  His  advocacy,  and  blends  with 


826  THE  PRECBOUSNESS  OF  PRAYER. 

the  much  incense  of  His  sacrifice  every  humble 
suit,  every  heaven-directed  j)etition  ?  "  We  are 
many  times  dejected  at  the  remembrance  of  our 
2:)rayers ;  but  the  concern  that  Christ  hath  in 
them  is  a  ground  to  raise  us.  We  have  an  Ad- 
vocate that  knows  how  to  separate  the  imperti- 
nences and  follies  which  fall  from  the  mouths 
of  His  clients ;  He  knows  how  to  rectify  and 
purify  our  bills  of  requests,  and  present  them 
otherwise  than  we  do.  How  happy  a  thing  is 
it  to  have  One  to  offer  up  our  prayers  in  His 
golden  censer,  and  perfume  our  weak  perform- 
ances by  applying  His  merit  to  them !  Satan 
distracts  our  prayers,  but  cannot  blemish  Christ's 
intercession.  When  we  cannot  present  our  own 
case,  by  reason  of  diseases  and  indispositions,  we 
have  One  to  present  our  cause  for  us,  that  can 
never  be  distempered,  who  is  more  quick  to  2:)re- 
sent  our  groans  than  we  are  to  utter  them.  Be- 
sides, all  prayers  put  up  in  His  name  shall  be 
successful.  (John  xvi.  23.)  The  arguments  we 
use  from  Christ's  merits  are  the  same  fundamen- 
tally upon  wliich  the  plea  of  Christ  in  heaven  is 
grounded,  and  if  God  should  deny  us  it,  it  were 
to  deny  His  Son,  and  cast  off  that  deliglit  He 
Himself   has  in  the  merits  of  His  death ;  but 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  PRAYER.  S27 

God  loves  that  mediation  of  His  Son,  and  that 
this  work  of  His  should  be  honoured  and  acknow- 
ledged. And  though  we  have  no  promise  to 
have  our  prayers  heard,  yet  there  is  no  doubt  but 
He  will  hear  the  prayers  of  Christ  for  us,  for 
Him  He  hears  always.  (John  xi.  42.)" 

In  another  part  of  the  Apocalypse  we  have  a 
beautiful  unfolding  of  this  truth, — the  mediation 
of  Christ  in  connexion  with  the  saints'  prayers  : — ■ 
"  And  another  angel  came  and  stood  at  the  altar, 
having  a  golden  censer ;  and  there  was  given  unto 
him  much  incense,  that  he  should  ofler  it  luith 
the  prayers  of  all  saints  upon  the  golden  altar 
which  was  before  the  throne."  (Eev.  viii.  3.)  This 
"  anger'  was  Jesus,  the  Angel  of  the  everlast- 
ing Covenant,  who  now  stands  before  the  golden 
altar,  waving  the  golden  censer,  blending  the 
precious  incense  of  His  own  divine  and  atoning 
merits  with  the  prayers  of  all  His  saints.  Oh, 
how  powerful,  then,  with  God  must  be  the  prayers 
of  His  people,  entwined  and  blended  with  the 
much  incense  of  such  a  sacrifice  !  How  can  we 
doubt  the  success  of  every  petition  sent  up  to  the 
court  of  Heaven,  with  such  an  Advocate  to  pre- 
sent and  plead  it?  Let  us,  then,  "draw  near;" 
let  us  come  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace  and  ask 


328     .        THE  PKECIOUSNESS  OF  I'KAYEE. 

what  we  will.  Is  it  pardon  ?  ash  it.  Is  it  accept- 
ance? ask  it  Is  it  grace?  ash  it.  Is  it  some 
temporal  good  needed?  ask  it.  The  petitioner 
may  be  unworthy,  and  the  petition  imperfect — • 
there  may  be  much  sinfulness  in  the  one,  and 
many  flaws  in  the  other ;  but  Christ's  merit  puts 
it  all  right.  Upon  the  ground  of  that  merit,  God 
says  to  you — "  I  will  accept  you  with  your  sweet 
savour."  The  person  first  finds  favour,  and  tlien 
the  offering.  Our  persons,  "  accepted  in  the 
Beloved,"  secure  the  gracious  acceptance  of  our 
prayers.  Tell  me  not,  then,  that  there  is  so 
much  sinful  taint  marring  the  fragrance  of  your 
players — such  coldness  of  spirit — such  vagrancy 
of  mind — such  intrusion  of  sinful  imaginations 
and  desires — such  formality,  unbelief,  and  insin- 
cerity— such  a  lack  of  power,  life,  and  unction, 
• — in  a  word,  so  much  unpraying  prayer ;  stiU, 
approaching  as  a  true  penitent,  with  some  yearn- 
ings of  spirit  after  God- — some  Christ-thirsting, 
Christ-longing  in  your  soul,  and  asking  in  His 
n;ime,  and  pleading  His  blood,  there  shall  be  a 
gracious  acceptance  of  your  person,  and  a  prompt 
answer  to  your  prayers,  secured  by  the  cloud 
of  incense  wdiich  goes  up  moment  by  moment 
from  the  golden  censer  w^hich  the  Angel  of  the 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  PRAYEE.     829 

everlastino-  Covenant  waves  to  and  fro  before  the 

CD 

golden  altar  in  lieaven.  One  touch  of  that  censer, 
one  breath  of  that  incense,  annihilates  in  a  mo- 
ment and  for  ever  all  the  sinful  faults  and  human 
imperfections  adhering  to  your  prayers.  "  The 
prayers  of  all  saints."  Sweet  and  encouraging 
declaration  I  No  one  excluded  ;  the  weak,  the 
trembling,  the  fearful,  the  unbelieving,  those  of 
but  shallow  knowledge,  of  little  grace,  and  of 
tried  circumstances,  who  write  themselves  "  less 
than  the  least  of  all  saints," — even  their  prayers, 
presented  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  and  offered  with 
the  much  incense  that  floats  from  the  golden, 
censer,  cover  the  mercy-seat  of  heaven  with  their 
cloud,  and  fill  heaven  with  their  fragrance.  Poor 
trembling  soul !  doubt  no  more  the  full  acceptance 
of  your  prayers. 

How  precious,  then,  is  prayer !  Prove  its  pre- 
ciousness  by  personal  experience,  beloved  reader. 
Are  you  afflicted  ? — give  yourself  to  prayer.  Are 
you  burdened  v/ith  sin  ? — give  yourself  to  prayer. 
Are  you  oppressed  with  sorrov/  ? — give  yourself  to 
prayer.  Are  you  bereaved  of  those  you  loved  ? — • 
give  yourself  to  prayer.  Does  God  hide  the  light 
of  His  countenance  from  your  soul  ? — does  Jesus 
suspend  the  visits  of  His  love,  the  gi'acious  manifes- 


SoO     THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  PRAYER. 

tatioiis  of  His  presence? — give  yourself  to  prayer. 
Does  Salcan  teiiipt — does  the  world  persecute — do 
the  saints  wound? — give  yourself  to  pray  e7\  Does 
loneliness  depress — does  disease  invade — does 
sickness  lay  low  ? — give  yourself  to  prayer.  Or, 
are  you  approaching  the  valley  of  the  sliadov/  of 
death  —  the  solemn  moment  nearing  of  your 
spirit's  entrance  into  the  eternal  world  —  tlie 
grave  unvailin,o;  its  bosom  to  receive  the  lifeless 
tenement  ? — Give  youeself  to  peayee.  Listen 
to  the  gentle  voice,  the  kind  invitation  of  thy  cove- 
nant God  and  Father, — "  Come,  my  people,  enter 
into  thy  chambers,  and  shut  thy  doors  about  thee ; 
hide  thyself  as  it  were  for  a  little  moment,  until 
the  indignation  be  overpast.*'  These  "  chambers" 
of  repose  and  security  are  many  and  precious. 
They  include  the  everlasting  love  of  God, — the 
cross  of  Jesus, — the  covenant  of  grace, — the  mercy- 
seat, — the  promises  of  Jehovah, — the  full  and  free 
invitation  of  the  gospel,- — the  pavilion  of  Christ's 
grace, — the  clift  of  the  "Rock ;  yea,  to  sum  all  up  in 
one,  "  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High,"  which  is 
the  very  heart  of  God's  heart, — hidden,  enshrine(^ 
in  which,  no  evil  shall  touch  thee.  "  Tor  in  the 
time  of  trouble,  He  shall  hide  me  in  His  pavilion  ; 
in  the  secret  of  His  tabernacle  shall  He  hide  me." 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  PRAYER.     331 

Oh,  tlie  cliarni,  the  soothing,  sanctifying  power  of 
PRAYER !  "  Prayer  is  an  all-efficient  panoply,  a 
treasure  undiminished,  a  mine  which  never  is 
exhausted,  a  sky  unobscured  by  clouds,  a  haven 
unruffled  by  storms ;  it  is  the  root,  the  fountain, 
and  the  mother  of  a  thousand  blessings.  I  speak 
not  of  the  prayer  which  is  cold,  and  feeble,  and 
devoid  of  energy ;  I  speak  of  that  which  is  the 
child  of  a  contrite  spirit,  the  offspring  of  a  soul 
converted,  born  in  a  blaze  of  unutterable  inspira- 
tion, and  winged  like  lightning  for  the  skies. 
The  potency  of  prayer  hath  subdued  the  strength 
of  fire ;  it  hath  bridled  the  rage  of  lions,  hushed 
anarchy  to  rest,  extinguished  the  wars,  appeased 
the  elements,  expelled  demons,  burst  the  chains 
of  death,  expanded  the  gates  of  heaven,  assuaged 
diseases,  repelled  frauds,  rescued  cities  from  de- 
struction ;  it  hath  stayed  the  sun  in  its  couise, 
and  arrested  the  progress  of  the  thunderbolt :  in 
a  word,  it  hath  destroyed  whatever  is  an  enemy 
to  man.  I  again  repeat,  that  I  speak  not  of  the 
prayer  engendered  by  the  lips,  but  of  that  which 
ascends  from  the  recesses  of  the  heart.  As- 
suredly, there  is  nothing  more  potent  than 
prayer ;  yea,  there  is  nothing  comparable  to  it. 
A  monarch  vested  in  gorgeous  habiliments  is  far 


332  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  PRAYER. 

less  illustrious  than  a  kneeling  suppliant,  en- 
nobled and  adorned  by  communion  with  his 
God.  Consider  how  august  a  privilege  it  is, 
when  angels  are  present,  and  archangels  throng 
around ;  when  cherubim  and  seraphim  encircle 
with  their  bhxze  the  throne  ;  that  a  mortal  may- 
approach  with  unrestrained  confidence,  and  con- 
verse with  heaven's  dread  Sovereign  !  Oh,  what 
honour  was  ever  conferred  like  this !  When  a 
Christian  stretches  forth  his  hands,  and  invokes 
his  God,  in  that  moment  he  leaves  behind  him 
all  terrestrial  pursuits,  and  traverses  on  the  wings 
of  intellect  the  reahns  of '  life ;  he  contemplates 
celestial  objects  only,  and  knows  not  of  the  pre- 
sent state  of  things  during  the  period  of  his 
prayer,  provided  that  prayer  be  breathed  with 
fervency.  Could  we  but  pray  with  fervency  ; 
could  we  pray  with  a  soul  resuscitated,  a  mind 
awakened,  an  understanding  quickened,  then, 
were  Satan  to  appear,  he  would  instantaneously 
fly ;  were  the  gates  of  hell  to  yawn  upon  us,  they 
would  close  again. 

"  Prayer  is  a  haven  to  the  shipwrecked  mari- 
ner, an  anchor  unto  tliem  that  are  sinking  in  the 
waves,  a  staff  to  the  limbs  that  totter,  a  mine  of 
jewels  to  the  poor,  a  security  to  the  rich,  a  healer 


IHE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  PRAYER.     833 

of  disease,  and  a  guardian  of  health.  Prayer  at 
once  secures  the  continuance  of  our  blessings, 
and  dissi23ates  the  cloud  of  our  calamities,  0 
Prayer !  0  blessed  Prayer  1  thou  art  the  un- 
wearied conqueror  of  human  woes,  the  firm 
foundation  of  human  happiness,  the  source  of 
ever-during  joy,  the  mother  of  philosophy  !  The 
man  who  can  pray  truly,  though  languishing  in 
extremest  indigence,  is  richer  than  all  besides  ; 
whilst  the  being  who  never  bends  the  knee, 
though  proudly  seated  as  a  monarch  of  nations, 
is  of  all  men  most  destitute.  Let  us,  then,  direct 
our  thoughts  to  Him  that  was  poor,  yet  rich ; 
rich,  because  He  was  poor.  Let  us  overlook  the 
enjoyments  of  the  present,  and  desire  the  bless- 
ings of  the  future ;  for  so  shall  we  obtain  the 
blessings  both  of  the  present  and  the  future. 
Oh,  may  we  all  obtain  them  through  the  grace 
of  Christ  our  Lord,  to  whom,  with  the  Father 
and  the  Holy  Spirit,  be  ascribed  all  glory,  now 
and  for  evermore  !     Amen."  * 

Prayer  is  one  of  the  essential  elements  of  the 
hidden  and  sequestered  walk  of  the  believer 
with  God.  It  is  an  engagement  so  sacred, — 
often  blended  with  an  unfolding  of  the  heart  so 

*  Clii-vf5r..-stom. 


S34     THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  PRAYER. 

confidential  and  hallowed, — it  -would  seem  as  if 
this  were  the  soul's  most  suitable  and  loved  com- 
panion in  solitude.  There  can  be  no  painful 
sense  of  loneliness  when  the  believer  is  in  con- 
verse with  God.  All  places  are  peopled,  and  all 
space  is  filled  when  occupied  by  Him.  Complain 
not  that  the  world  is  a  solitude,  while  Jesus  treads 
its  lone  and  shaded  paths  by  your  side.  Mourn 
not  that  no  resj)onses  of  love  and  sympathy  wake 
its  stillness — that  no  echoes  break  upon  your  ear 
but  those  of  your  moaning  spirit,  when  Christ  talks 
with  you  by  the  way,  your  Friend  and  Brother. 
Oh  no,  you  cannot  be  alone, — without  love,  with- 
out friendship,  without  sympathy,  without  society, 
— when  your  spirit  is  absorbed  in  God,  who  is  all 
life,  all  love,  all  presence.  The  aflecting  senti- 
ments of  one  whose  solitude  was  hallowed  and 
whose  loneliness  was  cheered  vidth  holy  converse 
with  God,  have  sublimely  ex^jressed  these  pensive 
feelings  of  the  heart: — 

"  Like  the  low  murmur  of  the  secret  stream, 

Which  through  dark  alders  winds  its  shaded  way. 
My  suppliant  voice  is  heard, — ah,  do  not  deem 
That  on  vain  toys  I  throw  my  hours  away  1 

"  In  the  recesses  of  the  forest  vale. 

On  the  wild  mountain,  on  the  verdant  sod, 
Where  the  fresh  breezes  of  the  morn  prevail, 
I  wander  lonely,  c<  nimuning  with  God. 


THE  PEECIOTJSNESS  OF  PRAYER.  S3 5 

*  When  the  faint  sickness  of  a  wounded,  heart 

Cree  ps  in  cold  shudd'rings  through  my  sinking  frame, 
I  turn  to  Thee, — that  holy  peace  impart, 

Which  soothes  the  invokers  of  Thy  awful  name. 

'  0  all-pervading  Spirit !     Sacred  beam  ! 
Parent  of  life  and  light !  Eternal  Power  ! 
Grant  me  through  obvious  clouds  one  transient  gleam 
Of  Thy  bright  essence  in  my  dying  hour  ! " 

Prayer  is  so  spiritual  an  exercise,  it  behoves 
us  to  be  cautious  how  we  confound  the  gift  with 
the  grace  of  prayer.  There  may  exist  in  some 
the  gift  ctpart  from  the  grace,  and  in  others  the 
grace  apart  from  the  gift.  It  is  of  great  moment 
that  those  especially  who  are  to  plead  with  God 
in  behalf  of  others  keep  this  distinction  in  view  ; 
and  while  seeking  from  God  the  gift,  may  be  yet 
more  assiduous  and  intense  in  their  seekings  of 
the  grace  of  prayer.  Alas,  what  spiritual  dead- 
ness,  what  perfunctory  formality  may  invade  our 
pulpit  devotions !  What  empty  censers  may  we 
wave  in  public,  and  before  our  God !  There  may 
be  the  beauty  of  thought,  the  elegance  of  dic- 
tion, the  copiousness  of  language,  without,  alas  ! 
the  reality  and  power  of  2:)rayer.  Oh  for  the 
effusion  of  the  Spirit  of  prayer  upon  the  pulpits 
of  our  land !  But  not  here  alone  may  be  traced 
the  deadening  influence  of  a  spirit  of  formality 


336  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OP  PRAYER. 

— the  existence  of  the  gift  apart  from  the  grace 
of  prayer — but  the  domestic  altar  and  the  closet 
may  witness  to  this  separation.  Ho"V7  may  we 
know  the  difference?  We  think  by  the  fol- 
lowing marks.  The  gift  without  the  grace  of 
prayer  is  more  wont  to  vent  itself  in  public  ;  but 
the  grace  of  prayer  most  seeks  the  privacy  of 
communion,  and  loves  to  pour  itself  out  when 
none  but  God  and  the  conscience  are  the  listeners. 
The  gift  of  prayer  alone  inflates  the  soul  with 
pride ;  the  grace  of  prayer  lays  it  low  in  its 
own  eyes,  and  the  greater  its  enlargement  and 
power,  the  prof ounder  its  humiliation  before  God. 
The  gift  of  prayer,  working  alone,  inspires  the 
soul  with  the  fond  conceit  of  its  own  strength ; 
the  grace  of  prayer  constrains  it  to  take  hold  of 
the  strength  of  Christ.  The  gift  of  prayer,  apart 
from  the  Spirit,  is  satisfied  with  the  applause  of 
man ;  the  grace  of  prayer  waits  in  lowliness  upon 
God,  seeking  no  response  save  the  still  small  voice 
of  the  Spirit  in  the  soul.  The  gift  of  prayer  con- 
tents itself  with  cold,  intellectual,  rational  views 
of  God,  His  character  and  works ;  but  the  grace 
of  prayer  deals  closely  with  the  crucified  Sa- 
viour, is  pervaded  with  the  atoning  blood,  and  is 
Xiiixed  with  contrition  of  spirit,  confession  of  sin. 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  PEAYER.  887 

filial  love,  thanksgiving,  and  adoration.  A\liat 
need  have  we,  then,  to  look  well  to  our  prayerr, 
— honestly  to  examine  our  hearts,  and  ascertain 
whether  our  souls  have  been  baptized  with  the 
"  Spirit  of  grace  and.  supplication,"  and  if,  when 
Ave  present  ourselves  before  God  either  in  public 
or  in  private,  we  can  in  some  measure  adopt  the 
language  of  Paul,  and  say,  "  Truly  our  fellowship  is 
with  the  Father,  and  with  His  Son  Jesus  Christ !" 
Those  who  restrict  themselves  to  a  Formulary  of 
devotion  have  need  to  be  doubly  watchful  of  the 
prayerful  state  of  their  souls,  lest  the  constant 
repetition  of  a  "  form  of  sound  words "  be  a  sub- 
stitute for  the  inward  and  spiritual  grace  of 
prayer.  There  are  many  who  read  prayers — how 
few  who  pray  them  !  We  can  see  no  serious 
objection  to  a  prearranged  formulary  of  devotion, 
provided  the  heart  accompanies  the  sentiments 
and  words  expressed.  The  form  of  supplication 
taught  His  disciples  by  our  Lord — which  indeed, 
as  we  have  elsewhere  observed,  is  more  properly 
the  disciples  prayer — was  intended  doubtless  as 
a  model  rather  than  a  mould.  We  can  see  no 
reasonable  argument  in  favour  of  its  rejection ; 
on  the  contrary,  much  that  pleads  for  its  employ- 
ment as  a  summary  of  great  and  important  peti- 
Y 


338     THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  PRAYER. 

tions  needed  by  the  Christian,  the  Church,  an-i 
the  world.  And  yet,  while  tlius  conceding  the 
lawfulness  of  a  formulary  of  devotion,  we  must 
still  keep  in  mind  the  essential  element  of  all  true 
prayer, — the  spiritual  state  of  the  heart  with  God. 
Our  subject  is  suggestive  of  close  self-examina- 
tion. Prayer  is  the  moral  barometer  of  the  soul, 
• — it  proves  the  existence,  and  tests  the  tone  of  our 
spiritual  life.  As  a  man  is  in  his  walk  with  God, 
so  is  he  as  a  man  of  God.  As  vital  religion  is 
from  God,  so  to  God  it  returns,  and  with  God  it 
deals.  It  is  more  solicitous  what  God  thinks,  how 
God  approves,  and  to  what  degree  it  lives  for  God, 
than  it  is  to  commend  itself  to  man.  The  religion 
that  so  shapes  its  course  as  to  stand  well  with  tlie 
world, — that  can  accommodate  itself  to  the  world's 
opinions,  blend  with  the  world's  pleasures,  win  the 
•world's  smile, — that  thinks  as  the  world  thinks, 
acts  as  the  world  acts,  temporising,  compromising, 
assimilating, — that  is  not  the  religion  of  God  and 
of  the  Bible.  It  may  clothe  itself  in  a  sanctimo- 
nious garb — it  may  multiply  its  religious  forms 
and  ceremonies,  keep  its  saints'  days,  its  matins 
and  vespers,  and  yet  possess  not  an  element  of  real 
godliness.  0  God,  search  and  try  us,  and  vouch- 
safe to  us  grace  to  search  and  try  ourselves,  lest 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  PEAYEE.  839 

there  be  found  in  us  any  false  principles,  any- 
tliino-  untrue  and  unsound  in  our  religion,  any 
element  fatal  to  our  salvation,  anything  that  in- 
terposes between 'US  and  Christ's  finished,  atoning 
work  !    Now  here,  beloved  reader,  is  a  divine  and 
certain  test— the  existence  and  power  of  prayer  in 
our  souls.     Prayer  restrained,  prayer  cold,  prayer 
totally  neglected,  is  symptomatic  of  a  low  and 
lifeless  state.     Eeverse  this,  and  you  have  the 
clear  and  unmistakeable  indices  of  a  vital,  healthy, 
and  spiritual  action  of  the  soul.     Let  us,  then, 
bring  our  hearts  honestly^  frequently,  and  closely 
to  this  test.  '  What  is  the  state  of  your  soul's 
barometer  ?     Unlike  that  which  indicates  the  na- 
tural atmosphere,  the  mercury  of  the  soul  rises 
when  the  moral  atmosphere  lowers.    When  clouds 
are  gathering  thickly  and  darkly,  when  storms  are 
rising,  and  tempests  are  sweeping,  then  it  often  is 
that  prayer  is  the  most  vigorous,  the  most  power- 
ful, the  most  ascending  to  God.     The  seasons  of 
adversity,  trial,  and  sorrow,  are  the  most  praying 
seasons  with  God's  people.      Prayer   often  lan- 
puishes  in  prosperity.    The  spiritual  barometer  is 
tlie  most  depressed  when  the  sky  is  the  most 
cerulean,  and  the  atmosphere  the  most  serene, 
and  the  sun  the  most  brilliant.     Ah !  how  diffi- 


MO  THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  PRAYEK. 

cult  to  inaintain  a  humble,  watchful,  honest  walk 
"vwth  God,  when  the  star  of  temporal  good  is  in 
the  ascendant.  We  lose  sight  then  of  the  Star 
of  Bethlehem — of  Him  whose  birth  was  mean, 
whose  condition  was  poor,  whose  life  was  wreath- 
ed with  storms,  and  whose  life  closed  in  humi- 
liation, agony,  and  blood.  But  seasons  of  adver- 
sity, of  sorrow,  of  suffering,  of  need, — wdien  the 
earthly  star  is  fading  and  sinking, — are  halcyon 
seasons  in  the  history  of  the  child  of  God.  Then 
it  is  that  spiritual  prayer  is  in  the  ascendant,  that 
the  sun  of  the  soul  attains  its  meridian.  Then  we 
turn  to  God,  betake  ourselves  to  the  throne  of 
grace,  take  the  low  place,  humbled,  chastened, 
child-like,  and  dependent — the  will  subdued,  the 
heart  prayerful,  the  spirit  2:)raiseful,  the  soul  as- 
cending. Look,  then,  often  and  closely  to  the 
baron^eter  of  your  soul.  This  suggests  another 
thought. 

Study  to  maintain  an  aptitude  of  soul  for 
prayer.  This,  we  imagine,  is  the  meaning  of  the 
divine  precept,  "  Pray  without  ceasing."  Literally 
this  may  not  be.  It  would  be  impossible  for 
you  to  be  incessantly  in  the  act,  or  breathing  out 
the  expressions  of  .prayer.  Nor  is  this  necessary. 
Tlie  bird  is  not  always  on  the  v;ing.     Tlierc  aro 


THE  PRECTOUSNESS  OF  PEAYEE.  .311  • 

moments  of  repose,  when  it  smooths  its  ruffled 
phimage,  and  its  pinions  gather  strength.  But 
it  is  ever  ready  for  its  flight ;  and  at  the  first 
pressure  of  hunger,  or  the  first  note  of  alarm,  it 
expands  its  wings  and  soars.  So  let  us  cultivate 
the  spirit  of  prayer — the  heart  attuned  to  the 
holy  duty ;  the  mind  sitting  so  loose  to  earthly 
employments  and  cares,  as  that  at  any  moment  of 
danger  or  need  it  may  come  into  the  awful  pre- 
sence of  God  with  devout  and  solemn  reverence. 
This  is  to  "  pray  without  ceasing."  We  are  to 
relax  no  season  or  habit  of  prayer — but  in  the 
closet,  in  the  family,  in  the  social  circle,  and  in  the 
public  sanctuary,  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord. 
"  We  are  to  maintain  an  uninterrupted  and  con- 
stant spirit  of  prayer.  We  are  to  be  in  such  a 
frame  of  mind  as  to  be  ready  to  pray  publicly 
if  requested ;  and  when  alone,  to  improve  every 
moment  of  leisure  which  we  may  have  when  we 
feel  ourselves  strongly  inclined  to  pray.  That 
Christian  is  in  a  bad  state  who  has  suffered  him- 
self, by  attention  to  v/orldly  cares,  or  by  light 
conversation,  or  by  gaiety  and  vanity,  or  by  read- 
ing an  improper  book,  or  by  eating  and  drinking 
too  much,  or  by  late  hours  at  night  among  the 
thoughtless  and  the  vain,  to  be  brought  into  such 


S42     THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  PRAYER. 

a  condition  that  he  cannot  ongage  in  pra3^er  with 
proper  feelings.  There  has  been  evil  done  to  the 
sonl,  if  it  is  not  prepared  for  communion  with 
God  at  all  times,  and  if  it  would  not  find  plea- 
sure in  approaching  His  holy  throne.''  *  Prayer 
is  to  the  believer  what  wings  are  to  the  bird — 
it  assists  his  soul  heavenward ;  and  when  the 
rude  winds  of  adversity  blow,  and  the  seductions 
of  the  world  would  enchain  him  to  earth, — then, 
resorting  to  prayer,  the  believer  soars  as  on  eagle's 
wings  to  a  purer  atmosphere  and  sunnier  skies. 
Such  is  the  Divine  promise, — "  They  that  wait 
upon  the  Lord  shall  renew  their  strength  ;  they 
shall  mount  iip  with  wings  as  eagles  ;  they  shall 
run,  and  not  be  weary ;  and  they  shall  walk,  and 
not  faint."  See,  then,  0  child  of  God !  that 
the  pinions  of  thy  soul  are  ever  ready  for  their 
heavenly  flight.  Sit  so  loose  to  carnal  good, 
hold  the  creature,  however  dear,  by  a  band  so 
slight,  and  creature-blessings  by  a  tie  so  slender, 
that  at  any  moment,  and  in  any  place,  your  heart 
may  turn  to  God,  and  excUim, — "  Whom  have  I 
in  heaven  but  Thee?  and  there  is  none  upon 
earth  that  I  desire  beside  Thee."  And  as  the 
bird  requires  no  preparation  for  its  flight,  save 

■*  Barnes. 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  PEAYER.     843 

only  its  instincts  of  danger  or  of  need,  so  your 
soul  needs  no  preparation  ere  it  draws  near  to 
God,  ere  it  betakes  itself  to  the  throne  of  grace, 
save  the  deep  conviction  of  your  poverty  and 
want,  your  heart's  thirst  for  holiness,  your 
spirit's  yearning  for  Christ.  Alas!  how.  many 
restrain  prayer  before  God  because  of  their  low 
frames !  They  find  their  minds  are  so  earthly, 
their  hearts  so  cold,  their  spirits  so  depressed, 
so  strong  and  unconquerable  a  distaste  and  disin- 
clination for  prayer,  that,  yielding  to  their  feel- 
ings, they  relinquish  this,  the  most  quickening 
and  reviving,  as  it  is  the  most  precious  and  com- 
forting, of  all  spiritual  privileges.  But,  beloved, 
the  Lord  demands  of  you,  ere  you  approach  Him 
in  prayer,  no  self-fitness,  no  previous  preparation, 
but  that  you,  a  poor,  sinful,  unworthy  soul,  need- 
ing Christ,  coming  empty  to  Christ,  bringing  all 
your  sins  and  backslidings,  and  sorrows  and 
wants  to  Christ,  may  "  receive  out  of  His  fulness 
grace  for  grace."  Approach  Jesus  as  you  are — ■ 
C3me  with  elevated  frames,  or  with  depressed 
'frames ;  with  the  language  of  praise,  or  with  tlie 
utterance  of  want ;  with  the  gloom  of  despon- 
dency, or  with  the  aspiration  of  hope, — only  fall 
prostrate  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  and  receive  the 


844  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  PRAYER. 

blessing  He  is  able,  and  is  willing,  to  bestow — 
the  blessing  found  only  there. 

"  All  the  fitness  He  requires 
Is  to  feel  your  need  of  Him.^* 

This  suggests  another  thought.  There  is  great 
danger  of  a  wilful  quenching  in  our  minds  the 
spirit  of  prayer.  If  when  the  Holy  Ghost 
prompts  us  to  pray — if,  when  we  feel  the  soft, 
silent,  gentle  stirrings  of  our  heart  to  rise  to  God, 
we  suppress  the  emotion,  unheed  the  voice,  or 
postpone  the  act,  we  quench  the  Spirit's  in- 
fluence, and  withdrawing.  He  leaves  us  to  a  cold 
and  smokeless  censer — a  heart  from  whose  altar 
no  real  prayer  ascends.  Oh,  it  is  a  serious  and 
solemn  thing  not  to  have  an  ear  quick  to  catch 
the  voice  of  the  Spirit — a  heart  ready  to  respond 
to  the  call  of  Christ.  With  more  than  oriental 
poetry  has  the  inspired  penman,  in  his  graphic 
description  of  the  Church,  portrayed  this  state : 
— "  I  sleep,  but  my  heart  waketh  :  it  is  the  voice 
of  my  beloved  that  knocketh,  saying.  Open  to  me, 
my  sister,  my  love,  my  dove,  my  undefiled :  for 
my  head  is  filled  with  dew,  and  my  locks  v/ith" 
the  drops  of  i\\Q  night,  I  have  put  off  my  coat  ; 
how  shall  I  put  it  on?  I  have  washed  my  feet; 
how  si  mil  I  defile  them  ?     My  beloved  put  in  his 


THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  PRAYER.  3 15 

hand  by  the  hole  of  the  door,  and  my  bowels 
were  moved  for  him.  I  rose  up  to  open  to  my 
beloved  ;  and  my  hands  dropped  with  myrrh,  and 
my  fingers  with  sweet-smelling  myrrh,  upon  the 
handles  of  the  lock.  I  opened  to  my  beloved ; 
but  my  beloved  had  withdrawn  himself,  and  was 
gone :  my  soul  failed  when  he  spake :  I  sought 
him,  but  I  could  not  find  him  ;  I  called  him,  but 
he  gave  me  no  answer."  (Song  of  Sol.  v.  2-6.) 
She  heeded  not  the  monition  of  the  Spirit, — she 
responded  not  to  the  voice  of  Jesus, — she  quenched 
the  spirit  of  prayer  in  her  soul ;  and  when  she 
arose  to  meet  her  Lord— lo  !  He  was  gone ! 
Cultivate  then,  beloved,  a  holy  aptitude  for 
prayer,  an  earnest,  watchful  heeding  of  its  ear- 
liest and  gentlest  call  Then  prayer  will  not 
be  a  strange  employment  or  an  irksome  task. 
In  your  closet,  in  your  counting-house,  in  your 
morning  or  evening  rambles,  amidst  domestic 
cares  or  professional  engagements,  your  heart 
will  feel  the  attraction  of  heaven,  and  prayer,  like 
a  pillar  of  incense  ascending  from  the  altar,  will 
rise  waftea  to  the  throne  of  God. 

There  is  an  important  viev/  of  prayer  we  must 
not  overlook.  Are  we  not  great  losers  from 
not  cherishing  a  watchful  spirit  unto  prayer  I 


846 .        THE  PEEc:ous^'ESS  or  rr. a yek. 

Wg  ask,  we  petition,  we  invoke,  but  how  little 
expectation  is  there  of  God's  response  ;  hovv  little 
patient  waiting  for  the  Lord's  answer,  how  little 
watching  for  the  blessing !  Verily,  this  is  an 
essential  and  serious  defect  in  our  Christianity 
whicli  must  be  remedied.  But  what  is  the 
Divine  precept  touching  this  point?  ''Praying 
always  with  all  prayer  and  supplication  in  the 
Spirit,  and  watching  thereunto  with  all  perse- 
verance and  supplication  for  all  saints."  (Eph. 
vi.  18.)  "Watching  thereunto  with  all 
PERSEVERANCE."  The  same  idea  is  presented  in 
other  words: — "  Blessed  is  the  man  that  heareth 
me,  watching  daily  at  my  gates,  waiting  at  the 
posts  of  my  doors."  (Prov.  viii.  34.)  The  allu- 
sion here  is  to  the  j^osition  of  the  priest,  waiting 
at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation 
where  the  Lord  had  promised  to  speak  unto  him, 
in  holy  expectation  of  the  Lord's  answer;  it 
depicts  also  the  expectant  attitude  of  the  con- 
gregation itself,  watching  the  oj^ening  of  the 
temple-gate,  whence  the  priest  would  come,  bear- 
ing in  his  hands  the  blessing  his  intercession  had 
procured.  Such  must  be  our  watching  and 
waiting  for  the  answer  of  our  prayers.  Expect 
God  will  answer  you,  and  He  will  answer.     Look 


THE  PREOIOUSNESS  OF  PEAYER.  817 

for  the  blessing  you  have  craved,  and  you  shall 
receive  it.  To  petition,  g,nd  expect  no  response, 
— to  ask,  and  look  for  no  reply, — to  pray,  and  care 
for  no  answer, — to  implore  a  boon,  and  turn  away 
in  indifference  and  unbelief,  is  to  cast  the  deepest 
dishonour  on  a  prayer-hearing  and  a  prayer- 
answering  God.  Marvel  not  that  God  answers 
neither  by  fire,  nor  by  dew,  nor  by  the  still  small 
voice  —  you  are  not  waiting  at  the  door  of 
the  tabernacle,  nor  watching  at  the  temple-gate 
in  holy,  earnest,  sincere  desire  for,  and  expecta- 
tion of,  the  blessing !  This  was  the  Psalmist's 
position — "  I  will  direct  my  prayer  unto  Thee, 
and  tuill  look  up.''  Oh,  be  this  our  holy  atti- 
tude ! — looking  up  above  all  human  improbabili- 
ties and  impossibilities, — looking  above  all  our 
sinfulness  and  unworthiness, — looking  above  all 
the  dark,  depressing,  painful  circumstances  of  our 
position, — looking  above  creature  help,  sympa- 
thy, and  succour, — looking  up  to  God  alone ! 
The  more  we  look  up  to  God,  the  less  we  shall 
find  it  necessary  to  look  down  to  man.  The 
more  we  look  up  to  God,  the  more  thoroughly  we 
shall  be  schooled  in  the  holy  art  of  looking  up. 
David  looked  up  when  he  had  breathed  his  prayer 
to  God.     The  disciples  looked  up  when  Christ 


S48     THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  PRAYER. 

ascended  into  heaven,  and  a  cloud  received  Him 
out  of  their  sight.  StejDhen  looked  up  amidst  the 
agonies  of  his  martyrdom,  and  saw  Jesus  stand- 
ing at  the  right  hand  of  God.  My  soul!  do 
thou  look  up  above  thy  broken  cisterns,  thy  dark 
clouds,  thy  difficulties  and  thy  sorrows,  and  be- 
hold thy  God  waiting  to  be  gracious,  ready  to 
answer.  "  Why  art  thou  cast  down,  0  my  soul  ? 
and  why  art  thou  disquieted  within  me?  hope 
in  God;  for  I  shall  yet  pi^aise  Him,  who  is 
the  health  of  my  countenance,  and  my  God." 
(Ps.  xliii.  5.)  Be  you  found,  then,  beloved,  ho- 
nouring God  by  a  holy,  believing  expectation. 
He  will  regard  your  cry,  and  the  answer  will 
come.  "  For  the  vision  is  yet  for  an  appointed 
time,  but  at  the  end  it  shall  speak,  and  not  lie*: 
tliough  it  tarry,  ivait  for  it ;  because  it  will 
surely  come,  it  will  not  tarry."  (Hab.  ii.  3.) 
Oh,  for  stronger  confidence  in  Jehovah  touching 
prayer !  Lord,  increase  our  faith  !  Is  there  a 
suppliant  Thou  wilt  reject  ?  a  case  Thou  wilt 
despise  ?  a  blessing  Thou  wilt  withhold  ?  a  want 
Tliou  canst  not  meet  ?  a  sinner  Thou  refusest  to 
comfort  ?  a  sin  Thou  wilt  not  pardon  ?  or  a  poor 
humble  penitent  Tiiou  wilt  not  accept  ?  No,  not 
one.     Then,  Lord,  I  come,   and  will  wait  and 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  PEAYER.  849 

watch,  nor  let  Thee  go  until  Thou  bless  me  ! 
Arise,  my  soul  I  He  calleth  thee.  Behold,  Lord, 
I  come  !  /  come  I 

With  such  encouragements  to  prayer  —  the 
Spirit  inditing,  Christ  endorsing,  the  Father  re- 
sponding— let  us  draw  E.ear  and  ask  large  bless- 
ings. Already,  in  answer  to  prayer,  the  Church 
of  God  in  America,  in  Ireland,  in  Scotland,  and 
in  some  parts  of  our  own  land,  is  receiving  the 
baptism  of  the  Spirit.  As  the  tidings  reach 
us  of  thousands  pressing  into  the  kingdom  of 
God  in  connexion  with  a  work  too  scriptural 
ill  its  character,  too  supernatural  in  its  power, 
and  too  decided  in  its  results  to  be  mistaken 
for  the  work  'of  man,  we  exclaim  with  the  won- 
dering and  grateful  feelings  of  the  Psalmist, 
"Thou,  O  God,  didst  send  (marg.  shake  out)  a 
plentiful  rain  (marg.  a  shoicer  of  liberalities), 
whereby  Thou  didst  confirm  Thine  inheritance, 
when  it  was  weary."  (Ps.  Ixviii.  9.)  The  "  signs 
of  the  times,"  the  spiritual  and  intelligent  study 
of  which  we  too  much  overlook,  are  mighty  and 
impressive  in  their  significance.  Christ  is  about 
to  do  great  things  in  behalf  of  His  Church — ^ 
to  "  shake  out  showers  of  liberalities."  The  Holy 
Spirit  is  on  His  march  through  the  land,  travel- 


S50      THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  PEAYER. 

ling  in  the  greatness  of  His  strength  and  in  the 
marvels  of  His  grace.  The  moral  barometer  of 
the  world  indicates  the  approach  of  showers  of 
blessings — ^"the  former  and  the  latter. rain  abun- 
dantly." The  cloud,  now  larger  than  a  man's 
hand,  is  stretching  across  continents,  oceans,  and 
islands,  freighted  with  life,  light,  and  love  to  a 
lost  world.  "  Thy  kingdom  come,"  has  long  been 
the  prayer  of  the  Church.  His  kingdom  has, 
in  measure,  come  ;  but  it  is  destined  to  come 
in  the  full  triumph  of  its  grace,  and  in  the  final 
acclaim  of  its  glory.  It  is  yet  to  come  with  a 
power,  a  victory,  and  a  majesty  such  as  the  world 
never  yet  has  beheld.  Jesus  is  to  take  to  Him 
His  great  power  and  reign.  What  are  these 
extraordinary  movements  of  the  Spirit  but  a 
preparing  the  way  for  the  personal  coming  and 
reign  of  the  Lord  ?  Before  that  great  and 
glorious  advent,  "this  gospel  of  the  kingdom  is 
to  be  preached  in  all  the  world  for  a  witness 
to  all  nations,  and  then  shall  the  end  come.'* 
In  view  of  this  great  and  predicted  fact,  we 
look  upon  religious  Revivals  as  the  ordained 
and  surest  j)ioneers  of  Christian  missions.  The 
baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  this  and  other 
nations  is  but  the  arising  and  girding  of  the 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  PRAYER.  351 

Clmrcli  of  God  to  go  up  and  possess  the  land 
which  His  Providence  has  made  ready  for  the 
"  feet  of  Him  that  bringeth  good  tidings,  that 
publisheth  .  peace."  The  uprootings  and  over- 
turnings  of  the  nations  of  the  earth  are  but 
the  usherings  in  of  the  kingdom  of  Jesus.  The 
strongholds  of  error  and  of  despotism  upon  the 
continent  of  Europe,  impaire,d  by  time  and  shaken 
by  revolution,  are  preparing  to  yield  to  truth 
and  liberty.  The  chams  of  idolatry,  superstition, 
and  caste  in  heathendom,  smitten  by  rebellion 
and  loosened  by  mutiny,  are  ready  to  fall  from 
the  myriads  they  have  for  centuries  enslaved. 
India  and  China,  Tarkey  and  Japan,  with  well- 
nigh  the  entire  world,  for  ages  hermetically 
closed  to  Christ's  gospel,  are  throwing  wide  their 
gates  to  admit  and  even  welcome  the  messenger 
and  the  almoner  of  Christ's  Ch-urch.  What  en- 
couragement this  to  united,  believing,  persevering 
PRAYER !  ."  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  Holy  One 
of  Israel,  and  his  Maker,  Ask  me  of  things  to 
come  concerning  my  sons ;  and  concerning  the 
work  of  my  hands  command  ye  me."  (Isa.  xlv. 
11.)  Infinite  condescension  ! — worthy  of  Him 
who  "  made  Himself  of  no  reputation,  and  took 
upon  Him  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  was  made 


352  THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  TEAYER. 

in  tlie  likeness  of  men."  Lord,  beliold  us  at 
Thy  fe^t,  wrestling  with  Thy  word  of  promise 
—  "  Command  ye  me  ! "  "  Drop  down,  ye 
heavens,  from  above,  and  let  the  skies  pour 
down  righteousness ;  let  the  earth  open,  and 
let  them  bring  forth  salvation,  and  let  righteous- 
ness spring  up  together." 

Let  us  not  be  hindered  and  straitened  in  our 
prayers  for  this  precious  blessing — the  outpour- 
ing of  the  Spirit  upon  ourselves,  upon  our 
families,  upon  the  Church  of  God,  and  upon 
the  world — by  the  idea  that  the  Spirit  is  already 
in  the  Christian  Church,  the  promise  and  gift  of 
her  Lord,  a  present  and  inalienable  blessing,  and 
that  therefore  we  are  not  warranted  to  pray  for 
and  expect  a  fresh  outpouring  of  tlie  Holy  Ghost. 
That  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  Indweller  of  the 
Church  of  God,  abiding  with  her  for  ever,  and 
that  the  renewing  and  sanctifying  of  the  saints 
is  by  Him,  we  fully  and  gratefully  acknowledge. 
No  declaration  of  our  Lord  could  be  more  unmis- 
takeable  when  He  says,  "  I  will  pray  the  Father, 
and  He  shall  give  you  another  Comforter,  that 
He  may  abide  with  you  for  ever;  even  the  Spirit 
of  truth."  But  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
in  the  Church,   and   the  gracious  and  especial 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  PEAYEE.     853 

MANIFESTATION  of  the  power  of  the  Spirit  in 
the  'conversion  of  sinners,  are  two  different 
things — the  one  not  a  denial  or  a  contradic- 
tion of  the  other.  How  cold,  how  deathlike, 
how  unscriptural  that  teaching  which  teJls  us 
that  becg^use  the  Spirit  is  already  the  Indweller 
of  the  Church  of  God,  all  praj^er  and  suppli- 
cation for  the  expression  of  His  convincing,  life- 
giving,  and  sanctifying  power  is  a  work  of  supe- 
rerogation !  The  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  the 
Word  of  God  warrants  us  to  look  for  in  these 
last  days.  Peter  thus  quotes  the  prophecy  of 
Joel: — "And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  the  last 
days,  saith  God,  I  will  pour  out  of  my  Spirit  upon 
all  flesh."  The  effusion  of  the  Spirit  on  the  day  of 
Pentecost  was  but  the  commencement  of  a  series 
of  Revivals — the  first  instalment  of  the  blessing 
— that  were  to  trace  and  signalise  the  gospel 
and  final  dispensation.  We  do  not  regard  these 
especial  baptisms  as  the  giving  of  another  Spirit; 
it  is  the"  same  Holy  Spirit  who  converted  the 
three  thousand  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  whom 
we  now  invoke,  and  who,  in  response  to  these 
invocations,  is  graciously  pleased  to  visit  the 
Church  with  "  time?  of  refresliirig  from  the  pre- 
sence of  the  Lor  1."     AVe  have  our  Lord's  own 


354     THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  PRAYER. 

warrant  to  ask  in  faith  the  bestowment  of  the 
S|)irit — "  If  ye,  then,  being  evil,  know  how  to 
give  good  gifts  unto  your  children,  how  much 
more  shall  your  heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  them  that  ask  Him."  Tins  promise 
and  this  warrant  touching  supplication  for  the 
manifestation  and  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
-was  designed  to  prompt  the  desire,  and  guide 
the  prayers,  and  feed  the  faith,  and  inspire  the 
hopes  of  the  Church  of  Christ  to  her  latest  age. 
And  sad  will  it  be  for  us  when  we  shall  cease 
to  offer  unto  our  ascended  and  glorified  High 
Priest  that  incense  of  bellying  and  importu- 
nate prayer,  which  shall  enclose  the  Church  and 
the  world  within  the  descending,  all -enfolding 
cloud  of  a  quickening  and  sanctifying  Spirit ! 
"  The  time  is  coming,  and  prophecy  has  fore- 
told it,  when  in  every  land  there  shall  be  offered 
to  God  a  peace-offering — when  from  the  closet 
and  the  sanctuary,  from  the  hill-top,  the  field,  the 
forest-side,  where  the-  children  of  God  shall,  like 
Isaac,  walk  forth  at  eventide  to  meditate — the 
voice  of  pious  supplication  shall  ascend  in  one 
continuous  stream ;  until  our  globe,  as  it  rolls 
along  its  orbit,  shall  seem  but  a  censer  revolv- 
ing in  the  hand  of  the  Great  High  Priest,  and 


THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  PEAYER.  S55 

pouring  out  at  every  aperture  a  cloud,  dense 
and  rich,  of  incense,  fragrant  and  grateful  to 
God/'* 

*'  Come,  tlien,  and  added  to  Thy  many  crowns, 
Receive  yet  one,"  the  crown  of  all  the  earth, 
Thou  who  alone  art  worthy  ! — 
The  very  spirit  of  the  world  is  tired 
Of  its  own  taunting  questions,  ask'd  so  long — 
*  Where  is  the  promise  of  your  Lord's  approach?* 
Come,  then,  and  added  to  Thy  many  crowns. 
Receive  yet  one,  as  radiant  as  the  rest. 
Due  to  Thy  last  and  most  effectual  work^ 
Thj  word  fulfill' d,  the  conquest  of  a  world.* 

«  Wmiam  R.  Willianu,  DM 


CHAPTER  XL 


THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OP  CHRIST  S  SYMPATHY  WITH 
OUR  INFIRMITIES. 

**  Himself  took  oiir  infirmities,  and  bare  our  sicknessea." — 
Matt.  viii.  17. 

Our  Lord's  union  with  our  nature — the  essen- 
tially divine  in  coalescence  with  the  perfectly 
human — was  not,  as  the  Doecetce,  a  branch  of 
the  Gnostics,  heretically  taught,  a  mere  appear- 
ance of  humanity,  a  fiction,  and  illusion  ; — it 
was  an  actual  and  personal,  a  living  and  tangible 
humanity, — a  mysterious  and  profound,  but  not 
less  true  and  visible,  manifestation  of  Cod  in 
the  flesh!  It  was,  probably,  in  part  to  refute 
this  early  heresy  that  the  Apostle  Jolm  wrote 
his  Epistle,  in  which  he  thus  condemns  the 
errorist  while  he  affirms  the  truth  : — "  Every 
spirit  that  confesseth  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come 
in  the  flesh  is  of  God:    and  every  spirit  that 


PRECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST's  SYMPATHY.     857 

confessetli  not  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the 
flesh  is  not  of  God :  and  this  is  that  spirit  of 
antichrist,  whereof  ye  have  heard  that  it  should 
come ;  and  even  now  already  is  it  in  the  world." 
(1  John  iv.  2,  3.)  It  is  not,  then,  less  a  doctrine 
essential  to  the  Christian  system,  or  less  an  evi- 
dence of  a  true  Christian,  and  of  a  sound  Christian 
teacher,  than  it  is  a  source  of  the  richest  con- 
solation and  soothing  to  the  Christian  Church, 
that  the  Son  of  God  became,  by  a  mysterious 
imion  of  the  two  extremes  of  being,  the  Son  of 
Man  ;  and  as  such—'*  Himself  bearing  our  infir- 
mities, and  carrying  our  sicknesses  " — becomes  at 
once  a  fount  of  sympathy  and  love,  its  soothing 
and  its  healing  spreading  like  a  sea  over  our  sin 
and  sorrow  stricken  humanity.  In  this  point 
of  light,  the  truth  of  Christ's  sympathy  with 
our  infirmities — which  furnishes  the  theme  of 
the  present  chapter  —  presents  itself  with  an 
actuality  and  vividness  the  most  realising  and 
personal.  The  proper  discussion  of  our  subject 
suggests,  in  their  order,  the  consideration  of  the 
infirmities  which  appertain  to  our  humanity — 
our  Lord's  2:)ersonal  participation  in  those  infir- 
mities— and  the  preciousness  of  His  sympathy 
with  the  varied  infirmities  of  His  people. 


358  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST'S 

The  existence  of  physical  infirmity  in  the  saints 
of  God  is  a  fact  so  self-evident  as  to  require  no 
laboured  argument.  It  is  the  natural  effect  of  sin 
— a  part  of  the  curse  under  whicli  our  humanity 
came  in  consequence  of  the  fall.  To  assert  that 
we  were  "  conceived  in  sin,  and  bom  in  iniquity" 
— as  the  Bible  most  distinctly  and  emphatically 
does — is  to  claim  for  our  whole  being — physical, 
moral,  and  intellectual — the  existence  of  weak- 
ness, imperfection,  and  decay,  which  no  surviv- 
ing and  still  lingering  emblems  of  our  original 
stateliness  and  grandeur  can  possibly  annihilate 
or  conceal.  How  true  a  picture  of  the  animate 
and  the  inanimate  world  has  the  pen  of  inspira- 
tion drawn,  when  it  describes  "the  whole  creation 
as  groaning  and  travailing  in  pain  together  until 
now  !  "  In  this  paralysed  and  convulsed  condi- 
tion the  saints  of  God  are  equally  involved.  Our 
humanity  is  essentially  the  same  as  that  from 
which  the  electing  love  and  sovereign  grace  of 
God  ha»  rescued  and  separated  us.  We  are 
"  by  nature  children  of  wrath,  even  as  others." 
Our  humanity  differs  from  the  most  enslaved 
and  degraded  of  our  species  only  as  Jesus  has 
borne  its  sins,  removed  its  curse,  and,  by  the 
Spirit's  renewing  and  indwelling,  has  made  it 


SYMPATHY  WITH  OUE  INFIRMITIES.         859 

the  temple  of  God.  Before  we  enter  more  fully 
upon  this  subject,  let  us  remark,  that  the  bodily 
infirmities  under  which  the  children  of  God 
labour  are  to  be  regarded  rather  as  the  con- 
sequences of  sin  than  as  in  themselves  sinful. 
For  the  want  of  clearly  observing  this  distinc- 
tion, many  of  the  Lord's  people  walk  in  bondage. 
Sin  is  the  cause,  infirmity  the  effect.  In  all  the 
instances  in  which  the  word  is  employed  in  the 
Bible,  this  idea  would  seem  prominent.  Thus, 
for  example,  physical  deficiencies,  bodily  weak- 
nesses, or  actual  sickness,  are  described  as  in- 
firmities of  our  nature.  We  read  of  "a  certain 
woman  which  had  been  healed  of  a  spirit  of 
infirmity."  Her  spinal  cord  was  contracted,  and 
she  was  bowed  down  and  could  in  no  wise  lift 
up  herself.  We  also  read  that  many  came  to 
Christ  "  to  be  healed  of  their  infirmities  ; "  and 
that,  "  in  that  hour  He  cured  many  of  their 
infirmities.''  And  when  Paul  enjoined  upon 
Timothy  the  use  of  a  little  wine,  the  plea  upon 
which  he  enforced  the  duty  was  his  "often  in- 
firmities." And  when,  in  the  lowly  spirit  of 
the  Gospel,  he  abjures  all  self -glorying,  laying 
his  mouth  in  the  dust,  and  esteeming  himself 
the  chief  of  siimers  and  the  least  of  saints,  he 


3G0  THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST'S 

exclaims,  "  If  I  must  needs  glory,  I  will  glory 
in  the  things  which  concern  mine  inlirmities." 
And  in  another  place  he  says,  "  Therefore  I  take 
pleasure  in  infirmities,  in  reproaches,  in  necessi- 
ties, in  persecutions,  in  distresses,  for  Christ's 
sake :  for  when  I  am  weak,  then  am  I  strong." 
Let  it  then  be  distinctly  remembered  that  vsin 
is  not  an  essential  adjunct,  a  necessary  concomi- 
tant of  our  nature — it  is  rather  an  accident  of 
our  being.  0ur  nature  was  created  sinless,  re- 
flecting, without  a  line  to  deface  its  beauty,  or  a 
shadow  to  becloud  its  lustre,  the  intellectual  and 
moral  imao-e  of  God.  This  curious  and  mm- 
nificent  mechanism,  as  it  came  from  the  hands 
of  the  Divine  Artificer,  was  pronounted  by  Him 
to  be  "  very  good."  What  a  glorious  creature  was 
man  !  No  shade  of  care  upon  the  brow,  no  hectic 
flush  upon  the  cheek,  no  paralysis  benumbed  the 
limb,  no  trembling  agitated  the  nerve,  no  heart 
flutter,  nor  convulsions,  nor  pain,  nor  restlessness 
— nothing,  in  a  word,  to  shade,  deform,  or  de- 
press his  humanity, — he  was  without  sin,  and 
consequently  without  suffering.  We  may  there- 
fore infer,  and  the  inference  is  replete  with 
comfort  to  the.  holy  and  spiritual  mind,  that 
our  bodily  infirmities  are  not  sins,  and  are  only 


SYMPATHY  WITH  OUR  INFIEMITIES.         361 

to  be  viewed  in  that  light  as,  through  our  un- 
prayerfuhiess  and  unwatchfulness,  they  become 
causes  or  occasions  of  sin.  But  let  us  take  a 
more  comprehensive  view  of  this  subject,  seeing 
that  Christ's  sympathy  extends  to  all  the  in- 
firmities to  which  His  people  are  subject — this 
it  is  which  makes  that  sympathy  so  precious. 

Chief  and  prominent  we  must  place  the  inheing 
of  sin — the  believer's  great  infirmity,  and  the 
source  and  parent  of  all  others.  Sin  is  a  word 
easily  spoken,  soon  written — a  mere  monosyl- 
lable— but  of  what  mighty  and  solemn  import ! 
Sin  is  the  cause  of  all  evil,  the  source  of  all 
sorrow,  the  spring  of  all  suffering — its  guilt, 
tyranny,  and  condemnation  only  met,  cancelled, 
and  removed  by  the  incarnation  and  sacrifice  of 
the  Son  of  God.  What  must  be  the  nature,  the 
magnitude,  the  terribleness  of  sin,  to  demand  on 
the  part  of  God's  moral  government  such  an 
expedient !  Now,  it  is  this  inbeing  of  sin  in  the 
believer  that  forms  the  baneful  root  of  all  in- 
firmity, and  is  to  his  holy  mind  the  greatest  of 
them  all.  Listen  to  the  inspired  language  which, 
in  all  ages  and  dispensations,  has  been  but  the 
one  cry  of  the  Christian  Church — "  0  wretched 
man  that  I  am !  who  shall  deliver  me  from  tJbo 


362  THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST'S 

body  of  this  death  ? "  A  deep  truth  is  unfolded 
here — the  principle  or  body  of  sin  in  the  believer, 
as  constituting  the  ground  of  his  prof oundest  hu- 
miliation and  sorrow.  It  is  not  the  dark  speck, 
here  and  there,  as  indicating  the  existence  and 
process  of  the  moral  gangrene  that  produces  the 
painful  anxiety  of  th'e  apostle — it  is  the  corrupt 
body  itself.  We  come  short  of  just  views  of 
sin  if  we  only  estimate  its  enormity  by  its  out- 
break here  and  there — the  spots  upon  the  surface. 
The  evil  lies  deeper  and  is  concealed.  We  speak 
of  the  principle  of  sin,  from  which  all  "sin 
originates.  We  do  not  ask  you,  reader,  if  you 
confess  and  mourn  over  sin  in  its  external  and 
overt  acts, — this,  doubtless,  you  often  do  with 
deep  self-abasement.  _  But  the  deepest  sorrow 
for  sin  is  that  which  springs  from  the  con- 
viction and  consciousness  of  its  indwelling  prin- 
ciple and  power — this  should  be  our  profoundest 
humihation  before  God.  To  think  of  the  de- 
praved nature,  the  evil  heart,  the  corrupt  mind, 
the  empoisoned  and  impure  fountain,  the  body 
of  sin  and  death  constantly  borne  about  with 
us — lying  down  and  rising  up  with  us — car- 
ried into  our  most  sacred  places,  and  with  ua 
in  our  most  hallowed  engagements — constantly, 


SYMPATHY  WITH  OUR  INFIRMITIES.         863 

inseparably,  ever  prompting  to  evil — oh,  this  is 
our  humiliation,  and  this  should  be  our  sorrow. 
Beloved,  count  not  yourself  to  have  arrived  at 
any  proper  or  adequate  view  of  the  burden  and 
sinfulness  of  sin,  until  you  have  been  brought 
to  embody  in  your  daily  acknowledgments,  hu- 
miliation, and  sorrow,  the  sin  that  dwelleth  in 
you.  Then  shall  we  be  set  upon  the  great  work  of 
mortification — and  only  then.  No  longer  seek- 
ing merely  the  moral  filtration  of  the  impure 
streams,  we  shall  task  our  utmost  energies  to 
the  work  of  purifying  the  fountain.  And  who 
seeth  not  that,  this  done — the  source  of  evil 
met,  the  heart  seasoned  with  grace — we  shall 
then  the  more  cheerfully  and  successfully  address 
ourselves  to  the  work  of  "cleansing  ourselves 
from  all  filthiness  of  the  flesh  and  spirit,  perfect- 
ing holiness  in  the  fear  of  God?" 

There  are  other  infirmities  which  may  be 
classed  as  constitutional.  Our  spiritual  and 
mental  constitutions,  like  our  physical,  vary.  As 
each  individual  has  a  natural  constitution  pecu- 
liar to  himself,  so  has  he  a  moral  and  intellectual 
one.  Our  constitutional  infirmities  are  not  all 
alike.  The  temperament  of  some  is  warm,  excit- 
able,   impetuous ;   they  have   ardent,   impulsive 


304 

feelings;  their  affections  are  fervent,  their  sensi- 
bilities strong,  their  emotional  nature  intense 
— they  can  sympathise,  can  weep,  can  love.  The 
temperament  of  others  is  cold,  phlegmatic,  im- 
movable ;  they  have  but  little  of  the  emotional, 
the  susceptible,  the  sympathizing,  and  it  requires 
a  great  calamity  often  to  rouse  them  to  feeling. 
There  are  yet  others,  whose  mental  characteris- 
tics are  those  of  depression,  despondency,  and 
^loom.  Overlooking  the  bright  and  cheerful 
tints  of  life's  landscape,  they  love  to  ruminate 
upon  its  dark  and  sombre  hues, — always  gazing 
upon  the  gloomiest  aspect  of  the  picture,  and 
dwelling  with  morbid  pleasure  upon  the  most 
unpromising  and  hopeless.  Others,  again  are  of 
a  sanguine  and  hopeful  temperament;  they  live 
in  a  world  of  illusion  and  romance ;  without  ade- 
quate premises  they  leap  to  conclusions,  and  with- 
out proper  data  they  assume  facts ;  credulous,  un- 
suspecting, and  confiding,  they  take  for  granted 
what  some  minds  accept  only  upon  demonstra- 
tion. Now,  all  these  are,  doubtless,  constitu- 
tional infirmities.  It  is  an  infirmity  to  be  too 
feeling ;  it  is  an  infirmity  to  be  too  cold.  It  is 
an  infirmity  to  be  too  trusting ;  it  is  equally  an 
infirmity  to  be  too  suspicious.     It  is  an  infirmity 


SYMPATHY  WITH  QUE  INFIRMITIES.         oQo 

to  be  totally  fascinated  by  the  sunny,  golden, 
and  mellow  tints  of  the  picture,  and  equally  so 
to  be  mentally  absorbed  and  depressed  by  its 
shaded  and  gloomy  colouring.  "  This  is  my  in- 
firmity," may  be  the  exclamation,  as  each  one 
passes  in  review.  Yes,  they  are  infirmities : 
levity,  gravity;  the  sanguine,  the  desponding; 
the  feeling,  the  phlegmatic;  the  confiding,  the 
distrusting ;  the  sensitive,  the  impassable ;  the 
ardent,  the  frigid ;  the  liberal,  the  parsimonious ; 
the  credulity  that  believes  anything,  the  scepti- 
cism that  believes  nothing  ; — all  these — and  a 
thousand  more  constitutional  characteristics  that 
might  be  adduced — in  consequence  of  the  sin 
that  dwelleth  in  us,  are  infirmities  clinging  to 
our  fallen  humanity,  the  source  and  the  occasion 
frequently  of  our  deepest  and  bitterest  sorrows. 

And  then  there  are  infirmities  purely  of  a 
jjJiysical  nature.  We  embody  and  bear  about 
with  us  the  seeds  and  germs  of  all  disease  and 
decay,  which,  in  any  climate,  in  any  place,  and 
at  any  moment,  may  develop  itself,  and  which, 
indeed,  are  gradually  and  imperceptibly,  but 
most  surely,  conducting  us  to  the  grave.  Who 
can  behold  the  frailty  of  some,  the  nervousness 
of  others,  the  incessant  suffering  of  others  more, 


366  THE  PEECIOUSXESS  OF  CfirJST  S 

• — ^^of  multitudes  who  know  not  a  clay's  perfect 
health,  an  hour's  freedom  from  pain,  a  night's 
unbroken  sleep — and  rot  be  convinced  that  the 
Church  of  God  is  "compassed  with  infirmity?" 

Under  this  head  of  infirmity  may  be  classed, 
too,  the  sufferings  and  persecutions,  the  priva- 
tions, trials,  and  temptations,  to  which  the  saints 
are  constantly  exposed,  and  by  which  they  are 
frequently  assailed.  The  soul  has  its  infirmities 
as  well  as  the  body ;  there  are  spiritual  and 
mental,  as  well  as  natural  and  physical,  weak- 
nesses and  frailties.  Sin,  and  the  curse  which 
followed  in  its  wake,  have  sown  man's  path, 
from  his  cradle  to  his  tomb,  with  mingled  seed. 
At  each  step,  and  each  bend,  there  springs  up 
a  multitude  of  various  ills,  and  woes,  and  sor- 
rows. The  tare  grows  side  by  side  with  the 
wheat ;  the  thistle  with  the  rose  ;  the  nightshade 
with  the  myrtle  ;  the  cypress  with  the  laurel ; — • 
joy  and  sorrow,  laughter  and  tears,  hoi3e  and 
despondency,  the  marriage  and  the  tolling  bell, 
all,  all  blend  togethe;  in  our  march  to  eternity. 
The  woof  of  our  humanity  is  of  many  colours ; 
the  stones  that  pave  our  jDathway  to  the  grave 
are  of  variegated  hues.  Such  are  the  varied 
and  dissimilar  conditions  of  God's  people.     It  is 


SYMPATHY  WITH  OUE  INFIRMITIES.        S67 

the  iafirmity  of  one  believer  that  his  faith  is 
always  faltering ;  of  another,  that  his  courage  is 
always  failing:  of  one,  that  he  is  of  a  despond- 
ing tendency  of  mind,  taking  but  little  of  the 
comfort  and  hope  of  the  gospel ;  and  of  anotlier, 
that  he  confides  too  implicitly  in  himself,  and 
looks  too  exclusively  to  his  ever -varying  and 
fluctuating  experience  for  the  strength  and  evi- 
dence of  his .  Christianity.  The  experience  of 
Asaph  is,  doubtless,  that  of  many : — "  Will  the- 
Lord  cast  off  for  ever?  and  will  He  be  favour- 
able no  more?  Is  His  mercy  clean  gone  for 
ever  ?  doth  His  promise  fail  for  evermore  ?  Hath 
God  forgotten  to  be  gracious  ?  hath  He  in  anger 
shut  up  His  tender  mercies  ?  And  I  said.  This 
is  my  infirmity.''  (Ps.  Ixxvii.  7-10.) 

It  must  always,  too,  be  considered  one  of  the 
infirmities  of  our  spiritual  condition,  that  we  look 
so  much  to  the  dark  providences  of  God  in  our 
history,  rather  tlian  to  His  power,  faithfulness,  and 
love  in  the  providence.  God  must  be  in  all  His 
providential  dispensations.  They  are  the  chariots 
in  which  He  rides.  "  He  maketh  the  clouds  His 
chariot."  AYhen,  then,  v/e  are  absorbed  in  a 
fearful,  unbelieving  view  of  the  chariot  that 
comes  near  to  us,  and  overlook  Him  w\iq  sits  in. 


368  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  CHEIST'S 

it — the  God  of  love,  our  Father,  our  Friend — ^it 
is  no  marvel  that,  with  good  old  Jacob,  we  ex- 
claim, "All  these  things  are  against  me."  Beloved, 
there  is  nothing  that  is  really  against  you  if  you 
are  in  union  with  Christ  Jesus.  There  is  no 
enchantment,  no  divination.  It  is  a  "curse 
causeless  !  "  It  may  be  a  tedious  way,  a  narrow 
way,  a  thorny  way,  a  self-denying  way,  a  way 
bedewed  with  your  tears,  vocal  with  your  sighs, 
perhaps  tinted  with  the  oozings  of  your  heart's 
blood — nevertheless  it  is  a  right  way  by  which 
Jesus  is  leading  you,  step  by  step,  home  to  God. 
You  will  see  that  it  was  all  right  when  you 
arrive  there ;  and  then  with  the  countless  min- 
strelsy of  heaven  redeemed  like  you  by  precious 
blood,  and  who  with  you  have  come  out  of  great 
tribulation,  you  will  exclaim,  "  He  hath  done  all 
things  well." 

There  is  a  tendency,  too,  through  the  infirmity 
of  our  faith,  to  hesitate  and  falter  when  sum- 
moned to  walk  in  some  i^ath  of  duty.  It  is 
seldom  that  God  so  leads  us  but  at  the  sacrifice 
of  some  creature  good,  the  surrender  of  some, 
cherished  idoL  It  is  a  part  of  that  moral  dis- 
cipline that  imparts  symmetry  ai\d  completeness 
to  our  Christian  character.     The  call  of  duty  is 


SYMPATHY  WITH  OUR  INFIEMITIES         S69 

always  the  call  of  God.  And  yet  how  we  hesi- 
tate and  demur  !  How  we  linger  upon  the  loved 
spot  we  are  to  leave — how  we  cling  to  the  pre- 
cious ties  we  are  to  sunder — how  we  grasp  the 
sacred  enjoyments  we  must  perhaps  for  ever 
relinquish !  But  the  path  of  duty  is  onward — 
and  onward  must  be  our  course.  Then  we  learn 
how  great  is  the  infirmity  of  our  grace.  We  once 
thought  we  could  do  anything  for  Christ — now 
that  His  glory  and  our  interests  clash,  we  pause, 
we  weep,  we  reason.  But  it  is  only  our  infirmity, 
and  the  Lord  knoweth  that  it  is  so.  And  as  sure 
as  He  enables  us  by  His  grace  to  take  the  first 
step  in  the  path  of  duty — fearful,  trembling,  hesi- 
tating though  it  be — He  comes  and  helps  each 
succeeding  one  by  the  sympathy  of  His  love,  and 
by  the  succourings  of  His  grace ;  and  we  ex- 
claim, "  I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  who 
strengtheneth  me."  In  this  way  of  duty,  in  which 
there  is  so  severe  and  lingering  a  crucifixion  of  self, 
lessons  in  the  divine  life  are  learned,  and  truths 
in  God's  Word  are  experienced,  such  as,  probably, 
would  not  be  in  any  other  way.  In  the  world 
there  are  schools  for  different  branches  of  know- 
ledge and  science,  where  the  principles  and  systems 

peculiar  to  each  one  are  alone  taught.    Christ  has 
2  a 


370  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  CHKIST'S 

different  schools  for  His  disciples  : — there  is  the 
school  of  correction,  the  school  of  trial,  the 
school  of  sorrow,  the  school  of  temptation,  the 
school  of  self-denial,  the  school  of  active  service, 
the  school  of  patient  endurance — in  one  or  all  of 
these  schools  Jesus  is  instructing  the  disciples 
on  earth,  and  training  them  for  heaven,  teaching 
them  the  peculiar  lessons,  and  bringing  them 
into  the  experience  of  the  peculiar  truths  found 
in  no  other  way.  There  are  two  natures  in  the 
believer,  the  active  and  the  passive — both  of 
which  the  Lord  will  unfold  and  discipline,  and 
both  sliall  alike  honour  and  glorify  Him.  Per- 
adventure  you  have  reasoned  thus — that,  be- 
cause the  infirmities  of  the  body  or  of  the  mind 
prevent  you  from  the  active  service  of  Christ, 
you  are  therefore  but  a  dry  tree,  a  useless  mem- 
ber of  the  body,  a  cumberer  of  the  ground.  Ah ! 
my  reader,  the  Lord  has  wisely  chosen  for  you 
another  and  a  different  school — that  of  passive 
submission  to  the  Divine  will — the  school  of 
suffering,  which  is  the  school  of  God.  Your 
duty,  strength,  and  service  for  Christ  is  to  sit 
still,  to  cultivate  in  your  soul  the  passive  graces 
of  tlie  Holy  Spirit ;  and  so  by  meekness,  quiet- 
ness, and  silence,  glorify  your  Fatlicr  in  lieavon. 


SYMPATHY  WITH  OUE  INFIILltlTIES.          oil 
"  They  also  serve,  who  only  staml  and  wait." 

But  it  is  possible  the  Lord  sees  fit  to  train  you 
for  glory  in  the  school  of  active  and  laborious 
employ.  He  may  summon  you  to  a  j^ost  of 
labour  at  home  which,  perhaps,  your  judgment 
would  the  last  have  selected,  or  from  which  your 
taste,  feelings,  and  inclinations  recoil.  Or,  it 
may  be,  He  sends  you  to  the  far  heathen,  sever- 
ing the  fond  and  sacred  endearments  of  home, 
and  sundering  the  ties  that  bound  you  by  asso- 
ciations so  precious  to  the  land  of  your  birth. 
Well,  beloved,  it  is  Christ's  school,  in  the  which 
He  is  teaching,  disciplining,  and  training  you  for 
heaven.  By  nature,  by  providence,  and  by  grace 
He  has  fitted  you  for  active  service  in  the  Church, 
and  into  His  vineyard  He  condescendingly  sends 
you.  While  others  are  learning  the  same  lesson, 
and  are  being  taught  the  same  truth — the  lesson 
of  their  own  poverty  and  nothingness,  and  the 
truth  of  Jesus'  all-sufficiency  and  unspeakable 
preciousness — amid  scenes  of  trial  and  sickness,  of 
suffering  and  want,  you  are  being  taught  by  the 
Master  in  the  school  of  toil,  of  hardship,  and  of 
self-denial.  Be  it  so,  beloved.  Each  line  from 
the  cii'cumference  leads  to  the  one  centre — • 
Jesus  ;  and  Jesus  will  ere  long  bring  both  the 


37^  THE  PKECrOUSNESS  OF  CHETST'S 

active  and  the  passive  disciple  He  has  trained  for 
glory  on  earth,  to  rejoice  together  in  the  same 
happy  and  eternal  home  in  heaven. 

We  have  now  reached  an  essential  and  toucli* 
ing  part  of  our  subject — Christ's  personal  par- 
ticipation with  the  infirmities  of  His  people. 
*'  Himself  took  our  infirmities,  and  bare  our 
sicknesses."  "  Himself  "  did  it.  It  was  a  j)er- 
sonal  act.  He  confided  the  task  to,  and  He 
imposed  the  burden  upon,  no  other.  Nor 
would  He  admit  a  partner  in  the  transaction. 
None  should  share  it  with  Him.  Not  a  sin, 
not  a  sorrow,  not  a  pang,  not  an  infirmity, 
not  a  tear,  not  a  sigh  would  He  divide  with 
another.  He  would  tread  the  path  alone,  and 
of  the  people  there  should  be  none  with  Him. 
"  Himself  took  our  infirmities."  Oh,  in  what  a 
touching  light  this  places  the  love  of  our  Jesus — 
the  all-concentrating,  all-absorbing,  all-engrossing 
love  of  our  Emmanuel — for  His  people  !  He  so 
loved  us  that  He  would  do  all  for  us  Himself, 
nor  share  the  work,  nor  divide  the  glory,  nor 
participate  the  love  of  another  being  in  the  uni- 
verse. Himself  did  it,  and  did  it  alone.  The  ques- 
tion then  arises — In  what  way  may  we  legard 
our  Lord  as  taking  our  infirmities  and  bearings 


SYMPATHY  WITH  OUE  INFIEMITIES.        373 

our  sicknesses?     We  think  the  answer  will  be 
sii23].Iied  by  the  following  considerations  : — 

First,  by  His  assumption  of  our  humanity. 
He  could  only  come  under  the  obligation  to 
participate  in  our  circumstances  by  taking  up 
into  union  with  the  Godhead  the  nature  that 
sin  and  the  curse  had  bowed  to  the  earth.  The 
human  nature  to  which  His  Godhead  stooped 
was  as  free  from  the  taint  and  pollution  of  sin 
as .  His  divinity,  and  yet  was  it  real  humanity. 
"A  body  hast  thou  prepared  me."  "He  was 
made  sin "  (or  an  offering  for  sin)  "  for  us  who 
knew  no  sin."  He  was  "holy,  harmless,  undefiled, 
and  separate  from  sinners."  Keep  firm  hold  of  this 
doctrine  of  your  faith,  0  believer  !  The  shadow 
of  a  shade  of  sin  in  the  human  nature  of  the 
Son  of  God  would  have  been  eternal  destruction 
to  His  elect  Church — fatal  to  the  accomplishment 
of  His  sacrifice,  and  the  salvation  of  His  people. 
\Ye  have  said  that  it  was  l-eal,  true,  actual 
humanity.  Its  mysterious  and  close  union  with 
the  Godhead  did  not  alter  it,  even  as  there  was 
no  essential  change  in  the  Godhead  when  it  took 
up  into  union  the  manhood.  There  was  a  union 
■ — a  personal  and  inseparable  union — of  the  two 
natures,  Ijut  no  cliange  in  either — both  retained 


S74  THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST'S 

theii  peculiar  and  essential  properties.  The 
humanity  was  blest  by  its  union  with  the  Deity, 
but  not  changed,  in  the  least  degree,  into  the 
essentially  divine.  It  was  filled  and  enriched 
with  excellent  gifts — even  the  Holy  Spirit  with- 
out measure — but  was  not  in  the  least  degree 
elevated  into  an  equality  with  the  Divine  nature 
— it  retained  its  own  property  intact.  In  taking 
upon  Him  the  form  of  a  servant,  Christ  did  not 
abdicate  the  form  of  God.  He,  indeed,  emptied 
Himself  and  made  Himself  of  no  reputation,  and 
was  reputed  a  man,  and  a  very  poor  and  despised 
man,  too ;  yet  He  never  ceased  to  be  God. 
The  glory  of  His  Godhead  was  indeed  en- 
shrouded, but  not  extinguished  ;  it  was  obscured, 
but  not  lost.  Our  infirmities  shaded  the  lustre 
of  the  Sun,  but  the  Sun  behind  those  infirmities 
shone  with  undimmed  and  undiminishable  splen- 
dour. "  He  could  not  have  been  a  sufficient 
Mediator  had  He  ceased  to  be  God,  and  He  had 
ceased  to  be  God  had  He  lost  any  one  perfection 
proper  to  the  Divine  nature ;  and  losing  none, 
He  lost  not  this  of  unchangeableness,  which 
is  none  of  the  meanest  belonging  to  the  Deity. 
Why  by  this  union  with  the  Divine  nature 
should  He  lose  this  any  more  than  He  lost  His 


SYMPATHY  WITH  OUE  INFIEMITIES.         S75 

omniscience,  which  He  discovered  by  His  know- 
ledge of  thd  thoughts  of  men  ;  or  His  mercy, 
which  He  manifested  to  the  height  in  the  time 
of  His  suffering  ?  That  is  truly  a  change  when 
a  thing  ceaseth  to  be  what  it  was  before.  This 
was  not  in  Christ.  He  assumed  our  nature 
without  laying  aside  His  own.  When  the  soul 
is  united  to  the  body,  doth  it  lose  any  of  those 
perfections  that  are  proper  to  its  nature?  Is 
there  any  change  either  in  the  substance  or 
qualities  of  it?  No;  but  it  makes  a  change  in 
the  body,  and  of  a  dull  lump  it  makes  it  a  living 
mass,  conveys  vigour  and  strength  to  it,  and  by 
its  power  quickens  it  to  sense  and  motion.  So 
did  the'  Divine  nature  and  the  human  remain 
entire  ;  there  was  no  change  of  the  one  into  the 
other,  as  Christ  by  a  miracle  changed  water  into 
wine,  or  men  by  art  change  sand  or  ashes 
into  glass.  And  when  He  prays  for  the  glory 
He  had  with  God  before  the  world  was,  He 
prays  that  a  glory  He  had  in  His  Deity  might 
shine  forth  in  His  person  as  Mediator,  and  be 
evidenced  in  that  height  and  splendour  suitable 
to  His  dignity,  which  had  been  so  lately  dark- 
ened by  His  abasement ;  that  as  He  had  ap- 
peared to  be  the  Son  of  man  in  the  infirmity  of 


876  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST'S    ' 

tlie  flesh,  He  might  appear  to  be  the  Son  of  God 
in  the  glory  of  His  person,  that  He  might 
appear  to  be  the  Son  of  God  and  the  Son  of 
man  in  one  person/'* 

But  His  assumption  of  our  humanity — "  the 
Word  made  flesh  " — was  only  a  part  of  His  pai^- 
ticipation  with  our  infirmities — the  physical  infir- 
mities of  our  nature.  The  body  He  took  was  but 
the  vehicle  by  which  He  acted.  He  approached 
yet  closer  to  the  actual  bearing  when  he  was  made 
under  the  curse,  and  took  upon  Him  our  sins. 
As  sin  and  the  curse  which  followed  are  the 
sources  of  all  our  infirmities — mental,  moral,  and 
physical — so,  by  becoming  a  sin-ofi'ering  for  the 
one,  and  coming  under  the  other,  He  "  Himself 
took  our  infirmities,  and  bare  our  sicknesses."  By 
'ids  act  of  bearing  our  sins,  He  more  truly  and 
fttrictly  took  our  infirmities  than  though  He  had 
Actually  sinned  as  we  have  sinned.  Our  great, 
our  grand,  our  chief  infirmity  is — SIN !  This  is 
*he  parent,  and  root,  and  spring  of  all  infir- 
iinty.  Jesus  took  our  sins :  "  He  bare  our  sins 
in  His  own  body  on  the  tree  ; "  "  He  was 
wounded  for  our  transgressions.  He  was  bruised 
for  our  iniquities."     Could  language  be  stronger? 

*  Charnock. 


SYMPATHY  WITH  OUE  INFIRMITIES.        377 

Not  merely  the  punishment  for  sin,  but  sin 
itself  was  laid  upon  Him  ! — yet  was  He  ''  with- 
out sin/'  And  thus  it  was  our  blessed  Lord 
"  took  our  infirmities,  and  bare  our  sicknesses." 
And  now  trace  His  own  actual,  personal  parti- 
cipation in  our  infirmities.  Jesus  knew  what  it 
was  to  be  weary — to  hunger  andr  thirst — to  be 
homeless  and  friendless — to  be  maligned,  tra- 
duced, slandered — to  be  wounded  by.  foes — to  be 
deserted  by  friends — to  be  taunted  by  men — to 
be  tempted  by  Satan— to  be  forsaken  by  God. 
Was  not  this  a  taking  upon  Him  our  infirmities? 
Did  not  this  include  them  all  ?  What  is  thine 
infirmity,  0  child  of  God  ?  Is  it  sin  ? — Jesus 
bore  it.  Is  it  sickness  ? — Jesus  carried  it.  Is  it  a 
weak,  infirm,  fraD  body  ? — Jesus  assumed  it.  Is 
it  loneliness  ? — Jesus  lived  much  in  solitude.  Is 
it  irritability,  impatience,  fretfulness,  nervousness? 
— .Tesus  bore  the  sin  and  curse  from  whence  this 
springs.  Is  it  wounded  love,  betrayed  confidence, 
disappointed  friendship  ? — Jesus  trod  this  shaded 
path  before  you.  Is  it  poverty,  straitened  circum- 
stances, humiliating  dependence  ? — Jesus  too  was 
poor,  and,  succoured  by  the  charities  of  those  who 
ministered  of  their  substance  to  His  wants,  was 
subjected  to  this  humiliation.    Are  you  bereaved  ? 


878  THE  PKECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST 'S 

- — keenly  did  Jesus  feel  tliiy  sorrow,  when  His  tears 
fell  fast  and  thick  upon  the  gi^ave  of  His  friend  at 
Bethany.  Tell  me,  then,  have  you  an  infirmity 
which  your  Lord  did  not  bear  before  you  ?  "  Him- 
self took  our  infirmities,  and  bare  our  sicknesses." 
How  illustriously  did  Christ  exhibit  this  as- 
sumption of,  and  sympathy  with,  our  infirmities . 
when  He  was  on  earth  !  Take  a  general  survey.  He 
healed  the  sick — restored  sight  to  the  blind — made 
the  lame  to  walk — the  deaf  to  hear — and  lifted  up 
those  that  were  bowed  down.  Nor  this  only. 
He  restored  reason  to  its  throne — ejected  demons 
from  their  usurped  dominion  of  the  soul — chased 
the  cloud  of  sadness  from  the  spirit,  and  made 
the  widow's  heart  to  sing  for  joy.  How  beautiful 
and  artless  the  narrative — how  graphic  and  life- 
like the  description  ! — "  When  even  was  come, 
they  brought  unto  Him  many  that  were  j^ossessed 
with  devils :  and  He  cast  out  the  spirits  with  His 
word,  and  healed  all  that  were  sick :  that  it 
might  be  fulfilled  which  was  spoken  by  Esaias 
the  prophet,  saying,  Himself  took  our  infirmities, 
and  hare  our  sicknesses.''  Pause,  and  contem- 
plate the  scene — it  is  full  of  j^oetry  and  power. 
It  is  twilight — or,  as  Mark  narrates,  "at  even 
when  the  sun  did  set."    All  nature  is  in  harmony 


SYMPATHY  WITH  OUR  INFIRMITIES.        379 

with  the  touching  spectacle.  The  sun  has  almost 
finished  his  daily  course,  his  burning  wheels  re- 
posing upon  the  utmost  verge  of  the  sky.  The  last 
smile  of  day  yet  lingers,  gilding  with  liquid  gold 
the  lofty  dome  of  the  Temple,  and  tipping  with 
streaming  silver  the  mountain's  brow  and  the 
leafy  spires  of  the  grove.  All  is  hushed,  as  if 
Nature  itself  were  dead.  The  confused  din  of  the 
tumultuous  city  has  ceased,  and  the  toil-worn 
labourer  rests  from  his  employ.  The  weary 
"winds  forget  to  blow  —  the  gentle  gales  have 
fanned  themselves  to  rest — not  a  wavelet  breaks 
the  smooth  surface  of  the  lake.  The  aspen  ceases 
to  quiver,  and  echo  herself  slumbers.  This 
is  the  hour  and  this  the  scene  Jesus  has  chosen 
for  His  works  of  benevolence  and  power.  Holy 
and  precious  the  instruction  !  Is  it,  beloved,  the 
twilight  of  life  with  those  on  whose  behalf  we 
would  implore  the  compassion  and  help  of  the 
Saviour  ?  Is  the  sun  of  human  existence  just 
setting,  his  last,  his  latest  rays  falling  upon  the 
world's  gray  landscape,  now  receding  into  the 
deep  shades  of  night  ?  Hear  you  their  plaintive 
cry,  "  Woe  unto  ::~  '  for  the  day  goeth  away,  for 
the  shadows  of  evening  are  stretched  out  ? "  Take 
heart,  my  brother !     The  sun  has  not  yet  gone 


380  THE  I^RECIOUSNESS  OP  CHRIST'S 

down — -night's  darkness  has  not  yet  come ;  it  is 
not  too  late  to  bring  in  faith  and  hope  the  objects 
of  your  sympathy  and  love  to  Jesus.  It  was 
"at  even,  when  the  sun  did  set,  they  brought 
unto  Him  all  that  were  diseased,  and  He  healed 
them/'  What  Jesus  then  was  He  is  now,  "  the 
same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever."  Despair 
not,  then,  of  their  salvation.  Lay  them  down  at 
His  feet,  cast  them  upon  His  heart,  take  hold  of 
His  robe,  nor  let  Him  go  until  He  speaks  the 
word,  and  lo!  "at  evening- time  it  shall  be  light." 
Blessed  Saviour !  The  world's  din  is  hushed — 
the  thick  shades  of  evening  are  gathering  over 
life's  landscape  —  the  sun  of  human  probation 
touches  the  horizon — -the  long,  dark  night  of 
eternity  approaches — the  all-important  crisis  has 
arrived  —  one  look,  one  word,  one  toucli  from 
Thee,  and  there  shall  be  healing,  there  shall  be 
light,  there  shall  be  life  ! 

How  precious,  then,  the  sympathy  of  Christ 
with  Iniman  infirmity !  His  fitness  thus  to  sym- 
pathise is  j)ortrayed  by  the  apostle  as  iiispira- 
tion  alone  could  depict  it — "  We  have  not  an  high 
priest  which  cannot  be  touched  with  the  feeling 
of  our  infirmities  ;  but  was  in  all  points  tempted 
like  as  we  are,  yet  widiout  sin.     Let  us  therefore 


SYMPATHY  WITH  OUE  INFIEMITIES.         08 1 

come  boldly  unto  the  throne  of  grace,  that  we 
may  obtain  mercy,  and  find  grace  to  help  in  time 
need.  For  every  high  priest,  taken  from  among 
men,  is  ordained  for  men  in  things  i)ertaining  to 
God,  that  he  may  offer  both  gifts  and  sacrifices 
for  sins :  who  can  have  compassion  on  the  igno- 
rant, and  on  them  that  are  out  of  the  way ;  for 
that  he  himself  also  is  compassed  with  infir- 
mity." Behold  your  Lord's  fitness  to  share  and 
sympathise  with  all  your  infirmities !  He  was 
'*  encompassed  with  infirmity."  He  knew  what 
hunger  and  thirst  were — He  knew  what  labour 
and  fatigue  were — He  knew  what  languor  and 
sleeplessness  were — He  knew  what  pain  and 
suffering  were — He  knew  what  spiritual  depres- 
sion and  mental  darkness  were — He  knew  what 
the  fiery  darts  of  temptation  were  —  He  knew 
what  the  weight,  and  curse,  and  sorrow  of  sin 
were — He  knew  what  the  assaults  of  the  world, 
the  malignity  of  foes,  the  fickleness  of  friends, 
the  distrust  and  woundings  of  brethren  were — ■ 
He  knew  what  it  was  to  be  denied  by  one  dis- 
ciple, to  be  betrayed  by  another,  and  to  be  for- 
saken by  all !  Child  of  God  !  what  more  shall 
Christ  endure,  what  ruder  path  shall  He  tread, 
what  deeper  sorrow  shall  He  experience,   what 


882  THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  CHETST'S 

bitterer  cup  shall  He  drink,  what  darker  cloud 
shall  He  penetrate,  what  infirmities  more  human, 
more  severe,  more  humiliating,  shall  He  take,  in 
order  to  be  touched  with  the  feeling  of  youi^s  ? 
Will  not  this  suflBce  to  v-^ke  your  heart  to  love, 
to  win  your  mind  ix)  confidence,  to  inspire  your 
soul  with  hope,  to  replenish  your  spirit  with  joy, 
and  tune  your  lips  with  praise  —  that  Christ's 
sympathy,  so  human  yet  divine,  all  so  tender,  all 
so  clinging,  all  so  personal,  entwines  around  your 
every  infirmity — bodily,  mental,  spiritual— and 
makes  it  all  His  own  ?  "  Touched  with  the  feel* 
ing  of  our  infirmities/' 

"  And  dost  thou  weep  in  sorrow,  brother  ? 
Think  not  thou  hast  a  lonely  lot ; 
The  very  pang  now  thine,  Another 
Endured  for  thee,  and  murmur'd  not. 

"  To  consecrate  the  path  of  sorrow. 
He  left  the  glory  of  tlie  skies ; 
And  deign'd  our  suffering  flesh  to  borrow. 
That  He  with  grief  might  sympathise. 

"Dost  mourn  beneath  the  fierce  temptation  ? 
On  Him  the  tempters  shafts  were  cast. 
Are  thine  the  waves  of  tribulation  ? 
Oft  o'er  His  soul  those  waters  pass'd,  . 

*'  Each  suffering  that  enthrones  thy  pillow. 
Is  felt  within  thy  Saviour's  heart ; 
His  hand  will  hold  thee  o'er  each  billow. 
For  He  hath  felt  thy  every  smart. 


SYMPATHY  WITH  OUR  INFIEMITIES.        383 

**  He  who  s{A)od  by  the  sisters  weeping, 

Their  brother  raised,  and  dropt  the  tear, 
Marks  all  thy  tears  with  eye  unsleeping, 
When  grief  bends  o'er  the  recent  bier. 

*'  Though  far  removed  from  mortal  vision, 
His  heart  still  beats  with  sympathy ;  • 

The  sufiferings  of  His  earthly  missioa 

Have  left  deep  scars,  which  plead  for  thee. 

'*  In  all  thy  sufferings,  think  not,  brother. 
Thine  is  a  lone,  unfriended  lot ; 
Look  up,  and  feel  there  is  Another, 
In  sympathy  who  ceaseth  not."  * 

*' And  bare  our  sicknesses''  You  inquire, 
How  could  this  be,  since  Christ  knew  not  bodily 
disease  ?  But  it  was  not  necessary,  in  order  to 
constitute  a  perfect  sympathy  in  Christ  with  our 
physical  infirmities,  that  He  should  know  in  His 
own  person  what  sickness  was.  He  bare  our 
sicknesses  when  He  bare  our  sins,  and  by  His 
atonement  put  them  for  ever  away.  If  He  bore 
the  cause  of  all  our  sorrows  and  infirmities,  surely 
He  is  fitted  to  sympathise  with  its  effects — and 
sickness  is  one.  And  when  Jesus  ministers 
at  our  sickbed,  imparting  succour  and  soothing, 
alleviation  and  recovery, — when  He  approaches 
and  vouchsafes  patience  of  spirit,  and  strength  of 
endurance,   and  submission  to  the  Divine  will, 

*  Rev.  W.  J.  Brook,  M.A. 


384  THE  PEECIOUSNESS  OF  CHEIST*S 

giving  gracious  manifestations  of  Himself  by 
day,  and  songs  of  praise  and  thanksgiving  in  the 
night  season,  and  then  raises  you  up  again  to 
health,  to  duty  and  service — surely,  then,  He  may 
be  said,  in  a  most  emphatic  sense,  to  bear  our 
sicki esses.  Sick  believer!  you  are  not  alone — 
Christ  is  with  you.  He  knows  all  your  weakness, 
infirmity,  and  pain.  He  understands  perfectly 
the  mysterious  relation  of  mind  and  body,  and 
can  enter  into  all  those  delicate  shades  and  subtile 
distinctions  in  the  mutual  operation  of  the  one 
upon  the  other,  which  escape  the  eye  even  of  the 
most  skilful  and  vigilant.  What  is  purely  mental, 
what  is  simply  physical  in  your  case,  and  how  they 
sympathise  and  often  seem  to  blend,  is  to  Him 
who  bear  our  sicknesses  when  He  took  our  sins, 
and  who  rebukes  and  heals  all  our  diseases  now, 
an  object  of  the  intensest  interest.  Suffering 
one  !  Christ  is  bearing  that  suffering  with  you. 
The  burning  fever,  the  writhing  23ain,  the  faint- 
ness,  the  languor,  the  sinking — all  is  known  to 
Him.  The  difficulty  of  concentrated  and  conse- 
cutive til  ought,  your  inability  to  meditate,  to  read, 
to  pray,  the  absence  of  spiritual  enjoyment,  tlie 
dimmed  evidences,  the  beclouded  hope,  the  fears 
and  tremblings — all,  all  are  entwined  with  your 


SYMPATHY  WITH  OUE  INFIRMITIES.        885 

Kedeemer's  sympathy.  His  "  grace  shall  be  suffi- 
cient for  you,"  His  "  strength  shall  be  made  per- 
fect in  your  v/eakness  ;  "  and  thus  you  shall  be 
enabled  to  "  glory  in  your  infirmities,  that  the 
power  of  Christ  may  rest  upon  you." 

With  the  infirmity  of  prayer  we  may  especially 
invoke  and  expect  the  aid  of  Christ's  precious 
sympathy.  That  there  is  a  close  relation  between 
the  two,  is  clear  from  the  passages  we  have  al- 
ready quoted,  and,  for  our. argument,  will  quote 
again.  The  reasoning  of  the  apostle  is,  "  We 
have  not  an  High  Priest  which  cannot  be  touched 
with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities ;  but  was  in  all 
points  tempted  like  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin." 
Then  follows  the  exhortation — "  Let  us  therefore 
come  boldly  unto  the  throne  of  grace,  that  we  may 
obtain  mercy,  and  find  grace  to  help  in  time 
of  need."  The  connexion  of  our  infirmity  in 
prayer,  and  the  tender,  succouring  sympathy  of 
Christ  with  that  particular  infirmity,  is  adduced 
as  an  encouragement  to  pray.  And  who  is  not 
sensible  of  infirmity  in  prayer  ?  In  no  spiritual 
duty,  perhaps,  is  our  earthliness,  weakness,  and 
failure  more  manifest.  In  proportion  to  the  ele- 
vation, spirituality,  and  solemnity  of  the  engage- 
ment, is  our  frailty  and  shortcoming.  It  is  your 
2b 


THE  PRECIOUSKESS  OF  CHEIST'S 


infirmity  that  you  feel  such  a  reluctance  to  pray 
and  that  when  you  rouse  yourself  to  the  privilege, 
it  is  to  you  a  burden  and  a  task.  It  is  your  infir- 
mity that,  at  the  Mercy-Seat,  your  mind  is  so  wan- 
dering, your  tlioughts  are  so  vagrant,  your  heart 
is  so  divided  ,  that,  in  spite  of  your  endeavours  to 
concentrate  the  mind  on  the  great  business  of  con- 
verse with  God,  it  starts  off  like  a  broken  bow ; 
and  the  feelings,  that  ought  to  dissolve  and  flow 
forth  in  one  ardent  current  of  affection,  congeal 
as  into  icicles  around  the  Mercy-Seat,  bathed  in 
the  very  sunbeams  of  Divine  love.  The  deep  con- 
sciousness, too,  of  your  sinfulness  operates  often 
as  dissuasive  to  prayer.  You  cannot  imagine 
how  one  so  unworthy  may  be  permitted — yea, 
invited — to  approach  ;  and  when  you  approach, 
the  suspicion  haunts  your  breast  that  such  peti- 
tions as  yours  can  never  find  acceptance  with 
God.  But  we  have  not  an  High  Priest  who  can- 
not be  touched  with  the  feeling  of  this  infirmity. 
AYhat  a  provision  has  His  mediatorial  work  made 
for  it  in  the  unceasing  sympathy  of  the  Holy 
Spirit '  Thus  reasons  the  apostle — "  Likewise 
the  Spirit  also  helpeth  our  infirmities :  for  we 
know  not  w^hat  we  should  jpray  for  as  we  ought ; 
but  the  Spirit  itself  maketh  intercession  for  us 


SYMPATHY  WITH  0¥E  I^^FIEMITIES.  387 

with  groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered."  (Rom. 
viii.  26.)  To  this  intercession  of  the  Spirit  He 
adds  the  merits  of  His  own  oblation.  Blendinnf, 
as  we  have  shewn  in  the  preceding  chapter,  the 
incense  of  His  merits  with  the  incense  of  our 
prayers,  and  tenderly  commiserating  the  feeble- 
ness and  frailty  of  a  nature  which,  "  when  it 
would  do  good,  finds  evil  present  with  it,"  He 
graciously  purifies  and  perfumes  each  petition, 
and  then  presents  it  with  acceptance  to  God: 
Come  boldly,  then,  to  the  throne,  ye  timid,  trem- 
bling souls  ! — ye  whom  sins  distress,  whom  guilt 
burdens,  whom  sorrow  bows,  whom  infirmity 
disheartens, — for  you  have  a  "  High  Priest  who 
can  be  touched  with  the  feeling  of  your  infir- 
mity," and  who  invites  you  to  draw  near  and  ask 
what  you  will  in  His  name. 

If  Christ  patiently  bears  and  tenderly  sympa- 
thises with  your  infirmities,  be  you  as  patient 
and  sympathising  towards  the  infirmities  of  your 
fellow- Christians.  In  this  respect  "let  the  mind 
be  in  you  which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus."  Our 
brethren  are  encompassed  with  infirmity — each 
having  his  own  and  peculiar  cross  to  carry,  his. 
burden  to  bear.  Learn  to  be  like  Christ — gentle, 
patient,  charitable,  and  sympathising.     The  sym- 


888  THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  CHEIST'S 

pathy  which  the  Gospel  inculcates  in  the  disciples 
of  Christ  towards  our  fellow-disciples  is  large 
and  comprehensive  in  its  nature.  The  precept 
is — "  Kejoice  with  them  that  do  rejoice,  and  weep 
with  them  that  weep."  The  exhortation  is — 
"We  then  that  are  strong  ought  to  bear  the 
infirmities  of  the  weak,  and  not  to  please  our- 
selves." Now,  the  feeling  implied  in  these 
words  is  something  more  than  sympathy^  or  at 
least  as  commonly  imderstood, — it  is  sympathy 
in  its  strict,  literal,  and  legitimate  import, — 
something  far  exceeding  ordinary  pity  or  com- 
miseration. The  family  of  God  is  one  house- 
hold, one  brotherhood.  And  the  essential  unity 
of  this  one  family  i3  in  nothing  more  truly  and 
touchingly  exhibited  than  in  the  oneness  of  sor- 
row and  of  joy  which  pervades  alike  each  member 
of  the  sacred  household.  But,  as  if  the  Holy 
Spirit  would  define  yet  more  clearly  the  nature 
of  true  sympathy,  the  Church  of  God  is  presented 
under  the  similitude,  not  of  a  family  only,  but  of 
a  body.  Alas !  we  find  not  always  in  a  family 
the  mutual  affection  and  confidence,  the  sym- 
pathy and  intercourse  which  ought  to  disliiigui^^h 
and  hallow  an  institution  so  sacred  and  precious 
as   the   domestic      But  if   we   pass   from   the 


SYMPATHY  WITH  OUR  INFIRMITIES.        389 

similitude  of  the  family  to  that  of  the  body,  we 
think  we  shall  have  a  more  vivid  conception  of 
the  nature  of  that  sympathy  which  ought  to  ani- 
mate the  Church  of  Christ.  '*  Now  ye  are  the 
body  of  Christ,  and  members  in  particular/'  The 
sympathetic  union  of  the  body — each  part  with 
the  other,  and  all  with  the  whole — is  of  so  close, 
tender,  and  inseparable  a  nature  as  not  to  be 
surpassed  nor  equalled.  The  sympathy  which  a 
sound  member  of  the  body  has  with  a  suffering 
member,  is  a  sympathy  which  makes  that  suifer- 
ing  its  own.  The  net-work  of  nerve,  so  fine  and 
universal,  which  extends  from  the  censorium  to 
the  furthest  extremity,  indicates  to  the  remotest 
member  the  existence  of  suffering  in  any  one 
part  of  the  body,  and  instantly  awakens  a  re- 
sponsive sympathy,  which  amounts,  in  fact,  to  a 
corresponding  uneasiness  and  suffering.  There 
may  be  said  to  be  actual  pain  in  one  member 
when  there  is  sympathy  with  positive  pain  in 
another.  So  should  it  be  in  the  Church  of  God, 
which  is  "  the  body  of  Christ/'  In  virtue  of 
our  individual  membership,  we  are  to  make  a 
brother's  or  a  sister's  afihction,  sorrow,  and  in- 
firmity as  much  ours  as  if  it  were  our  own.  If 
one  brother  is  wronged,  wounded,  slandered — or 


"S90  THE  PRECIOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST'S 

another  is  bereaved,  afflicted,  tried — or  yet  another 
is  borne  down  by  some  heavy,  clinging  infirmity,' 
— I  am  to  make  that  brother's  wound,  that  bro- 
ther s  affliction,  tliat  brother's  infirmity  my  own. 
That  blow  is  to  be  upon  me  as  well  as  upon 
him,  and  that  wound  is  to  penetrate  my  heart 
as  it  penetrates  his : — '*  That  there  sliould  be 
no  "schism  in  the  body ;  but  that  the  members 
should  have  the  same  care  one  for  another.  And 
whether  one  member  suffer,  all  the  members 
suffer  with  it ;  or  one  member  be  honoured,  all 
the  members  rejoice  with  it/'  (1  Cor.  xii.  25,  26.) 
''Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens,  and  so  fulfil 
the  law  of  Christ."  Such  is  the  sympathy  of  our 
great  and  glorious  Head.  "  In  all  their  afflictions 
He  was  afflicted."  And  the  trials,  and  sorrows, 
and  infirmities  which  still  adhere  to  His  Church 
on  earth,  the  Holy  Ghost  denominates  the  "  afflic- 
tions of  Christ."  In  behalf,  then,  of  Christ's 
infirm  and  suffering  bf  dy,  we  bespeak  your  j'a- 
tience,  gentleness,  and  sympathy.  Speak  gently, 
or,  rather,  speak  not  at  all,  of  a  brother's  fail- 
ing ;  unveil  not  a  sister's  weakness  to  another 
eye.  Act  towards  that  infirm  or  erring  one  as 
though  that  infirmity  and  that  error  w^re  your 
own.     Imitate   your   Lord   and   Master.     "  For 


SYMPATHY  WITH  OUE  INFIRMITIES.          891 

even  Christ  pleased  not  Himself ;  but,  as  it  is 
written,  The  reproaches  of  them  that  reproached 
thee  fell  on  Me!'  Guided  by  this  principle, 
actuated  by  this  spirit,  and  imitating  this  ex- 
ample, you  will  be  gentle  towards  those  who  are 
"  weak  in  the  faith,"  will  participate  in  "  the 
infirmities  of  the  weak,"  and,  "  if  a  man  be  qyer- 
taken  in  a  fault,  ye  which  are  spiritual  will 
restore  such  an  one  in  the  spirit  of  meekness : 
considering  thyself,  lest  thou  also  be  tempted." 
Think  not,  beloved,  that  we  are  exacting  too 
much  from  you  in  requiring  that  you  should 
thus  identify  yourself  with  the  Christian  sufferer, 
and  act  as  though  that  sufferer  were  yourself. 
Your  common  Christianity  demands  it,  and  your 
exemplification  of  the  sympathy  is  one  of  the 
surest  tests  of  your  membership.  And  our 
identification  with  a  brother's  infirmity  is  no- 
thing more  than  the  practical  recognition  of  our 
being  "  members  one  of  another ;  "  and  notliing 
less  was  meant  by  the  apostle  when  he  enjoined 
on  believers,  that  they  should  "remember  those 
who  were  in  bonds,"  not  merely  as  pitying  and 
commiserating,  but  as  actually  "  hound  luith 
them."  Lamb  of  God !  mould  us  to  Thy  truth, 
and  make  us  like  Thyself ! 


392  THE  PEEC!IOUSXE£S  OF  GHPJST'S 

"  Lord,  leave  us  not  to  grander  lonely 
.    Through  this  dark  world,  unloved  by  Thee ; 
All  other  friends  are  helpless  only, 

Though  full  of  love  as  friends  may  be. 
Drear  are  the  fondest  homes  around  us, 

Sad,  like  our  hearts,  when  Thou  art  far; 
When  Thou  hast  sought  us,  heard  us,  freed  VO^ 
How  sweet  Thy  consolations  are  1 
Hear  us,  cheer  us, 
*  Lord,  and  leave  us  not  1 

**  Leave  us  not  when  pride  and  anger 
In  the  heart  would  dare  rebel; 
Claim  us  in  our  utmost  danger, 
Calm  us  at  the  mouth  of  hell. 
Leave  us  not  till  -we  inherit 
Charity  that  works  no  ill. 
And  we  hear  Thy  gentle  Spirit 
Truly  whisper — '  Peace,  be  still !  * 
Hear  us,  cheer  us, 
Lord,  and  leave  us  not ! 

"  Leave  us  not  in  days  of  trial ; 

Let  us  act  at  duty's  call. 

Though  it  lead  to  self-denial. 

Though  we  have  to  give  up  all. 
Raised  on  high,  or  humbled  lowly, 

Praised  or  scorn'd  from  land  to  land. 
Bear  us  up,  our  Father  holy, 
Bear  our  burdens  in  Thy  hand. 
Hear  vis,  cheer  us, 
Lord,  and  leave  us  not ! . 

**  Leave  us  not  when  all  has  left  us. 

Health  and  vision,  strength  and  voice; 


SYMPATHY  WITH  OUR  INFIEMITEES.        893 

When  of  friends  death  has  bereft  us. 

Let  us  still  in  Thee  rejoice  : 
Near  us  when  in  doubt,  to  guide  us ; 

Near  us  when  we  faint,  to  cheer ; 
Near  in  battle's  hour,  to  hide  us ; 
Nearer  ever,  and  more  dear. 
Hear  us,  cheer  us. 
Lord,  and  leave  ua  not ! 

®  Leave  us  not  when  foes  come  nigher. 
Cheer  us  when  the  grave  looks  coldg 
Lead  us  onward,  upward,  higher. 

Forward  to  the  gates  of  gold. 
Leave  us  not  when  ailing,  faihng. 

Sore  depress'd,  and  bending  low; 
Be  Thy  love  then  most  availing. 
Then  to  aid  us  be  not  slow. 
Hear  us,  cheer  us. 
Lord,  and  leave  us  not ! 

*  Leave  us  not  till  Thou  hast  brought  us 
To  the  holy,  wealthy  place. 
There  to  see  Thee  who  hast  bought  ui^ 
Fought  our  fight,  and  won  our  race : 
There  to  hear  no  more  the  shouting. 

And  the  thunder  of  our  foes ; 
Danger  past,  and  past  all  doubting. 
And  the  grave's  austere  repose. 
Hear  us,  cheer  us. 
Lord,  and  leave  us  not !  "  * 

*  Emmet. 


CHAPTER  XIL 


THE  DEATH  OF  THE  SAINTS  PRECIOU& 

**  Precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  is  the  death  of  Hi» 
saints." — Ps.  cxvi.  17. 

There  are  two  stand-points  from  which  the  be- 
liever views  death,  so  widely  separated  and  so 
totally  dissimilar  as  essentially  to  change  both 
its  character  and  its  appearance.  The  first  is  the 
prospective  view — the  looking  forward  -"o  death. 
From  this  position  the  spectacle  is  one  from 
which  even  the  feelings  of  the  Christian  in- 
stinctively recoil.  Death  is  a  part,  a  terrible 
part,  of  the  cnrse ;  and  no  firmness  of  faith  in 
Christ,  or  brightness  of  Christian  hope,  can  en- 
tirely disarm  the  feeling,  that  it  is  a  momentous 
thing  even  for  a  saint  of  God  to  die  !  In  the 
prospective  view  of  death,  it  appears  in  its  pure, 
unmitigated  character — an  arbitrary  sovereign. 


THE  DEATH  OF  THE  SAINTS  PRECIOUS.     395 

an  armed  despot,  a  relentless  foe,  a  melancholy 
and  inevitable  crisis  of  our  being ;  severing  the 
spirit  from  the  body,  the  soul  from  home,  the 
heart  from  all  its  loved  and  cherished  ties  of 
earth  ;  and  terminating,  too,  the  believer's  witness 
for  God,  his  service  for  Christ,  and  his  mission  to 
man.  In  looking  forward,  then,  upon  death,  we 
marvel  not  that,  from  this  stand-point  of  time,  the 
saints  of  God  should  shudder  at  the  prospect. 

But  the  second  view  of  death  is  the  retrospec- 
tive— the  looking  hack  upon  death.  How  diSer- 
ent  the  spectacle !  how  changed  its  aspect !  It  is 
from  the  stand-jDoint  of  glory  that  "the  sjjiiits 
of  just  men  made  perfect"  survey  death.  The 
dread  crisis  is  passed,  the  cold  river  is  crossed, 
the  enemy  is  conquered,  the  victory  is  won ;  and 
standing  among  the  heavenly  minstrelsy,  the  palm- 
bearing  throng  who  line  the  golden  sands  of  the 
heavenly  Canaan,  and  from  thence  looking  back 
upon  their  defeated  foe,  they  raise,  their  paean  of 
triumph  yet  more  expressive  and  melodious  than 
that  which  rose  in  the  triumphant  song  of  Israel, 
"  Sing  ye  to  the  Lord,  for  He  hath  triumphed 
gloriously ;  the  horse  and  the  rider  hath  He 
thrown  into  the  sea.''  "  Death  is  swallowed  up 
in  victory,  mortality  in  life  1 " 


890  THE  DEATH  OF  THE  SAINTS  PRECIOUS. 

But  even  ^-le  prospective  of  death  is  not-  with- 
out its  gleams  of  irradiation  to  the  believer  in 
Jesus.  It  is  not  all  sadness  and  gloom,  blessed 
be  God!  Separating  from  it  all  that  is  of 
nature  and  sense,  and  viewing  it  in  the  light  of 
the  cross  and  with  the  eye  of  faith,  we  can  see 
the  beauty  and  feel  the  force  of  the  words  of  the 
epitaph  which  the  Spirit  has  inscribed  upon  the 
tomb  of  all  who  sleep  in  Christ — "  Blessed  are 
the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord  from  henceforth : 
yea,  saith  the  Spirit,  that  they  may  rest  from 
their  labours ;  and  their  works  do  follow  them."' 
Believer  in  Jesus !  we  are  about  to  present  to  you 
the  Gospel  view  of  death ;  and  although  it  is  the 
sad  prospective,  yet  it  is  not  all  cypress  which 
climbs  around  the  gloomy  portal  that  conducts 
you  into  the  dark  valley ;  the  laurel  is  there ; 
the  ever-bright,  ever-living  laurel,  entwines  with 
the  dreary  cypress,  and  tells  of  victory  and  of 
hope.  "  Precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  is 
the  death  of  His  sauits."' 

In  the  preceding  pages  we  have  portrayed  the 
character,  defined  the  principles  and  privileges 
uf  the  saints  of  God,  unfolding,  in  the  progress 
of  our  discussion,  many  great  and  precious  things 
appertaining  to  their  order.      One  view  yet  r^ 


THE  DEATH  OF  THE  SAINTS  PEECIOUS.     397 

mains — and.  this  will  form  an  appropriate  close 
to  the  volume — their  departure  to  glory  to  be 
for  ever  with  Chrigt,  and  the  preciousness  of  their 
translation  to  the  Lord.  "  Precious  in  the  sight 
of  the  Lord  is  the  death  o^  His  saints." 

Until  the  personal  coming  of  the  Lord — to 
which  we  may  presently  advert — to  quicken  the 
sleeping  saints  and  to  translate  the  living,  death 
is  the  inevitable  condition  of  the  saints.  They  die 
as  others  die — it  is  a  part  of  the  curse  to  which 
all  must  submit,  although,  in  the  experience  of 
the  believer,  it  truly  is  the  "curse  causeless." 
The  Lord  could,  if  so  it  pleased  Him,  exempt 
them  from  ^he  long  and  painful  j^rocess  of  dis- 
ease and  decay,  and  without  their  seeing  death, 
without  a  cloud  or  a  fear,  take  them  to  glory. 
In  the  case  of  some  He  does.  In  a  moment,  in 
the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  they  are  absent  from  the 
body  and  they  are  present  with  the  Lord.  This 
He  sometimes  does  with  those  whom  He  early 
calls  by  grace  and  as  early  calls  to  glory.  It  is 
not  that  He  loves  them  less,  but  that  He  loves 
them  more,  that  He  takes  them  soonest  to  be 
with  Himself.  "  Whom  God  loves  best  He  takes 
soonest.''  The  son  of  Jeroboam,  who  only  of 
that  family  had  "  something  good  in  him  toward 


398     THE  DEATH  OF  THE  SAINTS  PEECIOUS. 

the  Lord  God  of  Israel,"  came  to  an  early  grava 
We  repeat  that  God  could,  if  most  for  His  glory, 
take  all  His  saints  to  heaven  without  their  tasting 
the  "  bitterness  of  death."  But  it  pleases  Him 
that  they  should  tread  the  path  their  Lord  and 
Master  trod,  who,  in  all  t/ie  events  of  His  life, 
"left  us  an  example  that  we  should  follow  His 
steps."  But  while  the  saints  of  God  must  die, 
there  yet  is  much  in  death  from  which  they  are 
exempt.  They  are  exempt  from  it  as  a  penalty, 
as  a  sting,  as  a  condemnation.  Death  in  the 
case  of  believers  is'  not  a  curse,  but  a  blessintr  ; 
it  is  not  a  penalty,  but  a  privilege.  Death  is 
one  of  the  precious  blessings  of  the  covenant  of 
grace — quite  as  much  so  as  life.  "  All  things  are 
yours  .  .  ,  whether  life  or  death."  Death  is  as 
much  a  covenant  blessing  as  is  the  pardon  of  our 
sins,  or  the  justification  of  our  persons.  Christ 
met  death,  the  "  king  of  terrors,"  clad  in  all  the 
darkness,  and  horror,  and  bitterness  of  the  curse. 
He  grappled  with  it,  tasted  it,  received  its  sting, 
and  bowed  to  its  mandate.  Having  thus  passed 
through  its  terrible  ordeal,  as  our  Surety  and 
Redeemer,  He  gives  it  back  to  us  clad  in  a  robe 
radiant  with  lustre,  holding  a  broken  sceptre  in 
one  hand,  and  a  wreath  in  the  other,  with  which 


THE  DEATH  OF  THE  SAINTS  PRECIOUS.   399 

He  crowns  each  believer  who  succumbs  to  his 
momentary  power,  thus  essentially  changing  its 
character  and  appearance,  so  that  now  the  death 
of  God's  own  saints  is  precious.  This,  beloved, 
is  a  pleasant  view  of  death.  It  is  delightful  for 
you  who,  "  through  fear  of  death,  are  all  your 
lifetime  subject  to  bondage,"  to  contemplate  it 
among  the  precious  things  of  God. 

The  death  of  His  saints  is  precious  to  the  Lord, 
because  their  persons  are  precious  to  Him.  "VVe 
shall  never  fully  know,  though  sounding  its  fathom- 
less depths,  and  scaling  its' illimitable  heights 
through  eternity,  the  love  of  God  to  His  saints. 
When  the  finite  can  compass  the  Infinite,  we  may 
then  understand  to  its  extent  the  "  love  of  Christ 
which  passeth  knowledge."  So  great  is  this  love, 
it  extends  not  to  the  persons  only,  but  to  all 
that  belongs  to  a  child  of  God.  It  separates  not 
between  the  believer  and  his  minutest  interest, 
there  being  nothing  attaching  to  an  accepted 
sinner  that  is  not  dear  to  God.  Human  friend- 
ship affords  an  apt,  though  necessarily  an  im- 
perfect, illustration  of  this.  Real  afi'ection  is 
undivided  and  supreme.  We  cannot  love  the 
person  of  a  friend  and  feel  indifferent  to  his 
personal  interests.    His  happiness  and  well-being, 


400     THE  DEATH  OF  THE  SAINTS  PRECIOUS. 

his  character  and  usefuhiess,  will  ever  be  closely 
and  inseparably  interwoven  with  our  deepest  in- 
terest and  with  our  warmest  love.  Entwining 
him  with  our  sacred  affections,  we  have  entwined 
in  the  same  coil  of  love  all  the  elements  of  his 
being,  and  all  the  circumstances  of  his  history. 
His  sorrows  becloud,  his  joys  brighten,  our 
spirit ;  in  his  depression  we  are  depressed,  in  his 
honour  we  are  honoured.  The  atmosphere  in 
which  he.  lives  influences  the  emotional  of  our 
nature,  and  our  sensibilities  rise  or  fall,  are 
elated  or  depressed  by  his  moral  temperature. 
Of  all  the  definitions  of  friendship,  none  can 
equal  the  truth  and  beauty  of  the  inspired — • 
"  Thy  friend,  which  is  as  thine  own  soul."  (Deut. 
xiii.  6.)  Sanctified  by  the  grace  of  Jesus,  what  a 
tender,  touching  affection  is  this,  linking  us  to 
another  being,  and  to  all  that  being's  interests,  as 
closely  and  as  faithfully  as  though  they  were  oui- 
own ! 

"  It  is  the  secret  sympathy — 
The  silver  link,  the  silken  tie — 
Which  heart  to  heart,  and  mind  to  mind. 
In  body  and  in  soul  can  bind." 

There    are   few  gifts  of  God  more  rare  and 
precious  than  such  a   friendship) — a  friendship 


THE  DEATH  OF  THE  SAINTS  PEECIOUS.     401 

wliicli  becomes  an  inseparable  part  of  our  own 
being.  We  are,  perhaps,  but  little  aware  how 
deeply  we  are  indebted  to  its  moulding,  soothing, 
preserving  influence.  Who  that  has  felt  it  finds 
not  a  response  to  the  poet's  language  ? — • 

"  Friendship  !  mysterious  cement  of  the  soul  I 
Sweetener  of  life,  and  solder  of  society  ! 
I  owe  thee  much.     Thou  hast  deserved  of  me 
Far,  far  beyond  what  I  can  ever  pay. 
Oft  have  I  proved  the  labours  of  thy  love, 
And  the  warm  efforts  of  thy  gentle  heart. 
Anxious  to  please." 

But  the  friendship  of  God  transcends  all 
friendship,  even  as  the  love  of  God  transcends  all 
love.  God  loves  not  only  the  persons  but  the 
interests  and  concerns  of  His  people.  There  is 
nothing,  beloved,  appertaining  to  you  that  Christ 
does  not  feel  an  interest  in.  He  is  concerned  in 
all  your  sorrows,  in  all  your  trials,  in  all  your 
infirmities,  in  all  your  wants,  in  all  your  tempta- 
tions. Think  not  His  is  a  divided  affection.  Oh, 
no!  your  person  precious  to  His  heart,  all  that 
relates  to  you  is  precious — your  life  is  precious 
— your  death  is  precious.  Can  you  think  of  the 
departure  to  eternity  of  one  you  love  with  indif 
ference  ?     Can  you  stand  by  that  dying  bed,  and 

mark  the  ebbing  of  life  from  "  thy  friend,  which 
2o 


402  THE  DEATH  OF  THE  SAINTS  PRECIOUS. 

is  as  thine  own  soul/'  without' emotion  ? — with- 
out the  feeling  that  your  own  existence  were  pass- 
ing from  you?  Oh,  no  !  Think,  then,  how  pre- 
cious to  the  Lord  must  be  the  death  of  His  saints  ! 
It  is  as  if  His  own  life— the  life  He  inspired,  the 
life  He  ransomed,  the  life  He  renewed,  the  life 
He  kept — were  dissohing  into  immortality,  yea, 
were  dissolving  into  Himself !  The  life  of  the 
believer  is  the  life  of  God  in  his  soul ;  and  when 
disembodied,  it  ascends  to  glory,  it  rises  to  the 
Divine  source  from  whence  it  came,  and  although 
maintaining  a  separate  and  personal  existence,  be- 
comes, in  a  measure,  absorbed  in  God,  and  God,  in 
the  fulness  of  its  joy,  becomes  all  in  aU.  Precious, 
then,  to  Christ  is  the  death  of  His  saints.  When 
they  die,  He  is  with  them.  He  is  there  to  succour 
witli  His  grace,  to  soothe  with  His  presence,  to 
brighten  wdth  His  glory.  He  is  there  to  nourish 
the  faith  that  droops,  to  quench  the  temptation 
that  assails,  to  dissipate  the  cloud  that  darkens,  to 
remove  the  guilt  that  distresses,  to  quell  the  fear 
that  agitates,  and  to  cheer  the  solitude  and  lone- 
liness of  the  valley  with  gracious  manifestations 
of  Himself,  and  to  breathe  words  of  kindness, 
comfort,  and  love,  as  the  soul 

"Passes  through  glory's  morning  gato. 
And  Avalks  in  Paradise. " 


THE  DEATH  OF  THE  SAINTS  PEECIOUS.     ^03 

Believers  die  in  reliance  upon  the  atoning 
sacrijice  of  Christ,  and  so  their  death  is  precious 
ill  His  sight.  They  die  without  a  shred  of  human 
righteousness  to  cover  them,  without  an  argu- 
ment that  sj^rings  from  themselves  to  plead  for 
them,  reposing  in  simple,  childlike  faith — the 
faith  of  an  empty,  helpless,  believing  sinner — • 
upon  the  finished  work  of  Immanuel.  His  blood 
and  righteousness,  beloved,  will  be  your  only 
hope  in  death,  as  in  life,  and  that  will  be  quite 
enough  to  meet  the  awful  solemnity  of  that  hour. 
We  have  witnessed  and  have  read  of  the  closing 
scenes  of  many  believers — some  eminent  as 
preachers,  scholars,  and  writers — but  we  never 
saw  or  heard  of  one  who,  in  that  solemn  hour, 
derived  any  evidence,  or  comfort,  or  hope  from 
his  holiness,  his  labours,  or  his  usefulness  of  life, 
— all  exclusively  and  humbly  have  relied  u23on 
the  Redeemer's  blood  and  righteousness,  and  died 
clinging  as  sinners  to  the  Saviour,  as  the  guilty 
to  the  Crucified.  And  must  not  such  a  death  be 
inconceivably  precious  to  Jesus  ? 

True  believers  die  in  the  Lord,  and  this  im- 
parts a  character  and  preciousness  to  their  death 
delightsome  to  God.  What  significance  and 
depth  of  meaning  in  these  words — "  Blessed  are 


404i     THE  DEATH  OF  THE  SAINTS  PRECIOUS. 

the  dead  who  die  in  the  Lord  /"  The  thoii,<iht 
of  dying  out  of  Christ  nmy  well  impart  to  the 
unbeliever  a  fearful  dread  of  dying.  Such  may 
truly  regard  death  as  the  most  terrible  of  all  ter- 
rible things.  Unconverted  reader!  better  never 
to  have  been  born  into  this  world  than  to  pass 
into  the  next  out  of  Christ.  It  is  to  die  as  you 
were  born — in  sin,  in  rebellion  against  God,  un- 
converted, under  the  curse,  and  condemned  for 
ever.  "  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  ever- 
lasting life :  and  he  that  believeth  not  the  Son 
shall  not  see  life  ;  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth 
on  him."  (John  iii.  ^Qf)  Oh,  to  confront  the 
"  king  of  terrors  "  with  all  your  sins  upon  you, 
with  all  your  guilt  attaching  to  you,  cherishing 
the  enmity  against  God  of  your  carnal  mind,  the 
weapons  of  rebellion  in  your  hand,  the  love  of  sin, 
and  the  supremacy  of  Satan  and  the  slavery  of 
the  world  in  your  heart!  Oh  !  is  this  the  proper 
state  in  whicli  to  stand  before  a  holy  and  a  right- 
eous God  ?  Are  you  willing  to  die  lA  this  con- 
dition ?  Have  you  made  up  yoin*  mind  to  go 
into  eternity  without  reconciliation,  without  par- 
don, vv'ithout  the  weddino-crarment,  without  an 
interest  in  Christ?  Surely  you  have  not  seriously 
and  intelligently   considered  your  position,  nor 


THE  DEATH  DP  THE  SAINTS  PEECI0X7S.     405 

ha 76  weighed — if,  indeed,  they  can  be  weighed — ■ 
the  fearful  consequences  of  dying  in  your  sins — • 
unrepentant,  unbelieving,  unconverted.  Think  of 
passing  through  that  dark,  mysterious  avenue 
that  leads  from  time  into  eternity,  without  the 
presence  of  Jesus  I  Think  of  finding  yourself 
disembodied  in  the  world  of  spirits,  yourself  a 
spirit,  afirighted,  agitated,  trembling,  your  escort 
up  to  the  judgment-seat,  lost,  condemned  spirits 
like  your  own  1  Think  of  appearing  before  the  tri- 
bunal of  Infinite  Justice  without  a  plea,  without  an 
argument,  without  a  Saviour  I  Think  of  the  trial 
— thinlv  of  the  scrutiny — think  of  the  unveiling  of 
your  whole  life — think  of  the  sentence — think  of 
the  condemnation — banishment  from  God,  exile 
from  heaven,  the  loss  of  the  soul,  the  undying 
worm,  the  unquenchable .  fire,  for  ever  dwelling 
with  the  devil  and  his  angels  I  "  Take  ye  the  un- 
profitable servant,  and  cast  him  into  outer  dark- 
ness ;  there  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of 
teeth."  Awful  words  to  fall  from  the  Lamb  of 
God,  who  died  on  Calvary  for  the  greatest  of  sin- 
ners! Have  you  carefully  pondered  these  things? 
"What  v/ilt  thou  bay  when  He  shall  punish 
thee  ? "  But  there  is  hope  !  Death  has  not  yet 
eited  you  to  Christ's  dread  bar.    Thine  adversary 


40 G     THE  DEATH  OF  THE  SAINTS  PRECIOUS 

has  not  yet  delivered  thee  to  the  judge.  God 
yet  gives  thee  space  for  .repentance.  Count  His 
long-suffering  salvation.  Eepent !  Ground  your 
weapons  beneath  the  Cross !  Fall  in  the  dust  before 
God  !  Cry  mightily  to  Him  for  mercy !  Escape 
for  thy  life,  and  look  not  behind !  Betake  you 
to  Christ,  and  give  not  sleep  to  your  eyes  nor 
slumber  to  your  eyelids  until  you  have  shut 
yourself  within  Christ,  where  not  a  drop  of  the 
wrath  of  God  shall  ever  touch  you.  Need  we 
remind  you  what  a  Saviour  He  is, — that  He  casts 
out  none  who  come  to  Him — that  He  welcomes 
all  poor  penitents — heals  every  broken  heart — 
binds  up  every  wounded  spirit — washes  in  the 
fountain  of  His  blood  the  guiltiest,  clothes  the 
naked,  pardons  the  vilest,  accepts  the  chief  of 
sinners,  and  saves  to  the  uttermost  all  that  come 
to  God  by  Him, — and  all  this  on  the  ground  of 
His  most  free,  unconditional  grace?  "How  shall 
we  escape  if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation  ? " 

But  believers  die  in  Christ.  They  die  in- 
terested in  Christ,  they  die  shut  up  in  Christ, 
they  die  clothed  with  Christ,  they  die  in  a  union 
with  Christ  from  which  nothing  shall  ever  sepa- 
rate them.  In  the  fullest,  broadest,  most  empha- 
tic and  blessed  meaning  of  the  words,  they  "  di$ 


THE  DEATH  OF  THE  SAINTS  PEECIOUS.      407 

in  the  Lord;"  and  precious  in  His  sight  is  their 
death. 

The  glory  which  the  death  of  the  saints  brings 
to  God  must  endear  to  Him  their  departure. 
"This  spake  He,  signifying  by  what  death  He 
should  glorify  God."  The  Lord  is  glorified  by 
the  death  of  His  saints.  Their  faith  in  Him  at 
that  solemn  hour  glorifies  Him.  The  grace  that 
sustains  them  under  their  sufferings  glorifies 
Him.  Their  confidence  in  His  promises,  their 
hope  in  His  salvation,  their  patient  submission 
to  His  will,  and  their  longing  to  depart  to  see 
His  face,  to  be  perfected  in  His  likeness,  and 
to  be  with  Him  for  ever,  glorifies  Him.  And 
think  you  not  that  glory  surpassing  all  concep- 
tion is  brought  to  Christ  when  the  dying  saint, 
in  that  solemn  moment,  commits,  entrusts,  and 
breathes  out  his  precious  soul  into  the  hands  of 
Jesus,  exclaiming,  "  I  know  whom  I  have  be- 
lieved, and  am  persuaded  that  He  is  able  to  keep 
that  which  I  have  committed  unto  Him  aojainst 
that  day  ?  "  "  Lord,  into  Thy  hands  I  comjnit 
my  spirit,  for  Thou  hast  redeemed  me." 

Precious,  indeed,  must  the  death  of  His  saints 
be  to  the  Lord,  because  then  it  is  that  He 
gathers  them  to  Himself.     "  Pather,  I  will  that 


408     THE  DEATH  OF  THE  SAINTS  PEECIOUS. 

tliey  also  whom  Thou  hast  given  me  be  with  niG 
where  I  am,  that  they  may  behold  my  glory." 
Behold  how  Christ  longs  to  have  His  saints  in 
heaven  with  Him !  So  near  and  precious  are 
they  to  His  heart,  He  will  not  rest  until  all  the 
travail  of  His  soul,  all  the  sheep  of  His  fold,  all 
the  precious  gems  of  His  cabinet,  encircle  His 
throne,  cluster  around  His  person,  fill  and  sparkle 
in  His  jewelled  diadem.  Not  one  shall  be  lost. 
Not  a  babe  of  the  family,  not  a  lamb  of  the 
flock,  not  a  crown-jewel  shall  be  missing  in  that 
day.  "  They  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any 
one  pluck  them  out  of  my  hands."  Deity  has 
redeemed  them,  Deity  has  preserved  them,  and, 
enshrined  in  the  glories  of  Deity,  they  spend  their 
happy  eternity.  Blessed  truth  !  glorious  hope  ! 
Weak  saints  shall  be  there,  doubting  believers 
shall  be  there,  restored  backsliders  shall  be  there 
— the  hand  that  but  touched  the  hem  shall  wave 
the  palm — the  eye  that  but  dimly  beheld  the  cross 
shall  drink  in  all  that  splendour — the  tongue  that 
but  lisped,  "  My  Father,"  shall  join  the  song 
and  swell  the  chorus.  Child  of  God  !  trembling 
believer!  doubting,  fearful  one,  to  whose  heart 
the  Saviour  is  more  precious  than  life  itself  !  you 
shall  be  there.     There  is  a  place  in  that  crown. 


THE  DEATH  OP  THE  SAINTS  PEECIOUS.   409 

a  mansion  in  that  home,  a  bower  in  that  paradise 
for  you.  And  when  death  releases  yon  from  the 
bondage  of  corruption,  and  your  happy  spirit 
wings  its  way  to  heaven,  the  angels  ^yill  {;lap 
their  wings,  and  all  the  family  above  will  strike 
their  golden  harps  and  cry,  Welcome,  welcome 
home !  So  precious  are  you  to  Jesus — the  fiuifc 
of  His  dying  agonies,  the  ''  pearl  of  great  price," 
bougiit  with  His  most  precious  blood,  and  kept  by 
His  Divine  power — He  must  have  you  to  behold 
His  glory,  to  see  His  face,  to  repose  upon  His 
breast,  to  bask  in  His  smiles,  to  chant  ,  His 
praises,  to  serve  Him  day  and  night  in  His 
temple,  to  be  like  Him  and  with  Him  for  ever. 
We  wonder  not,  then,  that  "  precious  in  the  sight 
of  the  Lord  is  the  death  of  His  saints." 

But  is  it  death  to  die  ?  Approach  that  cham 
ber  where  the  saint  of  God  is  departing.  Enter 
with  a  hushed  footstep,  for  solemn  is  that  scene, 
sacred  is  that  spot — it  is  the  verge  of  glory,  it  is 
the  expanding  gate  of  heaven.  Celestial  beings, 
viewless  and  noiseless,  are  there — angels  and  the 
spirits  of  the  glorified  hover  round  that  bed. 
The  Triune  Jehovah  is  there — the  Father  watch- 
ing the  child  He  adopted,  the  Son  upholdhig 
the  suul  He  rede^eiued,  the  Holy  C«]iudt  sl.r(:ngtli- 


4)10      THE  DEATH  OF  THE  SAINTS  PRECIOUS, 

ening  the  heart  He  had  made  His  temple.  Is 
this  the  chamber  of  death  ?  this  the  last  enemy, 
the  final  conflict,  the  closing  scene  ?  Surely  this 
is  not  dying  !  What !  this  mental  calmness,  this 
spirit-joy,  this  sonl-sunshine,  this  victory  of  faith, 
this  stupendous,  glorious  triumph  of  the  immor- 
tal over  the  mortal  —  is  this  death  ?  Hark  ! 
What  angel  sounds  are  those  ?  Whence  this 
melody  ?  It  is  the  voice  of  the  departing  one. 
Listen  to  the  strains — 

"Jordan's  stream  shall  ne'er  o'erflow  me 
While  my  Saviour 's  by  my  side ; 
Canaan,  Canaan  lies  before  me, 
Soon  I  '11  cross  the  swelling  tide. 

"  See  the  happy  spirits  waiting 

On  the  bank  beyond  the  stream. 
Sweet  responses  still  repeating, 
Jesus,  Jesus  is  their  theme." 

And  then  aU  is  still !  The  "  silver  chord  is 
loosed,'"  and  the  panting  spirit,  borne  on  the 
wing  of  song,  has  swept  upwards  into  the  beam- 
ing presence  of  God,  and  rests  in  the  embrace  of 
Christ.  Call  not  this  death— it  is  life  !  Call 
it  not  destruction — it  is  the  rejuvenescence  of 
the  soul,  the  moment  when  it  renews  its  youth 
and  expatiates  amidst  the  vv'oiiders,  glorien,  and 


THE  DEATH  OF  THE  SAHy^TS  PRECIOUS,     411  . 

sublimities  of  its  new-born  creo-tion.  All  this 
triumph,  all  this  glory,  all  this  joy,  we  owe  to 
Jesus'  death  and  resurrection.  In  th^  ^tk  of 
the  atonement — 

"  It  is  not  death  to  die — 
To  leave  this  weary  load. 
And,  'midst  the  brotherhood  on  high. 
To  be  at  home  with  God. 

**  It  is  not  death  to  bear 

The  wrench  that  sets  us  free 
From  dungeon  chains,  to  breathe  the  air 
Of  boundless  hberty. 

**  It  is  not  death  to  fling 
Aside  this  sinful  dust, 
And  rise,  on  strong  exulting  wing^ 
To  live  among  the  just. 

"  Jesus,  thou  Prince  of  Life ! 
Thy  chosen  cannot  die ; 
Like  Thee,  they  conquer  in  the  strife. 
To  reign  with  Thee  on  high." 

Precious,  too,  because  death  is  the  end  of  all 
their  sorrows  and  sufferings,  their  infirmities, 
sicknesses,  and  sins.  It  is  the  termination  of  all 
evil,  the  hiriJiday  of  all  good.  Oh,  precious  death, 
that  dissolves  the  last  link  that  binds  me  to  cor- 
ruption, that  breaks  the  last  fetter  of  sin,  stifles  the 
last  groan,  hushes  the  last  sigh,  dries  the  last  tear, 
and  introduces  me  to  the  sinless,  sorrowless  com- 
panionship of  those  who  are  before  the  throne  of 


412     THE  DEATH  OF  THE  SAINTS  PEECIOITS. 

God  and  the  Lamb  "without  fault!"'  Oh,  who 
with  but  the  lowliest  hope  in  Christ  longs  not, 
wearies  not,  sighs  not  to  be  there  ?  How  the  con- 
trast intensifies  this  yearning !  Here  is  earth 
—-there  is  heaven.  Here  is  sin — -there  is  purity. 
Here  is  toil — there -is  rest.  Here  is  continual 
sorrow — there  is  fulness  of  joy.  Here  is  exile — 
there  is  home.  Here  are  imperfect  saints — there, 
the  "  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect."  Here  are 
partings  and  changes — there,  eternity  restores  the 
holy  loves  of  earth,  sanctifies  and  fixes  them  for 
ever !  Oh,  pants  not  your  spirit  for  the  eagle's 
flight  that  you  may  be  there  ? 

"  Earth — with  all  its  sin  and  sadness. 
Pain  and  sickness,  grief  and  care ; 
Heaven — with  its  unspoken  gladness. 
Light  and  love,  and  all  that 's  fair ; 
flow  the  two  contrasted  stand— 
This  dark  world,  and  that  bright  land. 

"  Here  the  eye  grows  dim  v/ith  weeping. 
Here  the  cheek  is  wan  with  woe, 

For  the  loved  ones  who  are  sleeping. 
For  the  hopes  that  are  laid  low. 

In  the  light  of  heaven's  ray. 

Tears  of  earth  are  wiped  away. 

**  Here  our  toilsome  way  pursuing, 
Compass'd  round  with  many  foes. 


THE  DEATH  OF  THE  SAINTS  PRECIOUS.      413 

Pleasures  are  not  worth  the  wooing, 
Thorns  are  found  with  every  rose ; 
There — the  sorrowful  are  blest. 
There — the  weary  are  at  rest. 

**  Here  a  lonely  watch  we  're  keeping 

On  the  battle-plain  of  lif^ 
Lest  the  foe  should  find  us  sleeping. 

And  unfitted  for  the  strife ; 
There  the  war  and  conflict  cease. 
Heaven's  atmosphere  is  peace, 

**  Here  the  songs  of  praise  we  're  singing 
Often  languish  as  they  rise ; 
Fetter'd  is  the  spirit's  winging, 
Cold  and  dead  its  harmonies; 
In  the  chorus  of  the  sky 
Hallelujahs  never  die. 

**  Here  our  painful  cross  we  're  bearing. 
Where  our  Master  leads  the  way ; 
Here  the  shame  and  grief  we're  sharing 

That  for  us  upon  Him  lay  ; 
There,  we  lay  our  burden  down. 
Change  the  cross  into  the  crown. 

"  Here  the  parting  word  is  spoken. 

Where  our  hearts  the  closest  cling, 

And  upon  the  spirit  broken, 
Like  a  knell  its  accents  ring ; 

There — before  the  Saviour's  throne 

Parting  is  a  word  unknown. 

^  Here — we  long  to  be  like  Jesus, 

Here — we  taste  His  matchless  grace  j 


414  THE  DEATH  OF  THE  SAINTS  PKECIOUS. 

But  wheue'er  from  earth.  He  frees  us. 
We  shall  shall  see  His  blessed  face  ; 
With  His  saints  for  ever  stand,. 
In  our  glorious  fatherland."  * 

But  while  thus,  beloved,  we  have  concentrated 
your  meditation  for  a  time  upon  the  death,  the 
preciousness  of  the  death,  of  all  who  believe  in 
Jesus,  we  by  no  means  would  have  you  infer  that 
this  is  the  subject  which  should  the  most  pre- 
eminently, earnestly,  and  exclusively  arrest  and 
fix  the  thoughts  and  expectations  of  your  soul 
The  coming  of  the  Loed,  and  not  the  death  of 
the  saints,  is  the  grand  theme,  the  "blessed 
hope/'  which  the  Holy  Ghost  proposes  for  our 
meditation,  and  presents  to  our  faith.  The  great 
motive  to  watchfulness  and  prayer,  to  separation 
from  the  world,  holiness  of  life,  and  readiness  of 
habit  to  meet  the  Lord,  is  drawn,  not  from  our 
going  to  Christ  by  death,  but  from  Christ's 
coming  to  us  in  personal  glory.  Death  is  a  part, 
and  a  fearful,  gloomy,  repulsive  jDart,  of  the 
curse.  View  it  in  its  most  pleasant  and  attrac- 
tive light,  it  is  a  humiliation.  It  is  a  conquest 
— it  is  a  separation — it  is  a  change — it  is  a  decay 
— -it  is  a  solemUj  a  fearful  plunge  of  the  spkii 
*  Willis. 


THE  DEATH  OF  THE  SAINTS  PEECIOUS.  415 

into  a  world  mysterious,  invisible,  unknown ! 
But  turn  your  thoughts  to  the  coming?  of  the 
LOED.  How  different  the  spectacle  1  It  is  a 
glory — it  is"  a  triumph — it  is  a  reunion — it  is  the 
advent  of  a  Conqueror^it  is  the  appearing  of  a 
Saviour — it  is  as  the  coming  of  a  Friend.  Not, 
then,  by  the  approach  of  death — precious  though 
to  Christ  that  death  may  be — but  by  the  yet 
more  powerful,  "yet  more  precious,  yet  more  per- 
suasive, lovely,  and  soothing  prospect  of  the 
COMING  OF  Jesus,  does  the  Holy  Ghost  seek  to 
s,w^aken,  sanctify,  and  comfort  the  saints.  How 
impressive  is  the  language — "' Waiting  for  the 
coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus "—"  To  the  end  Ho 
may  stablish  your  hearts  unblameable  in  holiness 
before  God,  even  our  Father,  at  the  coming  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  with  all  His  saints  " — "  I  pray 
God  your  whole  spirit,  and  soul,  and  body  be 
preserved  blameless  unto  the  coming  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ" — "We  beseech  you  by  the  coming 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  by  our  gathering 
together  unto  Him " — "  Be  patient,  therefore, 
brethren,  unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord  "—"  For 
the  coming  of  the  Lord  drsiwetli  nigh  " — '^  Look- 
ing for  the  blerjscd  hope,  and  the  glorious  ap- 
pearing of.  tlie  great.  God  a^nd  om*  Saviour  Jesus 


416     THE  DEATH  OF  THE  SAIXTS  PRECIOUS. 

Christ" — "  To  all  them  that  love  His  appeamng" 
—  "I  will  come  again  and  receive  ye  unto  myself, 
that  where  I  am  there  ye  may  be  also" — "He 
which  testifieth  these  things  saith,  Surely  /  come 
quickly.  Amen.  Even  so,  COIME,  Lord  Jesus.'^ 
Is  not  this  a  prospect  worthy  the  study,  the  hope, 
the  longing,  the  future,  the  destiny  of  the  Church? 
Dwell  upon  the  scene — a  master's  hand  has 
sketched  it.  "  In  the  first  place,  it  presents  to 
the  expectation  of  the  saints  all  that  is  to  be 
loved  and  desired  in  the  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  by  whom  he  hath  been  redeemed,  and 
upon  whom  he  hath  been  nourished  and  sus- 
tained, not  in  His  humility,  as  heretofore,  but 
travelling  in  the  greatness  of  His  strength  ;  not 
as  a  servant,  but  as  a  sovereim,  unitino-  in  Him- 
self  all  the  tender  intercessions  of  the  priest  and 
the  powerful  majesty  of  the  king,  a  priest  upon 
his  throne  for  ever.  We  shall  behold  Him  whom, 
not  having  seen,  we  loved ;  we  shall  see  Him  as 
He  is,  in  whom,  ^vhile  yet  we  saw  Him  not,  we 
rejoiced  with  joy  unspeakable,  and  full  of  glory. 
We  shall  see  all  the  glorious  attributes  of  God 
made  manifest  in  manhood :  tlie  S(m  of  Mary 
glorified  into  the  Son  of  God,  and  clothed  with 
the  all-sustaining  power  of  the  Word  of  God 


THE  rfEATH  OF  THE  SAINTS  PRECIOUS.      417 

In  tlie  next  place,  we  shall  behold  all  enemies 
put  under  His  feet ;  Satan,  the  accuser  of  the 
brethren,  cast  out  of  the  earth,  and  with  him  all 
his  evil  angels  which  dwell  in  the  natural  man, 
and  rule  the  world.  And  we  shall  see  the  23rison- 
doors  of  death  unbarred,  and  the  grave  yield  up 
her  dead ;  and  then  shall  come  to  pass  that  say- 
ing of  the  prophet,  '  Death  shall  be  swallowed  up 
in  victory.'  In  the  next  place,  we  shall  be  ga- 
thered with  all  the  saints  of  God  since  the  world 
was,  who  shall  all  stand  in  their  lot  in  the  latter 
day,  and  in  their  flesh  shall  see  God — the  general 
assembly  of  the  first-born,  whose  names  are  v/ritten 
in  heaven  ;  the  Church  of  the  living  God,  the 
patriarchs,  the  prophets,  the  apostles,  the  glorious 
army  of  the  martyrs,  the  whole  host  of  the  re- 
deemed, whom  He  shall  bring  with  Him ;  and  we, 
who  remain  till  His  coming,  shall  be  caught  up 
with  Him  into  the  air,  and  shall  be  for  ever  with 
the  Lord.  This  is  not  a  cheerless  parting,  but  a 
joyful  meeting  and  eternal  union  of  those  who 
are  spiritually  dear  to  one  another  ;  and,  as 
touching  natural  affections,  let  it  be  remembered, 
that  the  natural  man  is  then  no  more,  the  spiri- 
tual man  alone  is,  and  his  affections  alone  remain. 

Then  our  father  and  mother,  brother  and  sister, 
2d 


418     THE  DEATH  OF  THE  SAINTS  TEEC^IOUS. 

are  they  who  have  fulfilled  the  will  of  our  hea^ 
venly  Father.  In  the  next  place,  this  body  of 
wickedness,  this  body  of  sin  and  death,  shall  be 
exchanged  for  the  likeness  of  Christ's  glorious 
body ;  for  sinful  flesh  and  blood  shall  not  inherit 
that  kingdom,  nor  corruption  incorruption  ;  mor- 
tality shall  be  swallowed  up  of  life ;  it  is  sov/n  a 
natural,  it  is  raised  a  spiritual  body ;  it  is  sown 
in  dishonour,  it  is  raised  in  honour ;  it  is  sown 
in  weakness,  it  is  raised  in  power.  So  that  all 
shall  be  strength,  harmony,  and  union  within  us; 
the  perfect  man,  the  holy  man,  complete  in  all 
things,  and  wanting  nothing.  In  the  next  place, 
w^e  shall  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord,  partakers  of 
His  throne,  partakers  of  His  crown,  and  partakers 
of  His  government ;  His  assessors  in  judgment, 
His  deputies  in  power,  ruling  over  the  cities  of 
Kis  dominion,  and  judging  the  tribes  of  the 
sojourners  of  the  earth.  Tor  though  I  inquire 
not  into  the  mode  or  manner  of  our  being,  yet 
this  I  am  not  ashamed  to  declare,  that  we  shall 
j)c  like  the  Lord  who  ascended  up  from  earth  as 
t>asily  as  He  descended ;  who  after  His  resurrec- 
tion, and  even  before  it,  passed  to  and  fro  with- 
out let  or  imr)ediment  of  matter,  and  o-overned 
the  elements  with  a  sovereiirn  control.     And  so 


TEE  DEATH  OF  THE  SAINTS  PSECIOUS.      41  D 

gliall  we,  in  the  exerdise  of  that  governinent  and 
sovereignty  which  we  shall  then  be  i3ermittecl  to 
hold  of  the  earth,  be  as  Adam,  a  king  in  his 
majesty,  whom  the  elements  of  nature  and  all  liv- 
ing, moving  creatures  upon  the  earth  harmed  not, 
but  delighted  to  obey.  Finally,  we  shall  beliold 
the  earth  and  all  the  sojourners  therein  living  in 
peace  and  blessedness,  under  the  government  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  nature  repossessed  of  all 
her  original  beauty,  and  society  of  all  ifs  proper 
blessedness ;  peace,  gentleness,  and  meekness  re- 
stored on  every  hand ;  all  men  blessed  in  Jesus, 
and  calling  Him  blessed :  '  nothing  to  corruj)t  or 
to  destroy  in  my  holy  mountain,  saith  the  Lord ; 
for  the  earth  shall  be  full  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
glory  of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the  channels 
of  the  deep.'  "  Look,  then,  on  this  picture  and  on 
that,  and  say  which  is  the  most  pleasant,  and  at- 
tractive, and  hopeful — which  the  best  calculated  to 
soothe  in  grief,  to  sustain  in  trial,  to  fortify  in 
assault,  to  nerve  in  conflict,  to  animate  in  service, 
to  stimulate  to  holiness,  and  to  throw  over  all  the 
future  of  the  soul  the  glory  and  radiance  of 
Christian  expectation  and  hope — the  dread  ap- 
proach of  the  grim  king  of  terrors,  or  the  glorious 
appearing  of  the  great  God  our  Saviour  ?     For 


420     THE  DEATH  OF  THE  SAINTS  PEECIOUS. 

His  coming,  then,  let  ns  be* looking — for  it  lefc 
us  be  prepared."  Gird  up  the  trailing  robe,  trim 
the  waning  lamp,  nerve  the  trembling  arm,  and 
ronse  the  drooping  heart.  Our  Lord  is  coming 
to  bring  us  to  Himself.  All  things  betoken  His 
near  approach.  Soon  we  shall  beliold  His  chaniot, 
hear  His  voice,  see  His  face,  and  fall  in  love  and 
ecstacy  upon  the  bosom  that  sorrowed,  and 
sighed,  and  bled  for  us  on  the  cross.  "  Let  your 
loins  be  girded  ^bout,  and  your  lights  burning ; 
and  ye  yourselves  like  unto  men  that  wait  for 
their  lord,  when  he  will  return  from  the  wedding ; 
that  when  he  cometh  and  knocketh,  they  may 
open  to  him  immediately.  Blessed  are  those 
servants  whom  the  lord,  when  he  cometh,  shall 
find  watching." 

And  now,  my  beloved  reader,  we  part !  We 
have  spent  many  a  sacred  hour,  have  travelled 
many  a  pleasant  path,  and  have  discoursed  upon 
many  a  hallowed  theme  together  as  we  have 
roamed  through  these  pages.  Have  we  the  ex- 
perience of  these  "  precious  things  of  God  "  in 
our  souls  ? — their  preciousness  in  our  hearts  ? — 
their  sanctifying  poAver  and  influence  in  our 
lives  ?     Tiien,  though  now  we  separate,  each  to 


THE  DEATH  OF  THE  SAINTS  PEECIOUS.     421 

Lis  toil,  liis  care,  his  conflict,  in  a  little  while 
and  we  shall  meet  again,  to  part  no  more  for 
ever !  Then,  beloved,  you  will  not  need  the 
human  tongue  to  tell  the  preciousness,  nor  the 
human  hand  to  portray  the  beauty,  nor  the 
human  imagination  to  unveil  the  glory  of  our 
Immanuel,  for  we  shall  "  see  Him  as  He  is," 
and  he  with  God  for  ever.  Oh,  look  to  Jestjs 
— cling  to  Jesus — live,  labour,  die  for  Jesus  ! 
Ten  thousand  lives,  ten  thousand  deaths — spent 
in  exile,  endured  in  martyrdom— were  little,  in- 
deed, for  such  a  Saviour !  Build  your  hoj)e  of 
heaven  solely,  exclusively,  upon  this  "precious 
Cornep- stone/'  Sweep  from  its  surface  all  the 
wood,  hay,  and  stubble  of  human  merit  and 
creature  trust, — all  the  chaff,  rubbish,  and  dust 
of  sacramental  grace  and  religious  ceremonial, — 
and  plant  your  foot  of  faith,  hope,  and  love, 
firm  upon  the  bare,  the  naked  EocK — the  "  Eock 
that  is  higher  than  you."  Never,  never  will  you 
perish,  if  upon  this  Divine  Foundation — this 

"  CHIEF  COENEE-STONE,   ELECT,  PEECIOUS  " — yOU 

lay  your  many  sins,  rest  your  weary  soul,  lean 
your  dying  head,  and  rear  your  hope  of  glory. 
Then,  "  when  He  shall  come  to  be  glorified  in 
His  saints,  and  to  be  admired  in  all  them  that 


422     THE  DEATH  OF  THE  SAINTS  PEECIOUS. 

believe/'  you  will  rise  from  the  dust,  enter  into 
joy,  and  revel  amidst  the  peecious  things  op 
God  in  endless  blessedness.     Amen,  and  amen. 

"  Our  Jesus  is  the  Corner-stone 
Jehovah  built  His  Church  upon, 
And  never  fallen  to  the  ground 
Shall  that  blest  edifice  be  found. 
The  worldly-wise,  with  boasted  sense. 
Count  Him  a  rock  of  great  offence  ; 
And  all  who  are  not  newly  born 
Behold  Him  with  contempt  and  scorn. 
Sufficient  goodness  of  their  own 
Makes  Jesus  but  a  stumbling-stone ; 
By  reason  of  their  blinded  eyes, 
God's  way  of  saving  they  despise. 
But  when,  in  His  appointed  hour. 
The  Holy  Spirit  comes  with  power. 
And  leads  the  soul  to  Sinai's  mount. 
And  opens  there  the  black  account. 
He  stands  condemn'd,  and  looks  around ; 
No  friend  nor  helper  can  be  found. 
But  when  the  Comforter  comes  near. 
And  sweetly  whispers  in  his  ear 
That  Jesus  came  for  him  to  bleed. 
His  name  is  precious  then  indeed; 
Precious  as  God's  appointed  way 
His  own  perfections  to  display. 
For  what  of  God  is  understood 
Save  through  the  Lamb's  redeeming  blood  f 
He  's  precious  all  our  journey  through. 
As  when  the  first  believing  view 
Eenioved  the  hea\-y  load  of  sin, 
And  brought  the  peace  of  God  within. 


tHE  DEATH  OP  THE  SAINTS  PRECIOUS.  4; 23 

He 's  precious  as  our  covenant  Head, 

And  precious  when,  in  sinners'  stead, 

He  paid  the  law's  immense  demands 

Into  His  righteous  Father's  hands ; 

And  precious  when  '  'Tis  done/  he  cried, 

And  bow'd  His  sacred  head,  and  died. 

Then  death  for  ever  lost  its  sting ; 

The  Church  iJiay  now  of  victory  sing. 

Precious  when  faith  beholds  Him  rise 

Victorious  to  His  native  skies ; 

And  precious,  now  in  heaven  He  pleads. 

And  for  His  members  intercedes. 

If  varied  often  be  our  case, 

He's  precious  then  in  various  ways  ' 

When  weary,  weak,  or  sore  oppress' i, 

He 's  precious  as  a  place  of  rest. 

When  clouds  of  darkness  intervene, 

And  Jesus'  beauties  can't  be  seen. 

Why  do  we  linger  by  His  cross. 

And  count  all  else  but  dung  and  dross  ? 

Because  He  's  precious  to  us  still. 

Nothing  on  earth  His  place  can  fill. 

When  vmder  fresh-contracted  guilt 

Sorrow  and  heartfelt  shame  are  felt. 

The  blessed  Spirit  comes  again. 

Sprinkles  the  blood,  and  heals  the  pain. 

How  precious,  then,  the  Son  of  God, 

From  whose  dear  side  the  fountain  flow'd  ! 

With  joy  we  lift  our  heads  again. 

And  sing  the  Lamb  that  once  was  slain. 

Sometimes,  lest  we  should  lift  ovir  head. 

As  if  the  Man  of  Sin  were  dead. 

We  're  left  to  feel  a  deadly  blow. 

To  humble  pride  and  keep  us  low. 


424:     THE  DEATH  OF  THE  SAINTS  PRECIOU& 

God  shews  us  some  inherent  sin, 
Which  makes  us  cry,  Unclean !  unclean ! 
Yet  'midst  the  thorns  He  '11  safely  keep 
The  feet  of  all  His  helpless  sheep- 
He  but  designs  from  self  to  wean. 
And  make  us  more  on  Jesus  lean. 
While  trav'lling  through  a  hostile  land, 
With  mighty  foes  on  every  hand — 
When  call'd  in  battle  to  engage, 
And  hot  the  fight  through  Satan's  rage — 
How  precious,  then,  our  conquering  Lord  I 
How  sweet  to  hear  that  cheering  woyd, 
*  You  need  not  fear,  you  need  not  flee, 
Stand  still,  and  my  salvation  see.' 
Then  shout,  ye  saints,  the  battle 's  won  ! 
Your  Captain  is  to  glory  gone  ! 
Gone  up  your  places  to  prepare, 
And  soon  He  '11  fetch  and  place  you  there. 
With  all  the  heavenly  host  to  praise 
A  PRECIOUS  Christ  through  endless  days."  ^ 

*  Sturton. 


THE  END. 


DEC  15  mi 


